 

Lost Star: Prologue

Banner above is made by usedcondom. Thank you. I've entered Lost Star in the Wattys2016 so I'd appreciate it if you could help me out by voting, commenting and sharing. :) I hope you enjoy. 
 Prologue 'Dear Rovina and Father,  I'm sorry I was such a failure. I have failed you again for the last time. I couldn't live without Mother, especially with the knowledge of what I had done to her. I am truly sorry for all the times I have brought shame and embarrassment to our family.
 My body will be in the Yangtze. For your sakes, I hope you will not find me in the river.   I am going to find Mother and I shall look over you and our empire. I shall protect our country in the way I never could alive. I am sorry, Rovina, Father.
 Goodbye.'
 Rovina read the note again for the umpteenth time. Goodbye. Surely, it couldn't be that easy. This was definitely her handwriting. It was no doubt that her sister was weak-minded but suicide? It was too pathetic, even for someone like Athena.
 But then again, maybe she'd overestimated Athena's sanity.
 "Where did you find this again?" she asked the young palace guard who bowed on his knees in front of her. His body practically quivered under his uniform.
 "In her chamber, your highness, o-on the table," he answered, voice breaking.
 More amused than she should've been by the distraught guard, she tapped her fingers on the hand rest of the chair she was sitting on. "When was the last time you saw her?"
 "Around half past nine last night, just after she left the library, your highness."
 "Really?" she drawled. "You were on duty all night, Cade?"   The guard looked up, his blue eyes teary. "Your highness, I can assure you that I didn't-"
 "Were you on guard, Cade?" she repeated firmly.
 He casted his eyes down to the floor again and nodded. "Yes, Princess Rovina."
 "She didn't seem... strange to you at all?"
 "No, Princess. She was quite normal. She returned to her chamber with a stack of books."
 This much, Rovina had seen on the security tapes in the palace halls. She dismissed the fact he was not telling her that he had helped her inside with the stack of books or that he sat with Athena as she read. Or that the boy had a strange infatuation with her sister.
 "What books were they?"
 "Astronomy and ancient history books."
 Of course, they were. Rovina sighed. "Fine. You are dismissed."
 Cade stood and bowed. But he gave her a final look, steeled and distrusting, before he shuffled out the door with his head bowed.
 This seemed too good to be true. Of course her problems were all solved with her sister out of the picture but until her body was found in the river next to the palace, she was not going to sleep in perfect serenity.   Oh, what was she doing anyway? She chided herself for worrying about that stupid girl. Athena's mental stability was about as stable as a two-legged chair. It was no surprise to her when she was given the note that morning. She was only surprised that it had taken seven months for Athena to crumble. And what a spectacular crumble that was.
 Maybe Athena wasn't that different from her after all.
 Then she quickly shook that thought away, shuddering in disgust. Athena was never going to be like her! How could she even compare? How could she possibly forget that she'd lost her mother because of her idiotic sister?
 Rovina crushed the note in her hand and threw it into the waste disposal. She didn't have time to be worried about things as petty and unimportant as her sister's supposed suicide.
 She had a world to conquer. Please do not copy any parts of this book. (And yes, I am aware that 'Mulan' has already been told but the words that make up this story are mine and mine alone.) Those who dare to reproduce my work will be introduced to my karate chop skills. You have been warned. And I do not speak Mandarin. Any Chinese you see in this book is from Google Translate and my very limited knowledge, so please excuse anything you see is wrong.


 

Part 1

Part 1 "The journey of a thousand miles begin with a single step."
 - Lao Tzu Across the ocean lie different stars, looking back and haunted by scars. Take a step onto soils of red, and pray that blood shall not be shed.  
 
 
 (The song above is what inspired me to write Lost Star. Part 1 is dedicated to Marissa Meyer, the brilliant author of The Lunar Chronicles.) 


 

Chapter 1

Chapter 1
 Teri was a prisoner of her own mind.   Vices held her firm and cold, bloodstained chains fastened around her. Across the table, Nina brought a glass of milk to her lips and sipped, Ben took a bite of his toast, Lee smeared jam all over his face and Marci glared at the VidScreen on the wall but there was a wall of glass between them and Teri.   Just behind the table where the Xing family was having breakfast at, stood a beautiful woman in a billowing white dress. Her long black hair danced to the light breeze that only worshipped her. Blue, dead lips curved into a smile to reveal rows of razor sharp teeth, dripping with blood. A drop plopped onto the white dress and suddenly it was all crimson.
 A knife lodged in Teri's throat and she couldn't swallow. The woman's bloody smile widened and she hovered towards Teri – through Nina, through the table and –
 "I don't get it," Marci snapped and the glass wall shattered, debris scattering on the table and the floor with high-pitched chinks.
 She slammed her mug of milk down on the wobbling table and the white liquid sloshed over the sides from the impact.
 Nina frowned. "Marci, please don't waste food," she said, eyeing the puddle around the mug with disdain.
 "Never mind that, Mum," the girl retorted, jabbing a finger in the direction of the VidScreen. "Look at her! She's a princess. What could possibly have made her kill herself? She has everything! Money, food, clothes, boys."
 "We can't judge her, Marci. Who knows," Nina replied, "the Empress' death might've affected her in ways we can't see."
 Teri forced a gulp down her throat, her mouth dry but none of the Xings noticed. She looked at the VidScreen to see that an anchor was reporting that the suicidal princess' body was still not found in the river after a restless month of searching. He might as well have called her the crazy princess from the way he was talking about the girl who drowned herself in the Yangtze.   A photo of the dead girl blinked onto the screen. Her brown hair was curled into an elegant side bun with golden pins keeping it in place. Her face was coloured in with traditional makeup for a ceremony and her eyes were cast down with a tiny smile directed at something outside the frame. She wore a beautiful silk blue hanfu with pink and gold cherry blossoms decorating the fabric.
 She looked so young, no older than thirteen. Teri knew the princess was older than that but no one had seen her in years since her older sister, the crown princess of the Northern Empire had become even more famous after her scientific breakthrough.
 "What is it with you and boys?" ten-year-old Lee said, scrunching his jam-smeared nose.
 Ben warned, "Both of you, enough. We have a guest, remember?"
 Teri blinked, realising that Ben was talking about her. "Oh, um, that's alright. I'll be gone by midday."   Nina eyes landed on her and Teri shifted under her gaze. No matter how kind the Xings were she would probably never get used to them. She hadn't in the last six days she'd resided with them in the small house of five rooms in total.
 "Thank you, Asteri," Nina said. "We will forever be in your debt."
 Teri offered a smile.   "Are you sure you want to volunteer? You are very young to be fighting for our country," said Ben.

  "I have to. Southern Union needs to-" Teri stopped herself before her tongue could slip. "Against the Northern forces, our country needs all the support we can to defend it if..." she let herself trail, knowing Ben and Nina knew what her next words would've been.   Marci's critical brown eyes trained on her and this time, Teri visibly squirmed. "Well, why aren't you keeping the money then? Do you pity us? Is that why you're giving it to us?"
 "Marci," Ben growled. "Show some gratitude. The reward money Asteri is giving us will help us out of debt."
 Marci grumbled but said no more against her father. Marci always thought of the negative but Teri didn't blame her. She knew that it had been somewhat insulting when she offered to give up the reward money she would get from volunteering. She meant well, though. The money would've been no use for her and offering it to the Xings was the least she could do for them in return for housing a criminal without knowing so.   "I think you're very brave," Lee offered, sending his sister a sideway glance. "I would fight too but they'd never believe I'm eighteen."
 "Lee, don't say such things," Nina snapped. "With any luck the Emperor won't declare war at all."
 Then she looked as if she wanted to take back the word 'war' and swallow it down. It was almost taboo to speak of it nowadays. It was as if saying that would call upon the declaration itself. The two countries were still at heated debates and arguments, Australia always refusing China's offer to ally with the Empire.   A footage of Princess Rovina's speech came on the VidScreen. The older princess was beautiful with golden skin, soft dark curls, cherry red lips and the body to accompany them. She stood on a podium at the front of a ceremonial chamber, full of buzzing figures in white robes, just to the left of the empty coffin.
 "I am extremely distressed by the loss of my beloved sister," she was saying. "I wish I had seen the signs before. We all do. She was such an eccentric girl and she had big dreams. Athena was a kind, gentle person and although most of you will not know this, she had done many things for you, her people. I wish I had more time with her, to tell her that I loved her and that we were all here for her. But alas I cannot and I hope that you can hear me from the heavens, Athena: I love you."
 How many times did she practice to sound that earnest? Teri almost believed the drop of tear that rolled down the princess' cheek, despite knowing the words were all lies. Everyone knew Athena had done nothing for her people. Her head was always stuck in the clouds and books. She talked of nonsense no one cared about. The dead princess was hopeless; a failure to her country.
 Emperor Alvah also spoke and his words were similar to the princess'. "I loved Athena very much and I would give anything for her to be here with us again. But unfortunately it had been many days and we have to accept that she may never be found. I'm extremely disheartened to have to say that the search has to be called off and the funeral will be held in a few days."
 Teri searched his cold, stern face for any raw emotion that he might've let through just for one moment, just for the cameras but there was none. There was only that all-too-familiar annoyance.
   "Is it true that Athena was loopy?" Lee asked.
 Nina shook her head slightly but didn't look up at her son, keeping her eyes on the stale bread in her plate. "I don't know, Lee. She might have been. Losing a mother does things to one's mind."
 "And why are the princess and the emperor not wearing mourning clothes?" Lee continued.
 The room fell silent. Teri glanced around her and it was obvious from the surprise on their faces that except for Lee none of them noticed that they were not wearing white. Teri picked up her toast and ate silently.

 
 The little mining town of Nyiup had never seemed bigger as Teri and the Xings walked down Central Road to town square. The heart of the town was buzzing with life, unlike the dry, quiet outskirts where the Xings lived.   The buildings were mostly three stories high here and were covered in solar slates and giant VidScreens that advertised products that would bankrupt millions. On the ground floors were shops, bars, small businesses and Gods knew what other professions Nyiup had to offer.   People of every race, colour, shape, size and age roamed the streets, more so today than any other Teri had ever seen. One woman was shoving an incoherent man out of what looked like a bar, yelling at him to come back when he was out of debt. Children raced down the street, yelling and chasing each other while adults headed to town square. Most of them were travelling by foot and a handful who could afford hover-bikes was proudly showing off their wealth.     Teri bit her lip and tugged the straps of her bag into the middle. Sour bile burned the back of her throat as a gnawing feeling grew in her stomach. It was never supposed to come to this and if she had half a mind to think things through carefully, it would never have. Fire didn't put out fires. Why she was the only person who realised this?
 "You don't have to," Nina said. "We can go back home right now and you won't have to fight."
 Where was home? She'd abandoned that place she called home four weeks ago. Where would she go? She couldn't stay with the Xings. She'd already overstayed her welcome. She couldn't possibly back down now that she'd gotten this far.
 Besides, the sign up was already done a week ago. All she had left to do now was confirm her identity and off she went.   She cleared her throat. "I, um, I'll be okay. I made this decision already. I cannot thank you enough for helping me and giving me a home to stay in."
 Ropes were put up around the square of an intersection, tied from one traffic light post to another. A large crowd was gathering outside the ropes. People were hugging and saying goodbyes to their loved ones who would soon be serving their country. Inside the rope square were two tables, an officer seated at each with ID scanners, ports and other devices.
 Teri made a move to step into the square through two traffic light posts without a rope but a small hand on her wrist stopped her. Lee looked up at her with a wide grin, showing off the missing tooth. "You can't go without saying goodbye," he said.
 She looked up. Ben, Nina and Marci were all looking at her expectantly, small smiles of encouragement on their faces, even Marci. When Teri didn't do anything, Nina exhaled a sigh and pulled her into her arms, wrapping them around her.
 It took Teri too long to realise the embrace as a hug. Her mother used to hug her all the time. Cade had hugged her just weeks before, too. But it felt like a lifetime ago.
 Because it was a lifetime ago.
 With that thought, she gingerly placed her arms on Nina's back, swallowing the lump that formed in her throat. She gave Marci, Lee and Ben hugs too, wondering why the Xings had cared for her enough to show her such affection.
 "Comm us whenever you want to," Ben said, "We wish you good luck."   "Xièxiè," Teri replied with a slight bow. "Goodbye."
 This time no one stopped Teri from steeling herself and marching into the square. She desperately longed for a hand on her wrist or her shoulder to stop her or even to prolong the inevitable but none came and suddenly she was standing in line in front of one of the tables. There was no backing out now.

  The curly-haired woman in front of her moved and she came face to face with a burly officer with his cap crookedly placed on top of his unruly blonde hair. His beady blue eyes scrutinized her, scanning her up and down for any sign of muscle instead of those sinewy limbs. He raised an eyebrow.
 "You?" he asked sceptically.   "I'm eighteen," she said.
 The officer scoffed. "Believe me, your age is the last thing I'm worried about. Give me your left hand."
 Teri stretched out her open palm, not surprised to find her hand trembling. The man yanked her hand forward roughly and brought out a DNA tester from his pockets, kept in case minors tried to lie their way in. He placed the cube on the tip of her middle finger and a second later, a needle piercing her skin, making her snatch her hand back with a hiss. The officer looked up at her as the machine worked out her entire genetic code.
 "You do know what you're getting into, right?" he questioned.
 Teri nodded.   The cube beeped. The officer pressed the indented button at the top of the cube and a one-way hologram projected from the cube. He looked over the details with a frown etched on his face. Teri held her breath, unsure what the cube was telling the man about her.
 "Eighteen and two months," he finally said and she tried not to exhale in relief. "You qualify, apparently. But word of advice kid, don't take it too hard if your platoon captain sends you home."
 Teri would let the worst come when it did and thrust her hand out for the officer to scan her ID chip. He gazed at her for a long time before he shoved the scanner towards her. She pressed her palm into the mould and a green light flashed acceptance almost immediately.
 The officer looked down at his port that was linked to the scanner then he looked up at her.
 "You're from the North?" he questioned, distrust suddenly radiating off him.
 "My parents died during the uprising...a month ago. I ran away," she lied.
 The officer narrowed his eyes, suddenly not as friendly as he had been. "Right. Where do I send the money to?"
 "Benjamin Xing, please."
 "And he is?"
 "He is my Godfather," she lied again. "His family have been Southerners for generations since the twentieth century."
 He tapped away on his port after a nod and then sent Teri down the road opposite the way she came. In the distance awaited another crowed, a much smaller one this time. It was the group of volunteers.   She glanced back at the Xings, the family who had helped her in her greatest time of need. She spotted Nina far, far behind the restraints of the rope and though it was too far to see, she suspected Nina must've been smiling at her. For a brief second, she remembered her old life where her mother used to smile at her like that. If she ever lived through this, the Xings were going to be the first people whom she would come back to find to repay their kindness. Teri waved back and dragged herself towards the crowd before she ran back to them.
 The number of female volunteers almost evened out the number of males. But these women were nothing like her. They were older, taller and built like born fighters, muscular. She gulped and looked down at herself, her body a mere twig compared to these women. If she ever made it through training it would be a miracle.
 "Attention, recruits!" a voice boomed from hidden speakers in the town square. "Please make your way to the landing pad outside town via Central Road. I repeat: make your way to the landing pad via Central Road."   Teri didn't even know Nyiup had a landing pad. People around her began to move and she tumbled after them, trying to avoid being shoved around by large bodies as she bit her bottom lip until she tasted blood.
 A military transport hover was waiting on the landing pad, the Southern Cross symbol of the Union painted on its side. It would take them to the training base where they'd spend the next ten weeks being toughened up. Not that many of these people needed toughening up. The door fell open into a ramp and a uniformed guard stood at the entrance.
 One by one volunteers scanned their IDs and disappeared inside the vehicle, their faces set to stone without a trace of fear. Teri was last. She trudged up the ramp on shaking knees and her hand pressed into the scanner on its own accord, much to her regret. The light on the scanner turned green and she stood frozen on the spot, at the mouth of the hover's entrance.
 "What's the matter? Too chicken?" someone jeered at her, and a few chuckles echoed around the room.
 "Shut your hole, Pudge!" the curly-haired woman yelled back and Teri forced a smile of gratitude.   "Shut it!" a voice cut through the air, silencing everyone. "You, get inside. We're taking off."
 A rough push from behind sent her tripping into a cold metal pole erected from the floor. A few sniggers followed. Teri gripped the pole until her knuckles turned white, as if her life depended on it, trying to swallow constantly.
 A few seconds later, the walls of the hover shuddered to life and the floor jerked. They had taken off and they were going to the training base now. Months from now, she was almost certainly going to be on a battlefield - almost certain dead.
 An ancient tribe believed that stars were warriors who fell in battle. Where did those who were not warriors go? Where would Teri go?
 The woman in the crimson dress smiled at her and said, "You'll come to me, of course." Hi, guys! Please feel free to leave a comment or two. I would love to hear what you guys think of this chapter. :)
 


 

Chapter 2

Beautiful banner above is made by VividMinds. Rewritten/Edited.            Chapter 2
 Orion pulled his fingers into a tight fist, itching to give the deputy a black eye. The old man was glowering at him as if he was dirt stuck on the sole of his shoes. How on Earth Hunter put up with this thing was a mystery.
 Next to Deputy Holston was his brother, Commander Hunter Kesswell, giving instructions of how the next two months would run at Hill Creek basic military training base. Though younger than most in the meeting room, his confidence and certainty never wavered and found comfort in carrying out his duty. His voice carried the experience he had yet to have, though he never forgot to respect those older than he.
 "Do we know the exact number of volunteers, sir?" Alison Joyce, a captain in her late twenties, asked as she casually batted her eyelashes.
 "One-eighty-three, Captain," Hunter replied, tapping on the screen in the table in front of him as his tone softened by a notch. "I've sent the list of recruits in your platoons and as soon as they arrive you will be collecting them to your sectors. Any more questions?"   Hunter looked at Orion almost expectantly. Orion looked down at his port as his list popped up on the screen. There were thirty-two volunteers in his troop, probably less than everyone else. He gave Hunter a glance with one eyebrow raised in question.   Hunter ignored him as he scrolled down on his screen and then smiled. "Ah. It seems that our selfless heroes have arrived. Shall we go to welcome them?"
 The five captains around the table nodded, and in Holston's case, he huffed before he swept out of the room with his chin stuck in the air as if he was God. Orion kept on frowning at the doorway the deputy had passed through even after all the captains have exited.
 "I'm sorry, little brother," Hunter apologised with an edge of amusement as he flung his arm over Orion's shoulders. "Holston can be a bit of a..."
 "Bastard?"   Hunter pinched Orion's cheek and shook it. "Didn't Mum teach us not to use profanities? I was just going to say Holston can be a bit of an engine clogger."   Orion scoffed, rolling his eyes as he swatted his brother's hand away and began to follow the other captains out. "I bet that's not the only thing he's got clogged."
 Hunter chuckled when he caught up to Orion's strides.   "Are you underestimating me?" Orion deadpanned.
 Hunter, unsurprised by his straightforwardness, mock gasped dramatically. "Of course not! Okay, maybe I did. I was only worried for you. I thought you'd be nervous because you've never trained anyone before. All the other captains are at least five years more experienced than you."
 "I'm fine, Hunter," he bit out. "Holston is unnecessary. I have enough on my plate babysitting Darren on top of training. Add Holston and someone will die."
 Hunter chuckled. "Don't worry; Holston will keep Darren in check."
 Orion's tongue still twisted in his mouth to insist that Holston was just going to be wasting his time but if Hunter thought it was for the best, it probably was. He didn't agree with it but he wasn't going to object any further.
 As they approached the sliding door of the Officials Building, Hunter said, "I know you'd be fine, Orion. You don't have to be nervous."   What made Hunter think he was? Orion looked at his brother, whose jaw was tensed and lips set in a thin line. Orion wasn't nervous; Hunter was. For a brief second Orion almost stopped mid-stride.

  Hunter stopped walking before he opened the door and squarely looked at Orion in the eye. "It's not too late, O. I can send you back home on the next train if you want. Training this platoon will mean that if it came to the worst, you'd be on the battlefields. You know this, right?"
 Orion had never seen Hunter afraid. Hunter had never been afraid. The naive belief of a child that his big brother was invincible and fearless was still the belief of the twenty-year-old man Orion was now. If Orion wasn't nervous before, he was now because Hunter truly believed that there would be war and the Union would be overpowered.
 "I do," he answered stiffly. "But-"
 "But you'll do this anyways," Hunter cut him off. "I know. I just- Let's make a promise. If one of us dies, the other has to stay alive at all costs. For our parents."
 If they were still walking, Orion would've halted right then from the utter absurdity of those words that had come out of Hunter's mouth. Die? What happened to his happy-go-lucky brother?   "Orion," Hunter pressed, holding out his pinkie, a tradition they had when they were younger and promised they wouldn't rat each other out after either had done something they shouldn't have.
 Orion uncertainly hooked his pinkie with Hunter's, giving him suspicious glances, expecting him to start laughing. When he didn't, Orion grudgingly said, "I promise."  "Good. Me, too. Now, let's go welcome those poor idiotic souls who have no idea what they're in for."
 Hunter and Orion crossed the half-dead grass grounds between Officials Building and the Main Hall in silence. They ascended to the second level of the hall where a ledge overlooked the hall on the ground floor.
   Hunter gave Orion a nod and he opened the door to the ledge. He stepped out, fixing his posture to one of the self-assured leader Orion thought he was. Orion followed after him, shaping his face into emotionless stone. As Hunter took his place in the space between Captain Joyce and Holston, Orion moved to the end and stood tall next to Captain Paruki.
 The crowd of one hundred and eighty-three people slowly fell silent and they all looked up at the addition of the brothers, but mostly Hunter, one of the most renowned soldiers the Union had, having become a Commander at nineteen.
 As Hunter began introductions, Orion began assessing every person below them, an instinct that had been drilled into him. There were a variety of races among them but that was hardly a surprise. Australia had been well known for its diversity in ethnicity for centuries.   Most of the recruits looked like they belonged on battlefields, whether they'd be on the borders of the Union or the floors of their local pubs. Women too looked like they'd have little trouble settling into their new training base. Then there were those cowering around the edges of the crowd, only volunteering for the reward money.
 There was a small man near the east side who had a million tattoos covering every inch of his porcelain skin, which would've looked intimidating if strewn onto the burly man in front of him instead of his thin, flimsy frame. He was obviously here for the money.
 Not far from him was a skinny girl with her mousy hair swept up into a ponytail. Her big brown eyes flittered around the room like someone would start shooting at her any second. The way she nibbled on her bottom lip, her eyes wide as she fiddled with the straps of her bag was enough to tell him that she was terrified.
 Orion almost smiled in amusement.
 But he frowned instead in realisation that at least a third of these volunteers would be low-lives living off crime and jumped at the first opportunity for credit as large as two thousand. They probably didn't even know what discipline meant. He had a long way to way training them to become soldiers.

      Teri's nerves finally kicked in. She wanted to sprint back out the door, into the hover she came upon and demand the pilot to take her to China.
 Upon arrival, they were herded into a tall building named 'Main Hall'. Five male and two female soldiers stood on the ledge that jutted out from a wall without any barriers to keep them from slipping off and splattering on the ground. She quickly learnt that five were captains and the other two were the deputy and Commander Kesswell.
 The commander had given them words of encouragement which felt more like death sentences to Teri.
 Alright, Asteri. You know why you're here. Everyone on Earth is depending on you.   Oh, she knew why she was here but she hadn't a clue what she was doing. She had to prevent a war and to expose the truth about the upcoming doomsdays but who would ever be mad enough to believe her.
 The first three captains had called out names of people from their platoon but Teri was not in any. She held her breath in anticipation, hoping that her name would not be called - hoping that her name had not ended up on the sign up list after all.   Captain Kesswell began to call out names of people from Platoon 4. He was young to say the least, not much older than Teri herself but he held himself in a confident stance, his back straight and broad shoulders pulled back as if he'd served in the army for the last ten years of his life. He had to have been closely related to the commander. They shared the same tanned skin, dirty blond hair and sharp, strong features.
 He worked his way down the list on his Port and just when it felt like Teri's name wasn't going to be called, he announced, "Verloren, Asteri," shattering any hope she had left of getting out of this place.
 She looked up, eyes wide and panting, to find that he was looking straight at her. The crimson woman appeared in the corner of her eyes and Teri span around with a gasp. She bit her lip and stiffly treaded outside, not daring to look back.
 Opposite the Main Hall and another building named 'Officials' five white, two-storey buildings were lined up in a row, each with a number painted on it in black. People were bunched up in front of the buildings according to their platoon number, some chatting among each other and others quietly assessing people around them.
 Teri stalked towards the building with the number 4 on it. No one spared a glance at her, too lost in their own excitement. At the back of the group stood two women, the younger one with olive skin – the woman who defended her on the hover – and the other pale with short curly blonde hair.   The older woman saw Teri and she waved her over, smiling.   "Hello, sweetheart," she said. "I'm Danika and this is Jill. Nice to meet you."
 Teri introduced herself as she tried to feign a smile onto her face. Danika gave her reassurance that she didn't need to be too nervous but it didn't feel quite as reassuring as Danika may have hoped.
 "We're talking about the dead princess," Jill said. "About how the girl had a metal heart, literally."
 She almost towered over Teri as she looked down. At such a close distance, she didn't seem much older than her, perhaps only by three or four years. Her grey eyes were bold and defiant and she stood with arms folded across her chest, legs slightly apart.
 "Did you know about that?" Danika asked Teri.
 Teri nodded. Everyone knew, even the colonies on Mars.   With narrowed eyes, Jill opened her mouth to say something when a cough silenced them. Captain Kesswell now stood in front of the platoon, posture rigid and serious. Up close, Teri could see his eyes were as dark as night, a couple of black holes that sucked all the lights in. There was a bump in his nose as if he'd broken it and didn't bother to let doctors fix him up. The left side of his upper lip bore a scar that ran down from the top to the bottom.

   He looked like the kind of men whom Teri had seen come out of her sister's room in the middle of the nights; beautiful and dangerous.
 "Alright, recruits," he said. "This is the building in which you will live and train at for the next ten weeks. From now on, we are a team. I don't want to see or hear any signs of conflict among you or there will be punished. Is that clear?"
 There was a weak blotchy response of, "Yes, sir."
 Captain Kesswell's eyes hardened. "Is that clear?" he barked.
 "Yes, sir!"
 "Good. The training will be the greatest challenge you will ever face in your life. You are becoming soldiers, guardians of this country, not butlers and barmaids. Do not expect yourself to ace through it. Any of you."
  He trained his eye on the dark-skinned man up the front who was smirking lazily. The man immediately straightened up and lost his smirk.
 "The first floor is separated into male and female quarters and you are to keep to your own quarters. Get a good night's sleep tonight because I want you out here at five tomorrow for the morning run. Anyone late will do two extra miles. Then we start the pre-assessments to see your skills and your weaknesses and determine what each of you needs to strengthen."   Teri gulped as his sharp eyes met hers again. There was a spark of curiosity in them, sending a chill down her spine. He, too, was wondering what Teri was doing in an army training base. From the way his nose twitched, he'd probably smelled the fear radiating off her.
 They were dismissed for the rest of the day to settle in. There were eighteen beds in the female quarters and next to each bed was a small bedside table with two drawers. In it were a towel and a toothbrush. On the other end of the room was a communal bathroom. Teri's heart sank as she looked around the dull grey room. There was almost no privacy at all.
 Danika reserved three beds closest to the bathroom for her, Jill and Teri and the other ten women in the platoon scattered themselves around room. As she unpacked her belongings, which consisted of a Port, three pairs of clothes and a thick sketchpad, all she could think was: what if she had a nightmare? She would scream everyone awake.
 She was about to fold away her bag when something blue attached to a gold chain fell out onto her bed.   The pendent in the shape of a shooting star was adorned with blue jewels, its tail dotted with miniature blue gems. The necklace lay on the greyish-brown sheets, mocking her. It dared her to touch it, as if it knew the touch would burn her.
 Teri stared at the shooting star and she was no longer at the training base. She was at her old home, sitting on her mother's bed in her new gown. Her mother brought a gold jewellery box to her as she sat in front of Teri.
 "This," her mother said, "is for you, my little star. It has been in our family for five generations. Now, I'm giving it to you and when you're older, you'll pass this down to your children."
 The six-year-old girl knitted her eyebrows together. "But I don't want to give it away, Mama, it's mine now. Zhè shì hěn piàoliang."
 Her mother chuckled, smoothing Teri's hair down. "Yes, it is very pretty," she agreed. "But this necklace is an heirloom. It is very precious to our family and anyone who gets to own this is very, very special. You are very, very special. You have to protect this with your life."
 The girl tilted her head and stared at her mother with a slight pout, not fully understanding. She could not comprehend how a necklace could be so precious that she had to guard this with her life. Maybe it was the star, she reasoned with herself. Mama loves stars. It must be very special to her, then. And it meant that she was very special to her, too.
 Her mother took the necklace out of its box carefully and held it up, the evening sunlight casting a multicoloured display of light on the wall from the jewels. "This will bring you luck."
 The necklace did bring luck, but not the kind of luck where a six-year-old girl was allowed to eat as many sweets as she wanted before dinner. It was the kind of luck that took away her beating heart: the kind of luck where lives were ruined.
 "Teri, are you okay?" Danika asked from the bed next to hers.
 "Oh, um, yes, I'm fine," she stuttered, dazed. "I was... thinking."
 Danika's eyes were on the necklace on the bed. Teri picked it up and shoved it into the pocket of her pants. Danika smiled softly as if she knew what it meant to her. Teri's heart skipped. No, Danika couldn't have known. That was impossible. Impossible.
 Through the fabric of her pants, the necklace sizzled, searing hot on her thigh. The smell of burning flesh and charred meat, wafted up her nostrils. Teri gave Danika an awkward smile before she rushed into the bathroom. She locked herself in a toilet cubicle and took the necklace out.
 Teri stared at it, unsure what she would do with it. The delicate golden box it was once kept in was now somewhere at the back of her sister's enormous closet, empty. The only place she could keep this safe and hidden from her sight was the compartment in her heart; a place where she could keep the memories of her mother alive yet out of sight.  
 Orion was familiarizing himself with profiles of each person in his platoon when the audio interface of his quarter dinged and informed him that Captain Towers asked for entrance permission.
 "Granted," he said.
 The door slid opened and in strolled Darren with a bounce in his steps and a Cheshire grin. He plopped himself down in the chair on the opposite side of his desk. Orion's friend was far too excited to be a captain, even though Orion would carry out most of the training.
 "Hello, O," he said. "What are you doing?"   "Profile assessments," he said, and slid the port across the table. "You should be doing that too."
 Darren gave him a pointed look. "If someone had bothered to send me the list, I would've."
 Orion shrugged. "I can't help it if Hunter doesn't consider you a captain. You're a pilot."
 "And you're an infiltrator but I don't see you missing out."
 "Do you have officers training?" Darren didn't say anything. "I thought so. Anyway, have a look at her."
 Darren pulled the port closer and projected a hologram display of the screen. A 3D holoboard of Asteri Verloren's profile sprung up.
 "We have to keep an eye on her," Orion said. "She escaped the uprising in the north a few weeks ago but her parents died so she came to her Godfather in Nyiup. Her family history traces back to her parents but then dead end."
 "She's only eighteen," Darren pointed out. "You think she's not who she says she is?"
 "No. She came from the north just when the government started sending for volunteers. Don't you think that's a little suspicious?"
 "She weights ninety-eight pounds. How much damage do you think she can do?"
 Orion gave Darren a long hard look. "With spies, size doesn't matter. In fact, the less dangerous they look, the more dangerous they are. All they need are silver tongues and they can get anything they're looking for."
 Darren simply rolled his eyes and cocked his head to the side, unconvinced.
 "That's not all," Orion continued. "Why on Earth would an eighteen-year-old girl volunteer?"
 "She could be looking for revenge for her parents' death," offered his friend.
 Orion rubbed his face with his hands in exasperation and sighed. "Doesn't seem like it. She never showed any signs of vengeance. If my suspicions are right, then she has mastered the art of deception and she will have us down in less than a week."
 "She seems harmless to me, Orion. I think you're being a little too paranoid," Darren argued, a hobby of his that he liked to share with Orion. The tiny amused smile at the corner of his lips proved it.
 Orion raised his eyebrows at him, pressing his lips together. "I don't think so because, see? She's already got you on her side and you haven't even seen her in person."  

 

Chapter 3

-Edited/Rewritten-
 Chapter 3
 It was cold and dark when Teri's alarm from her port went off at half-past four. She could hardly sleep a wink last night, too nervous. Danika had called her wife and one-year-old daughter to check up on them and Jill had called her mother and three brothers. Most of the women had been calling their families so Teri called Nina to say that she was all right and she had made friends.   After that they shared stories about their lives before volunteering. Jill was a barmaid, Danika had been a nurse in Beijing before she quit and came back to Australia. A lot of other women were from low-paid jobs. When it was Teri's turn, she'd told them that she was a university freshman who lost her parents during the rebellion and now had nowhere to go. Some had taken pity on her but a few women kept silent, watching her. She'd left the conversation soon after and laid in her cold, hard bed, listening as the others continued on.
 Now, while other women changed in the room, Teri changed in a toilet and pulled her jaggedly chopped hair into a ponytail before going outside. The first thing she saw were the stars still twinkling in the dark sky. The sky was so different, so cold here in the southern hemisphere. She couldn't find Polaris or the constellation of Andromeda, and a lot of other constellations she'd grown up with were missing too.   One star still missing was her mother.
 "Fracking cold," Jill cursed, hugging herself and bouncing on the spot.
 "Good morning, Jill," Teri said.   She stared down at Teri in disbelief. "Morning? It's only five hours past midnight!"
 Danika joined them, arms tucked into the pocket of her sweater. She laughed sleepily, exhaling a puff of mist.
 Captain Kesswell and another young man came out at exactly five o'clock. Everyone stopped complaining immediately, some straightening their hunched backs. Captain's eyes scanned his platoon, counting the numbers.
 "He's gorgeous," Jill whispered.
 "Who?" Teri asked.
 Both Danika and Jill gave her incredulous looks. Teri glanced between the two, suddenly embarrassed that she'd asked.
 "Captain Kesswell, of course," Danika said.
 "Oh."
 When Teri shifted her eyes towards the captain again, he was glaring at them. Everyone else was looking at them, too, some sniggering while others tried to conceal their smiles.   "Are we done, ladies?" the other man asked. Unlike Kesswell, he looked rather amused.
 Jill stuck her chin out. "Yes."   "Good answer," the captain said. "Now it would greatly benefit you if you paid attention to me instead of talking about me, Simmons."
 "Captains," another voice interrupted him. The deputy, a man in his late years stomped up to the troop with his eyebrows furrowed in disdain. Captain's face visibly hardened and his eyes narrowed by a fraction.
 Nevertheless he gave a stiff nod. "Deputy Holston. It's still early. I can take care of this."
 Teri knew that tone and hidden message from years of hearing that from her sister. It translated to something along the line of: go away; I don't need you here.   Deputy Holston ignored the captain and threw his eyes over the troop. His frown became more and more imminent with each person he scrutinized until lines above his brows were all that was left of his forehead. Behind him the captains were glaring holes at the back of his head.

  "Deputy," the nameless man said, his tone light but demanding attention. "We're taking our men for a two-mile run. Would you care to join us?"
 "No," the man grumbled. "I'll be back later. You may continue."
 Something about the retreating man was quite unnerving. The way his eyes peeled away every layer of her skin until he could see her true soul inside. She wondered if he saw the six-year-old girl inside her, still afraid of the monster under her bed, waiting for her mother to chase it away with stories of ancient worlds and heroes with swords.
 Captain Kesswell introduced them to Captain Towers. Then he made sure that everyone understood that from that day onward they were running two miles every morning at five. If anyone showed up late or not at all, they would run four miles.   Half an hour later, Teri was dying. The ache of her leg muscles was unbearable now and her legs had turned to jelly, threatening to trip over each other with each step. Her thundering heartbeat throbbed in her skull. Her heart and lungs were out of synch, unused to working this fast.
 But she couldn't afford to slow down or stop running for she'd never find the courage to start running again. She could almost hear her sister sneering, Pathetic. You run from everything and when you need to run, you can't. But oh, well. What can we expect of you?
 To save the world, she answered.   It pointed its long mocking finger, sharp as a knife, and it laughed in her face. You want to save the world? You can't even do something as simple as mixing a vial of tonic in water, her sister's voice taunted.   Teri choked on air as the knife plunged into her chest. She wanted to stick her chin up at the voice like Jill had done to Captain Towers, but refrained, afraid of being slapped. It had been months but she was still strung up on losing the only person who had ever believed in her. Now, there was no one to tell her that she could do anything she wished.
 Miraculously, Teri managed back to barrack 4 on her own two feet. She could barely make out the number on the building before she collapsed onto her hands and knees and emptied out her stomach. Even long after last night's dinner was a stinking puddle on the grass, she was still retching and her throat burned with the need to spill more of her insides.
  Danika rubbed her back gently. Someone was crouched on the other side of her, a hand on her shoulder. Her breath hitched when she saw it was Captain Towers, smiling down at her.
 "Are you alright?" he asked.
 Teri nodded, bringing on another wave of nausea.
 "She's fine."   Captain Kesswell stood a foot away from the puddle with his arms folded over his chest. Behind him, some people were looking at her sympathetically and some were smirking at her misfortune.
 Towers shook his head as he sighed and turned to the platoon. "When you're out on the field, people around you are the only ones you've got. From now on, we are a family. We help each other because no one else will and I suggest you start getting used to helping out when you see someone struggling."
 Captain Kesswell was still leering down at Teri, his eyes bright under the soft sunlight from the horizon now, his hair glistening. She dared to look him in the eye for two seconds before she had to cast them away. Behind him, Towers was giving instructions for the rest of the morning. He was definitely much friendlier than Kesswell.
 "Clean this up," he ordered when the men dispersed.
 "Yes, sir," she murmured.
 He spun on his feet and left in the direction of the Officials Building, Towers following after him.

  Jill said loudly, "I was talking about Towers this morning, not that brick wall," glaring at the captain's back.  
 When Asteri Verloren entered the Main Hall she was looking less of a wreck than she did before. She trailed after Jillian and Danika, sliding into a table with them. Asteri picked at her food, her eyes distant but still nodding along to something Jillian was saying.   "She," said Hunter as he nodded at Jillian, "is the rebellious one."
 Orion's eyes drifted to the woman. Jillian Simmons was specially recruited into the army by General Moore himself after her successful hack into the military security system. She claimed she was not looking for anything in particular when put under a lie-detector test and she was, surprisingly, telling the truth. She wanted something more challenging to hack than ports and banks – though she'd never stolen money from a bank before. The security system fell victim but the general was more than impressed by her skills.
 'Rebellious' would perfectly describe that girl, muscles in her jaws tightening when something she didn't like happened and not even trying to hide her annoyance. With her steel-grey eyes, there was also the atmosphere around her that would make most people think twice about messing with her.   "Yes," he agreed, taking a bite of the dry, rubbery bacon on his plate.
 "She totally finds me attractive," Darren said with a smirk, scooping runny scrambled eggs into his mouth.
 Orion rolled his eyes. "Don't get any ideas," he warned, knowing full well of Darren's habit with women. And men.
 Darren grinned. "Why so bitter, O?"
 Hunter smirked at Orion and gave him a nudge with his elbow. Orion didn't dignify that with a response. He already had enough on his plate with the Holston problem and training schedules without Darren's taunts. On top of that, he still couldn't decide what to make of Asteri Verloren. Spy or not spy? He briefly considered asking Hunter for advice but his pride wouldn't allow him to.
 He looked over at the recruits scattered around the hall. Most of them were in their early twenties and a few nearing thirty. Some talked among themselves in small groups and he caught bits of conversations about their families, previous occupations, old partners and people who were currently in the room right then. Some were joking around about the dead princess who was on the news again on the giant VidScreen mounted on a wall.
 Not a lot looked in shape. Some too lanky, others too filled out and some looked greatly distressed. Some men had their chests puffed out to make themselves seem larger in an unspoken competition as their conversation turned to the training. They really needed to learn discipline and teamwork instead of competing against each other.
 Darren noticed too and said, "We have only ten weeks to train them. God help us."  
 As promised, Holston appeared just as the troop entered the training room on the second floor. Orion wanted to wipe that holier-than-thou expression off his face, considering he ranked even lower than the recruits and yet acted like he was the prime minister.
 Orion didn't even make an effort to be civilised. He disregarded his presence and continued talking as if he hadn't slithered into the room at all.
 "When we are on duty and training," he was saying, "we do not see gender. We do not see race. We do not discriminate. We are soldiers. We fight for each other. If we're fighting against each other it is to help each other improve, not to put each other down. Understand?"
 "Yes, sir."
 "Today is to discover your strengths and weaknesses. It, by no means, decides whether you'd face dishonourable discharge or you're ready for the real pain. However in ten weeks, if you do not improve to minimal standards, you're out. After each training day, Towers and I will pick out three people to clean up the training room. Those three will know that they haven't done as well as they should've." 

  He paused, feeling Holston's eyes on the back of his neck. He should've felt somewhat nervous to a certain extent at the fact that he, too, was being assessed on how well he had done in his officer training. But he wasn't because he was repeating the exact words his old captain had said on his first day, four years ago. And he knew he was doing this right.
 "We're going to start with fitness testing," he announced.
 The looks on his troop's faces changed.
 Darren lined fifteen people up for the age old Beep Test and instructed on how the test would run. Orion paid particular attention to Asteri as the audio interface read out the programmed Beep Test module, calling out each level with a beep signalling the end of the times.
 She was panting hard before she even hit level five, her sinewy limbs thrown into the air in a mess as she ran, red faced. She was done by 5.3, barely able to walk straight. Darren looked at Orion and raised an eyebrow. See?
 Next one to drop out was Decks Hartigan at level 5.7. He was the smallest man in the troop, much like Asteri with long limbs and approximately zero ounce of muscle on him. Unlike Asteri, he hadn't tried his hardest - if she had actually tried her hardest at all. Orion made a mental note of this.
 Nineteen people in total dropped before level eight, but none as low as Asteri. Most did relatively well in the two-minute sit-ups and push ups but only a handful was anywhere near standard level for a soldier.   Orion and Darren led their troop into the simulation room at the other end of the training room. It was a long room with two rows of twenty-five beds, wires hooked up to boxes above the headboards. Orion showed them how to stick the brainwave sensors to their temples whilst Darren readied the simulation in the room separated by a transparent glass wall at the end, where they could monitor the sims.   "Where to?" Darren asked as Orion entered.
 "Forest," he replied without hesitation.
 Darren typed in commands and on the large projection against a wall, the virtual world of trees and rivers appeared. A few seconds later, the troop appeared. They looked around their surroundings in awe and fascination then at their clothes which were now thermo resistant suits made for camouflage and helmets with transparent visors.   Orion sat down at the individual simulation controls and said, "Give them S25 and let hell loose."
 Sleek black S25 guns appeared in their arms two seconds before an invisible enemy line opened fire on them. Every single one dropped to the ground immediately with shock so clear on their faces behind the visors that Orion had to smother his grin.   "You bloody sadist," Darren accused as he punched Orion's arm, but he was smiling too.  
 A deadly red laser beam landed right beside Teri's helmet, too close to her head for comfort. Dirt pressed up against the glass visor of the helmet, heavy pants resonating in her helmet and sweat beading her forehead. Her fingers gripped on the handle of her gun which lied beside her head. There was nothing to see but trees and random spots of laser beams flying their way from thin air.
 Something inside her helmet cackled to life and the captain's voice barked, "What are you all lying around for? Defend yourself. Open fire!"
 The woman beside Teri – whom she recognised as Emma – inspected her gun. Teri was too shocked and frozen to even attempt to move. She had never heard of simulation training in the North army and she hated it. This felt too much like her nightmares where she was utterly powerless and unable to take control of anything. 

  Over the sound of enemy guns, Teri heard a familiar voice in a war cry. Jill had sprung up and was shooting wildly into invisible enemy territory, the sound of her gun echoing in her eardrums. More people followed Jill's lead but stayed low.
 Oh, stars. Move, Teri! she yelled at herself. Just shoot!
 She couldn't see her hand under the thick gloves but she could safely say she was in no fear of dropping the weapon. Emma was shooting on her stomach when Teri finally forced her head to lift and search. The tangy metallic taste of blood exploded in her mouth and she realised she'd bitten her lip too hard.
 Suddenly a pained cry erupted and in the corner of Teri's eyes, Danika collapsed to the ground. No one was helping her, all too focused on the enemy. Teri was sprinting before she realised and was dragging her behind their line of defence, forgetting they were under attack.
 Danika's midsection was covered in cherry red blood and epicentre of the mess was a large burn, still scorching orange and burning into her flesh. Her blood-curdling scream was half muffled by her helmet but still sent chills down Teri's spine.
 "Advance, advance!" captain ordered them.
 The troop began to crawl forward but Teri ignored the direct order. A white circular canteen appeared in Danika's belt and Teri's fingers fumbled as she poured the liquid over the wound. Danika screamed louder, her face drenched with tears as her fingers dug into the dirt. Teri looked down at the wound and - oh, great stars! The liquid was not clear; it was green–radioactive green.
 The substance soaked into Danika and melted away her stomach, dissolving her flesh and it ate her up, up, up, until all there was left of Danika was her bloody skeleton.
 Teri stared in horror. Then she was scrambling backwards on the ground from the skeleton that had been Danika.
 Her back hit a trunk of the tree and she kept pressing her body against it, willing herself to sink into the tree, trembling. She killed Danika. She killed Danika. For the second time that day, her food rose into her throat. She forced herself to swallow it back down but as soon as she did, Danika's frightened blue eyes flashed in her mind again.
 Out on the field, the sound of guns stopped. Her own gun had been left beside where Danika laid but it was gone. Powerless; her own mind could take away everything she had and she could do absolutely nothing against it.
 She glanced up to see that most of her troop were standing up, guns gone. The ones who lay on the ground had the same scorch marks as Danika somewhere on their bodies and on their belts were white canteens.
 Her breaths fogged up her visor as she tried to crawl towards them on shaking arms and knees. Danika's eyes. Her flesh wasting away by lethal substance. Her scream. Her skeleton.
 In the distance, a woman's figure was walking towards her but a blur jumped out and tackled to the ground again. A gloved hand reached for her but it never reached her. A deafening crack, followed by a cry and the hand was gone.   Suddenly everyone was attacked by people in black covering every inch of their skin. Even the visors of their helmets were black.
 Someone coughed behind her and her head snapped towards it in panic. All she saw was the bottom of someone's boot connecting with her torso and she rolled across the forest ground, hitting into jutting tree roots. Pain rang throughout her body. The taste of blood built up in her mouth and she was sure something warm and wet was dripping down her nose.
 A man in black advanced on her and her heart constricted before suddenly beating faster with a jerk. He was at least twice her size. He could disassemble her with his fingertips. She forced her aching body on her feet, her right knee almost buckling and the pain from her abdomen kept her from standing upright.   If it were not for her synthetic heart beating wildly and ordering her body to function, Teri would be on the ground, dead at the hands of the man.
 He broke into a sprint and before Teri's jumbled brain could register, his body had slammed into her and she was slamming onto the ground again. He dropped onto her middle and pounded at her visor. His weight pinned her down and she couldn't scream. His hands fell down again and again at the screen and her arms fought to block his hits but somehow his fists always found her helmet.
 The visor smashed with a horrifying shatter and the last thing she saw was a fist sending her into oblivion.  
 When she opened her eyes, the first thing she saw was a box hovering over her head and two sticky patches attached to her temples. She wasn't dead. She gasped and sat up, the patches yanked off. Beside her, people were waking up. Her mind told her that she should be hurting everywhere but her body didn't agree.
 She was no longer wearing the greenish brown suit and was back in her jacket and track pants. None of what had happened was real. She never left the simulation room at all. If that was the case then... Danika!
 She spun around to the bed behind her and found Danika pulling off the sensor patches, alive. Teri swallowed. Danika was alive. She was alive.   "Danika, are you alright?" Teri croaked, rushing to her bedside.
 The blue eyes stared up at her but this time they were very much alive and frightened.
 "I..." she trailed, looking down at her stomach and then at her hands. "It was burning me and I died."
 Jill, sitting on the bed beside Danika's, scoffed and rolled her eyes. "Please, Dan. I was the first one to die."
 "Nearly all of you died," Captain Towers interrupted.
 He leaned against the glass wall down the room with a small smile on his face. Captain Kesswell was standing upright next to him, the complete contrasts. One was easy-going and relaxed whilst the other was serious and alert.
 "I hope all of you learnt something from this," Kesswell said. "If you didn't then I suggest you get your head out of your ass. Simmons, I suggest you start by not make yourself an awfully easy target. Does anyone else know what they did wrong?"
 When no one said a word, Emma cleared her throat and said, "I didn't shoot when I thought I saw someone at the very beginning, sir."
 Kesswell nodded, "Good, Bane. Anyone else?"
 "Asteri?" Towers asked. "Anything you did wrong?"
 Teri's throat clogged up with rising vomit. Retching, she clasped a hand over her mouth. She did everything wrong, as always, and someone had to pay a price for it.
 "Alright, alright," Towers said. "Take it easy. There's a psych ward in the Main Hall, second floor if you need."
 Kesswell cut him off, "All of you need to go to the Main Hall at 1500 hours this afternoon to retrieve your training uniform. Get some rest today because tomorrow, the real pain begins. Dismissed." Don't forget to vote and comment!  When I was rewriting, I realised that there is A LOT of foreshadowing in this chapter. Try to guess. ;) 
 Also, the beep test is also called the pacer in some parts of the world. For the fortunate few who don't know what it is, this tumblr user pretty much sums up the torture of it.
                     

 

Chapter 4

                  Chapter 4
 Orion sprinted into the trees, the muscles in his legs burning and yet asking for more. He could barely see anything with the sky still so dark but his instincts guided him along the familiar course.   Darren picked up his pace to match his, panting slightly. "Slow down, O," he said. "There are people back there who aren't used to running two miles every damned morning."
 "They're all under thirty. This is the pace they need to be running at by the end of training. If they can't then they need to try harder."
 Darren growled in frustration. "What if some smartasses decide to take a short cut?"
 Orion gave him a dark smile. "I'm tracking their chips. If I find out anyone has been, then they're in for hell. Besides, you're only worried about Verloren."
 "I'm telling you, Orion, you pushed her too far yesterday. First day and you burn her friend up? That's going to leave her with mental scars."
 "She can handle it," Orion said in finality.   "Did you not see her this morning? Did you not see our troop? They were not 'handling' it."
 Half of his men clearly did not have enough sleep last night with bags under their eyes. He had given them situations that would challenge each of them during the simulations yesterday and most had horrific outcomes which probably kept them from sleeping soundly.   Admittedly, he had been harsh on them, considering sims had nasty side effects of making your body rebel against the way the brain wanted it to function.  Most of the men would be trying to convince their bodies they were injured when it was only their minds believing it.
 He had given Asteri the worst situation out of them all. She was handling this worse than he thought, worse than could be faked. She was curled against the building with her knees in her chest, rocking back and forth as she stared at the grass with glazed eyes when he went out for the run. He had been trained to see past lies and pretence and there was nothing in the way that Asteri was behaving told him she was pretending.
 Maybe he was doing this wrong.    Darren muttered, "I wish you'd see that Asteri is not the enemy."
 He'd said it under his breath but was obviously meant for Orion to hear. He didn't bother saying anything back, not when Darren was possibly right.  
 Voices of the women in the bathroom swam in Teri's head, mixing with the images of hand-held weapons Captain Kesswell had been talking about during class that morning. Someone's brother was killed by a hand-held grenade that detonated in his hands – or those could've been completely unrelated but she couldn't tell. The image of Danika beating eaten away flashed in her mind and she stumbled, her back hitting the wall of the toilet cubicle she was changing in.
 Weapons from the Empire were far more destructive than any that Captain had talked about, though. Just one tiny chemical bomb was enough to wipe out two small towns and guns were capable of both long-range and short-range aim with near perfect precision due to target tracking. Not to mention an illegal army of cloned soldiers, genetically engineered to destroy.
 Danika's scream erupted in her ear. With a gasp her head dropped into her hands and palms pressed against her ears, squeezing her eyes shut to shove the memory away.
 When she opened her eyes the crimson woman stood in front of her, close enough to smell the metallic reek of blood. Sour bile bit the back of her throat and she swallowed, backing away only to remember that she was in a small toilet cubicle. 

  The woman stared at her and she stared back, heart racing. I need to get- the woman stabbed her chest with a knife before she could finish her thought.
 Pain seared in her chest and she cried out, rushing out of the cubicle and slamming the door shut. The four women who were changing turned to look at her with eyebrows raised. Teri gulped and she looked back at the closed door in front of her. It wasn't real, Teri. It was just your mind.
 "I saw a spider in there," she pathetically explained.
 Then she shuffled out of the bathroom and into the bedroom in embarrassment. She looked at her chest, expecting blood in the brief moment that she had forgotten her heart couldn't bleed. She couldn't help wiping away the imaginary blood anyway, somewhat thankful the greyish-white uniforms zipped all the way up to her neck and hid her abnormality.   With a constant supply of medication, her hallucinations hadn't surfaced in over two months. She sighed and closed her eyes. Her meds ran out two weeks ago and she was not likely to get her hands on more because if anyone found out about her instability, she'd be dismissed. If this was how things were going to be from now on, she'd need it more than ever.   "There you are, Teri. Ready to go?" Danika said. She was wearing her uniform of long sleeved shirt and pants with combat boots, too. "How are you feeling?"
 Teri managed to give her a wan smile. "I'm fine, thank you. Where's Jill?"
   "She left for the training room about five minutes ago. That girl is way too eager for action for her own good. We better go, too, before Kesswell makes us run laps."
 Teri nodded slowly in agreement as she followed Danika to the second level. Muscles in her legs throbbed with every step and her ankle was sore from twisting it after she tripped over some tree roots on the morning run. Her heavy eyelids threatened to shut from the lack of sleep last night, afraid she'd scream the building down from her nightmares.
 During lunch Danika and Jill tried to persuade her to see the medic but her records were bare from having a fake identity that had magically appeared in the system only three weeks ago. The little black-market business wasn't willing to be that elaborate even with the ravishing sum of credit she had tempted them with.
 They arrived in the huge room they'd been in the day before for the fitness tests. The room had a high ceiling and a rope dangling down from it near the back of the room. There were two stacks of mats piled in the corner next to the entrance and there was another two doors all the way on the opposite wall. On the left wall was a climbing station that went up to the ceiling and on the right was bare of equipments.   There were no windows in the room. She bit her lip and tried to ignore the walls closing in.
 Captain Kesswell and Captain Towers were standing in the middle of the room, in front of their troop. Captain's eyes caught hers as she saluted, remembering what he'd told them that morning. His eyes narrowed slightly and turned away. What had she done wrong this time?
 "Alright, ladies," his voice echoed off the walls. "Today your fitness and physical combat training begins. Being a soldier is not all about guns. It prepares you to be able to protect our country both physically and mentally. This is where you'll learn to protect yourself and to fight for yourself. If you can't protect and fight for yourself, you can't protect and fight for our country."
 He pointed at the rope behind him. "See that rope over there? By the end of your training, all of you should be able to touch the Southern Cross on the ceiling by climbing up that rope with nothing to aid you."
 His finger moved up from the bottom of the rope to the ceiling and then to the bars just next the spot where the rope hanged from. On the other side of the bar were five stars painted in a cross. It was the Crux, the constellation that pointed to the South Pole.

    "But now, we're going to start with defence and attack techniques."
 Captain Towers strode off to an electronic panel near the entrance. A few seconds later, hidden doors on the empty wall opened up and rolled out punching bags hanging from stands build into solid slates that were now walls.   The captains demonstrated stances, basic blocks and attacks. She winced every time skin slapped loudly against the leather bags. They had enough force behind every kick and punch to make the bag swing wildly. She was supposed to do that?
 "Remember," Towers said, "the important thing is that you know how to use everything to your advantage. Your size, speed, strength - or lack of. Find your opponent's weakness, notice every move they make; which leg they put more weight into, their habits before they strike, where their eyes shift towards."   Captain Kesswell kept on punching. There was a feral grace about the way he brought his fist to connect with the bag and the way his leg swang to strike with his shin. In that moment he was not human; he was a machine programmed to destroy his enemies.
 And she was being programmed to be like him.
 The first punch hurt the most, though it didn't get any easier. She threw a punch, then a jab, punch, jab and punch again. The bag didn't move an inch but her knuckles were already red.
 Captain Kesswell and Deputy Holston, who had appeared just as they were assigned to the bags, went from one person to another pointing out mistakes. Next to her Jill grunted as she repeated the same punch, jab rhythm. When the captain and the deputy reached her, they didn't say anything and moved on to Teri.
 Unsurely, she saluted again, her bottom lip rolling in between her teeth out of habit. She tried to make her limp as unnoticeable as possible but it was in pain to the point where she could not set her foot down flat on the floor. It her sister could see her now... Gods, she would laugh at how pathetic she was.
 Captain stared down at her with a look that said, "What am I supposed to make out of you?"
 Not a soldier.
 "Well," the deputy grumbled. "Are you going to practice or stare all day like a lost child?"
 "Oh, sorry, sir," she apologised and turned around, face burning.
 Punch, jab. Punch, jab. Punch-
 "Knees bent, elbows by the side, thumb tucked under, top of your hand facing the sky, left foot forward, don't straighten your elbows completely," Kesswell corrected.
 "Sorry, sir," she muttered again and repositioned herself.
 Her ankle was killing her, and her knuckles were raw and red. Stupid girl! You're never going to make it.   She was stupid, wasn't she? She gritted her teeth and continued on until Captain Kesswell called them back to the centre.   Captain Towers said, "Now that you've all had some practice, you're going to put those techniques to use."
 Jill said, "This is going to be fun." Sarcasm dripped down like venom on fangs.
 "Miss Simmons," Kesswell called out. "Thank you for volunteering. You won't mind pairing up with Mr. Jamieson then."
 A man, presumably Jamieson, let out a sound that resembled a yelp. Although he had the body of a labourer, he was only a couple of inches taller than Jill. His blue eyes were wide as he stared at Captain Kesswell in disbelief.
 Jill winked deviously at the man. "Not at all, Captain. Ander is an old friend of mine."
 He ordered them to lay out a sparring mat from one of the piles in the corner and the rest to form a circle around it. He motioned for Jill and Ander to step onto the mat.

  "What do we do, Captain?" Ander asked uncertainly as he faced Jill, who was flexing her shoulders, cracking her knuckles and bouncing on the balls of her feet with a smirk on her face.
 "You're on a sparring mat," Captain said. "What do you think?"
 Ander looked at him. "I'm supposed to fight her?"
 "What did I tell you yesterday? We do not see gender when we're in training."
 "Scared, Ander?" Jill taunted, spreading her feet apart and crouching low like a tigress seizing a gazelle.
 He mirrored her moves. "Whatever, Jill."
 They circled each other on the mat, waiting for the other to attack. Ander's reluctance to attack Jill went further than mere reluctance. He seemed to truly care about her, though Jill didn't seem to be too worried about him.   "Anytime this year would be nice," Kesswell snapped.
 With that he lunged for Jill's waist and she fell with a grunt as Ander's weight landed on her. She didn't wait for Ander collect himself and swang a punch at his jaw. Then another. And another. On the fourth punch, Ander caught her fist before it reached his face and locked her wrists in his hands.   Jill tried to yank her hand out of his grip but he pinned them beside her shoulders, unsure what to do next. In his moment of weakness, Jill jerked her leg up and kneed his groin. His eyes bulged and he swore, rolling off her and into a ball on the mat. The others watching the match groaned sympathetically and even Captain Towers winced.
 Jill smiled and stood up, hands on hips as she looked down at Ander still on the ground. Teri let out the breath of anticipation she didn't realise she was holding.
 "So," Jill said brightly. "Who's next, Cap?"
 "If your sparring partner can stand up, he's next. If not, you're out for today." He turned around to the rest of his platoon. "What Simmons demonstrated was a cheap blow, only effective for a short while before your opponent can recollect himself. But effective enough. Thank you, Simmons."
 Jill smiled and came to stand next to Teri. Ander was trying to crawl up, his face contorted in pain, jaws clenched.
 Captain Kesswell picked out another pair and set them loose on the mat. This time it was a thin man called Decks Hartigan against Emma Bane. Emma was shorter but a little larger than Decks with angular features. Decks was almost like a limp noodle, very much like herself.   "Use your difference to your advantage," Kesswell said.
 Unfortunately, Decks did not know how to use this to his advantage. Emma had thrown the first punch at Decks' stomach and he doubled over like a snapping twig. Teri sucked in a breath at the gurgling sound he made, his eyes refusing to look at them.
 Emma was kind enough to wait for Decks to get back on his feet and strike. Decks clumsily threw his fist at her face but she blocked it using a technique captain had demonstrated earlier and then pulled his arm behind him. He cried out and then fell to his knees.
 "Pathetic," Captain spat. "Get up, Hartigan. Harrison and Verloren get on the mat."
 What? Her throat constricted. Her feet were rooted to the spot as her heart rate increased tenfold. Her body trembled as heads turned towards her. Her vision swam out of focus and spun as if a black hole was sucking up her sight, then calmed again like it was nothing but a ripple on the pond.   On the opposite side, a dark skinned man stepped up onto the mat. He looked older than most in the room and his eyes were colder than Captain Kesswell's. Almost merciless. 

  "Get on the mat, Verloren," Captain ordered impatiently.
 Next to him, Captain Towers sighed. Danika touched Teri's arm in reassurance, her eyes told her that she'd be okay. They both knew it was a lie.
 Teri forced the lump in her throat down and silently prayed to every deity she knew to help her as she limped onto the mat. She prayed to her mother in the heavens to help her.
 The mat under her boots was nothing more than a thin sheet of barrier between the hard ground and whichever body part that had the displeasure of landing on it. It was not nearly enough to prevent a broken skull. The man in front of her looked like he was capable of breaking more than her skull without the ground's help.
 "Positions!" the captain ordered.
 Knees apart, fist to chin, elbows in, watch your opponent.   Too late. She was on the ground before she could register that she'd been punched. Her vision swam in and out of focus again and her jaw ached. The man in black from the simulation loomed over her. He broke her visor and now he was back to tear her apart.
 Up, up, up! She frantically crawled back onto her feet but was attacked by the sudden jab of her ankle and buckled again, catching herself at the last minute.
 Knees apart, hands in-
 A foot connected with her midsection and she was back on the floor, tears springing into her eyes. Her mother stood among the crowd watching the spar, her hair flowing in the wind with a smile playing on her lips. There was a knife in her hand, crimson blood dripping down the glinting blade.
 "I can't!" she rasped. "I'm sorry, I cannot continue."
 Captain Kesswell sighed. "Gods above!" he muttered under his breath. "Just- Get off. You're cleaning up the training room."
 Everyone was watching her, some of them laughing behind hands as she trudged off the mat. Their whispers twisted deep into her flesh and bones and burnt hotter than fire. She'd ran away.
 Captain Kesswell didn't let her sit down while everyone else sparred against their partners. She leaned on her weight on her uninjured foot for the next hour.   I am a rag doll. I cannot feel pain. She chanted to herself repeatedly as she dragged the last mat over to the piles in the corner on limping legs.   "Hey," Decks, who was also on clean up duty, called as he strode over, drenched in sweat. "Asteri, right?"
 She nodded meekly, shifting on her feet.
 Decks glanced down at her foot, one with the heel lifted off the ground, and smiled. "Hui and I can handle the rest. Go have a rest for now and get your ankle checked out."
 She couldn't refuse. She was two seconds away from falling over and Decks had to half carry her back to the dorm. Danika helped her inside, leaving Decks at the door. She was furiously muttering about how heartless Kesswell was as she helped Teri sit down on her bed.
 "I suppose it's a good thing you're still walking," Danika said. "I got you something."
 She picked up a small red metal can from her bed and placed it in Teri's lap.   She explained, "It's a medi-bot. We were allowed to go to the town just two miles from here. I got it at a thrift shop so it's a bit outdated but it still works perfectly fine. I thought you might like a personal nurse to check up on you."
 Teri stared at Danika. This woman hardly knew her and yet she'd bought a medi-bot just for her? "I-I can't accept this. Not when you need this, too."
 Danika rolled her eyes. "Sweetheart, we're not afraid of going to the medic if we're in such bad condition as you. You need this. Consider this my friendship gift to you."
 Friendship. Danika wanted to be her friend. The thought itself was mind-boggling. Only one person had ever been her friend and it was not by choice but by duty. Never in a million years had Teri thought that someone on earth wanted to be friends with someone like her that it left her speechless.
 Danika laughed. "You're making it look like you've never gotten gifts before. Try turning it on."
 Teri unsurely picked up the can and examined it. It was the size of a food can and heavier than it seemed. It must've been made around a decade or so ago, judging from the size and the 'on' button instead of fingerprint scanners that were now used.
 She pressed it and the robot whirred to life. Two blinking white lights appeared on the cylindrical body and a line beneath it. Rollers jutted out from the bottom.
 "Squeak! Hello," a robotic voice greeted, the line zigzagging. "I am Medicare Assist 514?"
 "It's quite small compared to other medi-bots I've seen," she voiced her thoughts.
 "Excuse me?" the droid replied. "I am not small. I am travel sized for your convenience. How can I be of service?"
 Danika laughed again. "I see it's got a bit of an attitude. Well, I'm going to head off to dinner now. Jill's already gone. I'll see you there." Vote if you understand the reference!

 

Chapter 5

The beautiful banner above is made by Artistic_Fabi.      

                 Chapter 5
 Deputy Holston was on Orion's last nerve. The old man rambled on and on about the platoon's incapability to become soldiers and how Orion's training techniques were flawed. For the record, Holston was the janitor of the base. He was not even a soldier and yet he was talking as if he was the prime minister, not caring that nobody wanted to hear what he had to say. Orion was itching to tell the man where to shove his opinions.
 Across the dining hall, Captain Joyce and Hunter were grinning at Orion and Darren's misery. Orion was about a second away from stabbing himself with the knife in his hand and Darren had put a hand up over his forehead discreetly so that he wouldn't have to see Holston's face.
 Orion narrowed his eyes at his brother. The only reason he was still sitting at the table was because that was what Hunter would've done. He would've put up with it and proved to him that he was perfectly fine to train his platoon by himself, which was more difficult than he'd originally thought.   Whilst some of the recruits could do things right, there were twice as many of those who couldn't. They were ones who couldn't get even a small jab at their opponents. Orion and Darren had been up most of the night rearranging sparring partners.
 Suddenly Darren snorted, cutting off Holston's babble. "Asteri is falling asleep."
 "That girl has no hope," Holston quipped.
 Darren and Orion shared a look and both simultaneously rolled their eyes. Of course he had a comment for that too.
 Holston, however, ignored them and continued, "She has no sense either. Anyone with common sense would not be found asleep outside."
 Orion couldn't argue this one, though. When he had gone outside for the morning run, Asteri was sleeping in the valley behind the compound, a sketchpad on her lap and graphite pencil in her hand - a brilliant shiner on her eye. She'd said she had been mapping the stars and then bowed her head in embarrassment when laughter rang through the crowd. Now he had began to suspect that she had a couple of loose nuts and bolts; not a spy from the North.
 If Orion had to be honest, he didn't think she was completely hopeless. She was undoubtedly the worst of the troop when it came to physical combat but the fact she pushed herself until she no longer could was something Orion like about her. Maybe she'd do slightly better in weapon training and physical training. Maybe.
 In the corner of his eyes, Captain Paruki of Platoon 5 laughed heartily. He was sitting with his men and laughing along with them while still maintaining the respect his men had for him. All of the captains were sitting with their troops, even if they were not socialising with them. Had Hunter sat with his platoon when he was captain?
 The answer was obvious.
 Orion picked up his tray of food and left the table, ignoring Holston's outburst. Darren followed him to their platoon's tables in relief.
 "About time, Orion," he sighed. "I swear one of these days I'm going to go shoot his tongue."
 "Be my guest."
 They stood in front of a table and the men's eyebrows rose before quickly making room for them. They sat down and continued their lunch. Then silence.
 Darren chuckled. "You know you can talk, right? We're not going to shoot you for talking. Well, I won't; I can't speak for your Captain though."
 In what was meant to be an attempt at a joke, Orion glared at them. It failed miserably. He rolled his eyes and downed the last gulp of his glass of milk, the liquid tasteless in his mouth. Darren gave him a flat look and shook his head. Orion looked over at his men again, hoping to start a conversation when he saw Asteri looking at him from one table down.

  Her tired eyes widened as his eyes met hers and she automatically lifted her hand towards her forehead with the fork still between her fingers. Realising this, she awkwardly set her fork down and casted her eyes away, her cheeks slightly tinted pink. Three more inches and she would've lost an eye. Maybe she really was a bit loose.
 A short man nicknamed Pudge by his peers asked Orion, "How is your lunch, captain?"
 "Same as yours."
 The same being the mashed potatoes, steak and vegetables that were served for lunch. The steak was tasteless due to engineered cattle that provided essential nutrients rather than taste. The potatoes and vegetables were either undercooked or overcooked on most days. Army food was never going to taste tolerable no matter how long one would serve - Orion's father always said so.
 Darren groaned, "Orion, you're on break, don't be so serious all the time. Don't mind him, boys. He's human interaction intolerant. What were you talking about before?"
 Orion didn't bother to object to Darren's statement. Lunch hour didn't end for another quarter of an hour and combats would not begin for another hour after that. He looked up at the VidScreen to pass time until Darren decided to finish the food on his plate.
 The reporter was broadcasting Princess Athena's funeral from that morning. Her body was never found in the Yangtze but the golden casket was still there for show, decorated with a red dragon wrapping its long body around it.   The entire hall was filled with people in white mourning clothes. Near the casket were another two figures in billowing, grand, white clothes, guarded by at least half a dozen soldiers. The elder princess and the emperor. Neither of their faces was new to him as they were always on international news.   The princess in particular was familiar. A few years ago, she had discovered a new substance that could be used for neurological sciences and would allow humans to live greater lives with further research. At the time, Orion was fifteen and couldn't care less about research and science; he had only been focused on how beautiful the princess was.
 But now he couldn't care less about the princess but only that she was the daughter of a power-hungry man.
 The camera had trained back on the reporter when breaking news headline flashed on the screen in orange, followed by a live aerial clip of people being shot by short range rifles in streets. The headline read, 'Northern Terrorists Massacre Residents in Aga, Egypt'.
 Orion nudged Darren and he heard a sharp intake of breath. It was chaos and mayhem; people running, hiding, falling down, yelling, crying, shooting, bombs being thrown, bombs exploding. A young boy was running across the street to a woman who was lying face down on the ground and then he was lying on the ground, blood seeping out of a hole in his head made by old fashioned weapons. Then the screen went black and silence engulfed the room.
 Orion's blood boiled. A shattering sound echoed off the walls, breaking the silence. It took him a moment to realise that his glass was in crystals on the table and his hand was bleeding with bits of glass jutting out of his skin.
 Everyone's eyes were on him and his eyes were on Asteri. She was looking at him in what was supposed to be concern but all he could think was that she was from the Northern Empire. Her people did this. He glared and she shrunk into herself.   Orion marched to the medic's quarters, his hand bleeding. The woman cleaned his hand up without question, pulling out pieces of glass with tweezers and scanning multiple times to see if there were any more imbedded in his flesh. She applied antibacterial spray and wrapped his hand up in nanosilver bandage. 

  He left for his own quarters after that, too furious for interaction. Hunter came up just as Orion reread and tweaked the new sparring partners he and Darren had paired.
 "Hi, little brother," he greeted. "How is your hand?"
 Orion didn't even glance up at him. "People are dying right now, Hunter. I'll live."
 Hunter sighed and sank into the seat in front of his desk. "I know, Orion."
 "What I don't understand," Orion continued, "is why they're killing people in Africa. They want Australia. Sure, Africa's a part of the Union but it's innocent. Those people were innocent."
 "The VidScreen came back on a while ago. It's all under control now and the attack wasn't a government movement. It's an independent organisation. Aga just happened to be near the northern borders and it's small enough to cause a good amount of damage."
 "How many died?"
 "Fifty-three. The murderers are going to be executed in two days as an example."
 He raised an eyebrow. "Example of what? Everyone knows the Northern forces can easily crush Africa like a tin can."
 "I know," Hunter replied softly, looking down at his hands. "I know, Orion. The conferences are getting us nowhere. Emperor Alvah is still adamant that we join forces with the Empire."
 Orion frowned. Everyone knew accepting his offer was as good as signing their own death sentences. Even people from his own country didn't like his rule. There would be chaos on an international scale if the Union accepted it. With his constant threats of declaring war, defending their own country was now their only choice left.
 "Let them declare war," Hunter finally said. "We're not going down without a fight. Anyway, how are you going with your platoon?"
 Orion shrugged. "Okay. Here, have a look at her."
 Orion projected a hologram of Asteri's profile from his port and pushed it towards his brother. Hunter took one look at her picture and then smirked.
 "What? You like her?"
 His face scrunched in disgust. "No, I wanted to show you that she's from the Empire."
 Hunter's smirk dropped and he set his eyes on the hologram, reading. Minutes later Hunter shook his head. "It's not what you're thinking, O. If she is a spy she'd be far more thorough with filling out family history and would try to be a lot more inconspicuous. In fact, she would lie that she'd lived here for a few years instead of just three weeks."
 "Maybe that's what she wants us to think," Orion argued, and then realised how ridiculous it sounded. "Maybe you're right. I don't know but I don't trust her."
 "You trust no one," Hunter pointed out. He glared. "Alright, fine. How is she at training?"
 "To put it mildly, she's crap at it."
 Hunter chuckled. "Tell you what, Orion, I'll cancel my plans and come to your training this afternoon."
 He gave him a side-ways glance. "Your plans include a certain captain by any chance?"
 Hunter smiled but didn't reply. Orion rolled his eyes, remembering all those times Hunter had told him being in a relationship when you were in the military was a bad idea. Bad idea or not, it seemed Hunter had changed his mind.  
 Teri's knuckles were about to break. Her skin had given up trying to stay intact and was oozing dots of red, staining the punching bag for her to clean up later. She had long lost all senses in her fingers from balling them up. Probably just as well.

  Her medi-bot was going to be busy again tonight.
 In the corner of her eye, Commander Kesswell strode in her direction. He'd come in with Captain Kesswell and Deputy Holston to oversee the troop's training for the day. His presence had set her more on edge than ever.
 Commander stopped right next to her. She stopped and saluted, seeing him up close for the first time. He was very much like the captain with tanned skin, dirty blonde hair and the dark eyes. However, his eyes were, surprisingly, much warmer than the captain's, though they didn't have the stars that Captain's did.
 "At ease," he said, looking at her hand over her forehead. "Continue with what you were doing."
 She unsurely turned around and put herself in position before continuing. With Commander Kesswell watching her, she suddenly aware of all the little mistakes she'd been making. She turned her right foot out and made a larger angle with her knees, shifting her fist upwards to protect her chin.
 He placed a hand on her arm.
 "Your punch should come from your shoulder," he instructed, tapping on it with a finger. "Pull your fist back and make sure your arm is never straight or otherwise you could dislocate something. Try it."
 She obeyed and the impact made the bag swing a little for the first time, but her arm flew straight and she almost popped her elbow.
 "Move forward. You're too far from the bag. Don't be ashamed to ask for help when you need it. Your captain is not the friendliest but he's good at what he does. Carry on."
 With that he moved to Danika's station.
 Captain called them in for sparring and she resisted the urge to slip out the door. Her face and her side were still aching from yesterday even with the painkillers her medi-bot gave her. And the way Captain was looking at her made her wish she knew how to deactivate her heart.
 His eyes said, You should be dead. His hands, one bandaged, were clenched as he folded his arms over his chest.
 The Captains demonstrated more blocking techniques then they paired each other up and practised. Danika and Teri practised on each other while Jill decided torturing Ander with her constant verbal bullying on top of her hits was not at all mean. Practice didn't last as long as it should've and she was soon biting her lip in anticipation, dreading for her name to be called out.
 Two men were rolling on the mat, trying to get above the other for the upper hand. Neither succeeded before Captain Kesswell ordered them off the mat. Jill was against Ander again. This time, Ander gave her more of a challenge than he did yesterday though he still forfeited. Jill had told Teri that she and Ander had gone to high school together.
 Danika sparred against a man called Pudge, who was not afraid to throw a punch at a woman. Danika was nimble on her feet; she dodged and swang a kick at his head. He didn't go easy on Danika after that and she gained a couple more bruises in addition to yesterday's.
 Teri was called up and against the other man who had to clean with her and Decks the day before. His name was Hui. He was not as built as most of the other men. He was knocked out by the third blow yesterday and now the left side of his face was bruised blue and purple, much like Teri's.
 Hui stuck out a jab at her and on instinct she dodged, missing her cheek by inches. Hui paused to give her time to strike but she couldn't. She could not bring herself to knowingly inflict pain upon others. Violence was not the answer. Never.
 You joined an army to fight back, she reminded herself.
 Fight back, she would but with violence.   While she was lost in her internal battleground, Hui had sent her to the floor with an aching punch to her already-bruised jaw.
 "Come on, Teri!" Jill cheered from the side. "Wipe the floor with his ass!"
 Wiping the floor with his backside, of course, didn't happen. Rather, Hui wiped the floor with her backside as she was thrown to the floor again and held down on her stomach with Hui's knee on her back.
 "Reset!" Captain ordered. "Verloren, it would help if you blocked."
 Block. Block. Block. She panted hard, her vision swimming in and out of focus. Hui swang another punch at her and she realised too late, the side of her face shooting pain through her skull. She let the pain settle in before she faced Hui again.
 Her sister pinched her arm and she cried out. The older girl was glaring at her, her dark eyes menacingly bright in the dark.
 "Didn't I tell you not to touch my snow globe?" she whispered harshly in her ear.
 "I'm sorry, jiějiě," she whimpered, her bottom lip quivering as her eyes began to water. "I didn't mean for it to break. I'm sorry!"
 "Well, you broke it anyway!" her sister snapped. "Wretched little minx. Don't you understand English? Do I have to speak Mandarin just so you'd understand? I'm not Mother! I won't do everything just so that your stupid little brain can comprehend! Don't ever touch any of my belongings again! Understand?"
 The little girl nodded frantically, eyes big and glassy like a pond. In years to come, she'd learn not to cry when her sister hurt her. She'd learn to expect and welcome to pain that she deserved.
 Teri's bottom lip was rolled in between her teeth and when Hui hit her jaw, she tasted blood in her mouth, her foot catching on the edge of the mat and falling over backwards.   "That's enough," Captain Kesswell sighed, pinching the bridge of his nose. "Li wins."  
 The rope was prickly and the rough bristles dug into her skin. She squeezed her eyes shut and forced a hand further up the rope. The eleven people who had climbed before her could not climb higher than ten feet. Teri was only at five.
 The man who climbed the highest at nine feet had used the soles of his boots and his knees to keep the rope steady and his hands gripped onto the rope tightly, moving one hand upwards each time, followed by his feet. He made it look almost easy.
 She moved another hand up, her hands raw and bloody. Another hand and then her feet, drenching in sweat.
 Her mind reeled back and forth. She never had to do such things at home. She never needed to climb rope and fight people; she had others to do them for her. And if her sister never discovered what she had years ago, Teri would not be here. She'd be dead in the Yangtze.
 That thought was her breaking point. She let go before she knew it and landed before she could make a sound. For a long moment, the world was upside down, her body screaming in pain. Someone came and stood over her, then another. The first person had dark olive skin and wild hair. The second had fair skin and short blonde hair. It took her a moment to realise they were Jill and Danika.
 "You two, get off," someone commanded.   Jill scowled at them. "Excuse me, she could be dead-"
 "She's not dead, Simmons. Off, now." The tone said, I wish you were.
 Teri laid there as Danika dragged Jill away by the elbow and someone else took their spot in her vision. Tanned skin, dark blonde and those eyes...and the stars in them.
 "Verloren, can you hear me?" he asked, voice stone cold.
 "Yes."
 "Can you see me? Who am I?"
 "Captain... K-Kesswell," she choked.
 "How many fingers am I holding up?" He held up three fingers.
 "Three."
 "Can you sit up?"
 She rolled to her side with great difficulty, muffling the noise at the back of her throat and pushed up. He was closer to her than he first seemed. Much, much closer. Oh, Gods, his eyes were as beautiful as the night.
 "Good. You can clean up today, too." w


 

Chapter 6

This chapter is dedicated to JS_Nox for the beautiful banner above.          Chapter 6
 "Rest day?" Holston asked quizzically.
 "Yes, Deputy," Hunter replied. "Everyone needs a break. These trainees are no different. The amount of physical and mental strains put on them is much more than any of them are used to. Rest days will also give the captains a break from their duties, as well."
 Holston bristled, his wrinkled face reddening. Across the table, Captain Alden and Darren were trying to smirk without being detected. Next to him Captain Joyce was looking at Holston in exasperation. Orion smiled to know that other captains didn't like the deputy either.   This meeting was initially called to discuss the progress made during the last two days of training with each platoon. It had taken a turn towards giving the trainees one rest day a week and Deputy Holston disagreeing. He and Hunter were now having an all out debate and Orion could see that even Hunter's patience was wearing thin. The old man had a talent for wearing down patience.
 "Gentlemen," Captain Paruki coughed. "Perhaps we should keep this discussion for another day."
 "Agreed, Captain," Hunter immediately said. "Any other issues to bring forth, captains?"
 For the fourth time during the last hour, Hunter glanced at Orion as if he expected him to say something. Orion didn't say anything and neither did the other captains. Holston, on the other hand, wanted to say much, much more but thankfully he knew he was not being addressed.
 "Well, then. Meeting adjourned," Hunter announced.
 Orion folded his port, stuck it in his belt and then followed the others out. Every time Hunter looked at him, Orion could've pointed out the Asteri issue. His mind still could not decide whether he could trust her or not. She refused to fight back Hui, he saw it in the saw she held herself. She didn't fight back either because she'd blow her cover or because she was too scared, was a decision in progress. Either way, Asteri would not be easy.  
 They were using guns today. From her first day of training, Teri remembered that the sleek black weapon in her hands was an R19 short range rifle; the least dangerous of all short range weaponry. Even with this knowledge, she couldn't help but stare down at it like a venomous snake, curled up in her hands and ready to strike whenever it pleased. The trigger was the fangs and the laser bullets were its venom.
 Danika nudged her elbow and she looked up, gasping and stumbling back straight after. Captain Kesswell stood right in front of her with his hands behind his back and he peered down with narrowed eyes.
 "Where is the safety?" he asked.
 Safety? Had he said a word about it at all? The last time Teri paid attention to him was when he was giving a speech about the importance of accuracy and following orders when out on the field. She bit her lip and searched her gun for anything that could resemble a safety switch but she knew nothing about guns except that they had the potential to end lives.
 Captain sighed. "Listen, Verloren."
 He held up her gun, her hand still holding onto it, and pointed at the L-shaped ridge just on top of the trigger. At the top of the ridge was a round button. Captain pulled the button down with his finger and slid it into the tail of the L. The button clicked into place and the gun softly, barely audibly, whirred.

  She couldn't look up at him. "Sorry, sir."
 They were told to stand behind a yellow line painted on the floor as the wall opposite lit up from a projection. This room was much smaller than the training room and they had come through the door at the back of the training room to get there. Targets of outlines of people appeared on the wall with different parts of the body colour coded; red for certain death, orange for severe wounds and yellow for mild injury.
 "Open fire," Captain Towers commanded.
 The fact that the guns only had holographic ammunition and could not kill anyone didn't ease her nerves. She aimed the gun at the wall and was careful to not swing it around, which she was sure Captain Kesswell had said something about. It was alien in her hands. It did not belong. With each pull of the trigger, she saw her mother.   This was not what her mother had meant by telling her to do something; to fight back. She wanted peace and she never would've meant for Teri to shoot at innocent people whose minds have been corrupted by thirst for power.
 The recoil of the gun shocked her every time she fired - and missed. Harrison, Pudge and a few other people laughed at her almost falling back from the recoil when she first shot. They laughed even more when she finally got a lucky shot in a red region in the target's head. They made cruel jokes about how she'd end up shooting at her own people in a real battle. She tried to block them out.
 She held the rifle up in front of her, took her time aiming and then pulled the trigger. The holographic laser beam struck the heart. The men didn't stop laughing. To them, it was just another lucky shot. To Teri, it was anything but. Tiniest bit of satisfaction rose inside her and she immediately smothered it. There shouldn't be any satisfaction in having the power to take lives at will.
 Captain Towers thought otherwise. "Good, Asteri. Keep aiming like that. Put more weight on your back leg."
 When Captain Kesswell ordered them to cease fire, she was shaking all over. Her legs were stiff and ached more than they ever had. Her hands were red from gripping the rifle, not to mention the painful rope burn and scrapes she'd earned yesterday. M, her medi-bot, had done its best in patching her up but it had run out of painkiller supply. Her whole body was in agony that it was a wonder she could stay standing and shooting for so long.
 "Most of you did well today," Captain Kesswell said. "Of course, every one of you have room for improvement. Tomorrow there will be a quiz in the morning class and we'll continue on with the-"
 A short whistling noise cut him off and a millisecond later, a laser beam sped through his forehead. Everyone froze. Captain didn't fall over or start bleeding from the hole that should've been left in the place of the beam on his forehead but wasn't.   His eyes darkened and scanned every one of their rifles in their arms and then stopped on hers. He glowered and stalked slowly towards her, stopping when he was inches away from her face. Oh, stars. The safety.
 "Is this a joke to you, Verloren? What did I say about the safety?"
 She gulped and nibbled on her lip. "Turn it on when it's not in use," she muttered.   "What's your mistake?"
 "I didn't turn it on."
 "Exactly." His eyes were murderous, two perfect wells of poison. "If that was a real gun, Verloren, you would have blood on your hands."
 A shiver crawled up her spine so fast she stumbled back. Her mouth had run dry and her hands became clammy with sweat. He could see her, the real her. She had been afraid of Deputy Holston when it had been her captain all along. He cut her heart and soul open and laid out her deepest fear in front of him. Exposed, naked, vulnerable.

  "Turn the safety on and leave. Do not show up tomorrow if you're not ready to pay attention and focus."  
 Orion and Darren were walking back to the Officials Building after checking up on the obstacle course equipment as Darren voiced his opinions on the conscription rumours being passed around the military. Orion had no doubt that conscription rumours were more than just rumours. The three thousand new recruits, all under thirty, Australia-wide was nowhere near enough if the Empire declared war - which at this rate, would be happening not too far in the future.   "Have you heard anything about America from Hunter?" asked Darren.
 Orion nodded. "It's still not on board the whole thing."
 Darren rolled his eyes. "What part of Empire's-about-to-declare-war-so-we-need-your-help-desperately do they not understand?"
 "The war part. The Pres doesn't think the Empire will declare war. He says if Australia was under attack, help will be sent but right now, he has rockets to shoot to Mars."
 "You know, America's involvement will be pretty fun to watch," Darren said thoughtfully. He shrugged when Orion shot him a look. "Hey, all I'm saying is that it'll be the Cold War all over again. China and Russia are loaded with nuclear weaponry and America is too."
 "Don't jinx things, Darren."
 Darren punched Orion's arm lightly. "Since when did you start believing in supersti- whoa. Look."
 Darren pointed in the direction of Sector 4. The back entrance into the building was unlit except for light pouring out a window nearby. Next to the door into the building were two men. In front of them stood another person, shorter and slender with their hair tied into a bun.
 One man pushed her shoulder and she stumbled backwards.   "Quite pathetic, aren't you?" he sneered. "You and your little Asian accent. What are you doing here, brat? Come to kill more babies?"   "Is that Asteri?" Darren whispered.
 "Yes, it is." Orion watched her.
 She didn't say anything back and instead tried to walk past them. The man at the front whom Orion recognised as Harrison grabbed her arm and yanked her back. Her face was now in the light coming from the window. She kept her head down and bit her bottom lip.
 The shorter man, Pudge, stepped out and threw profanities at her. Darren made a move to stomp up to them but Orion held him back. Darren gave him a quizzical look but he only shook his head at him.
 "I want to see what she does," he said quietly.
 Asteri didn't do anything. She let them call her names and let their rage rain down upon her. She soaked their words in and kept her head down. She closed her eyes. Even from a distance Orion could see that she accepted those words. She believed that she was a murderer. Something was seriously wrong with this girl.
 When Harrison raised his fist, Orion decided to speak up. "Is there a problem here?" he called, walking over.
 They gasped and Harrison immediately retracted his fist to his side, letting go of Asteri's arm.
 "No, sir," he replied.
 Orion narrowed his eyes. "Then what did I just see?"
 Pudge gulped. "She is from the Empire, Captain."
 "So is Hui. What does that mean?"
 Both men's eyes bulged in surprise. Asteri was staring up at him. Of course, they didn't need to know that Hui's family migrated from the Empire two generations back. 

  "No matter where she is from, she is a part of your team and we are all in this together," Orion continued. "I told you on the first day that I don't want to see trouble. Let this be the last time you decide to pick on your mates. Understand?"
 Pudge and Harrison nodded. "Yes, Captain."
 "You're dismissed."
 They saluted stiffly and sauntered inside the building. Asteri wrapped her hands around her arms and shrunk as small as she could.   "Thank you, Captain," she mumbled.
 He almost scoffed. "It wasn't for you. They needed to be taught a lesson. And you need to learn how to stand up for yourself."   "Yes, sir."
 Darren asked, "What are you doing out here?"
 Her face reddened. "I couldn't sleep so I came outside to watch the stars. I-I'll go in."
 "Yeah, go get some sleep now," Darren told her softly before Orion could ask the question he'd been itching to ask.
 She gave a weak salute before rushing inside. Orion stared after her, his eyebrows furrowed.   Darren sighed. "Okay, you have that look on your face. Spit it out."
 But Orion didn't. He kept on frowning at the now closed door, wondering why on Earth someone like Asteri volunteered, why on Earth she missed every single shot on purpose after a dead-centre, why on Earth she didn't stand up for herself. His theory of her being an infiltrator had gone out the window completely. Even Holston could see that she was trying her hardest and was still failing.   And then there was her obsession with stars. Orion rubbed his face with his hands. Maybe he was obsessed with her. He butchered the thought as soon as it came into his mind.
 A week after that fateful night, Asteri was not faring better. There had been no improvement on her combat skills, though she showed up to training with new bruises every day. Not once had she ever got a hit in nor could she block in time to not be knocked to the ground. She continued to be last in every morning run and on the obstacle courses, and never got past the six feet mark on the rope. Excepting occasional 'lucky shots', she never hit target again.
 She was trying. That much was obvious. Orion saw the spark of fire in her eyes at times, when sparring or practising shooting. But every time, she poured water over that spark and it was gone in an instant. He finally came to the conclusion that she didn't want to hurt people. But there was determination set inside her. That gave her more potential than any of the men in his platoon.
 But Holston could not see that potential.
 "She is not suited for the army," he exclaimed, loud enough for Asteri to hear on the other side of the training room, punching the bag with all her strength. If she heard him, she didn't react.
 To their surprise, Darren and Orion found themselves standing up for her in hushed voices.
 "Deputy, it's only the second week," Darren argued. "We have at least seven more weeks to train these men to become soldiers."
 The deputy frowned and turned to Orion. "I do not see her ever becoming a soldier! You know it, Captain. What improvement has she shown in the past ten days?"
 Orion squared his shoulders, finally catching on what Holston was getting at. He whispered, "Let's make a deal, Deputy. If I can get her to improve, you leave me to my platoon." Because this wasn't about Asteri, it was about him. Like many others, Holston doubted his ability to train and lead. Orion would prove them wrong.
 Holston scoffed. "If you wish so, Captain. But I highly doubt that would happen."
 Just you wait.
 After sparring, Orion cornered Asteri in the training room, assigning only her to clean up that evening. She was harbouring two bruises the size of golf balls on the left side of her face and another was beginning to form on her right jaw from Deck's left-handed punch. She winced with every movement as she wiped the bags.
 She didn't notice him enter the room and he used this as an opportunity to assess her every move. Her knuckles were red and her palms would've been in a much worse state from the rope burn that she could never avoid. Yet her grip on the damp cloth was tight.
 Being a soldier was not all about size. It was mentality that counted the most. Call him crazy but he knew she was a soldier, a fighter. He just had to bring it out of her and prove it to everyone else.
 Orion cleared his throat to get her attention before she moved onto the fourth bag. She turned and her eyes widened as she saw him.   "Captain," she murmured hoarsely.
 "Verloren," he greeted back. He strolled to the first bag in line and run a finger down the thick material. His fingertip was clean. He moved onto the next bag and then the next. "Are you aware of your performance in training?"
 She nodded and then winced. "Yes, sir."
 "Then you'll know that you are one click away from being discharged."
 Her head snapped up.
 "Tomorrow is a rest day so get some rest. After that I expect you to do better than this or I won't hesitate to throw you out. I don't care if you have nowhere to go. Understand?"
 "Yes, Captain."
 "Finish cleaning the bags then you can stop."
 When he realised his curiosity had won out, he had already walked out of the room. He'd set Asteri the challenge, wanting to know what she'd do to improve and how desperate enough she was to stay. He shouldn't have done that. Time he would need waiting for her reaction wasn't something he could afford. The faster he trained her, the faster Holston was getting out of his hair.
 He stopped walking and turned around. He stopped again. He wanted to see her try. This enough would prove that there was hope for her and hope for him. He sighed and continued on his way back to his quarters.  
 The next day, Orion told Hunter about the challenge he'd set Asteri with and about his promise to Holston to prove that he was capable of training a platoon.   Hunter shook his head. "Orion, a good captain should put his men's needs in front of his own. You can't push her beyond her limits, okay?"
 "I know," Orion said. "But after seeing her yesterday, you can't tell me she has no potential."
 "I'm not. Her problem is not that she can't fight, it's that she refuses to. If you want her to improve, you can't scare her off by showing her what she is capable of straightaway because that's exactly what she fears."
 Orion started. In just two hours, Hunter had figured out that she was afraid of hurting people when it had taken Orion days.   He nodded. "I won't."
 He finished off his daily reports and left to go inspect the equipment in the training floor that Holston had been nagging him over.
 When he exited the elevator on the second floor, grunts and slaps came from the training room. His first instinct was to reach for his gun that was usually tucked into his belt, the movement practised until it became a natural reaction. Then his brain slowed down and reasoned that one of the recruits was probably trying to get in extra practice during the day off. Plus, someone with a dangerous plan would not leave the door wide open like that, not if he was smart.
 Still, he grabbed a cleaner-droid nearby and held it out in front of him as he approached the door. When he peeked inside, he saw the last person he'd expected to see attacking a bag.
 Asteri Verloren.
 And it seemed she was more desperate than he thought. Teri and Orion fans will like the next chapter. :)

 

Chapter 7

Dedicated to Welc0meT0MyW0rld for the gorgeous banner above! Chapter 7
 His eyes immediately fell on her clothes. Instead of the uniform, she wore a grey T-shirt and a pair of shorts, her long legs bare. Except for patches of bruises, her skin was milky white as if it had never met the sun. He never realised just how thin she was under the uniform with sinewy arms and legs. She was like a toothpick.   It took a while for him to register that he was staring.
 But as soon as he did, he ripped his eyes away from her and wanted to punch some sense into himself. Letting himself get distracted was not an option. He would leave that job up to Hunter, who didn't seem to be having trouble with that.
 He dropped the cleaner-droid in his hands with a loud clang. Asteri yelped and jumped in alarm as she searched for the source of the sound and met his eyes instead.
 She panted, "Oh. Good afternoon, Captain."
 Her hands were bandaged. "How long have you been here?"
 "Since lunch break, sir."
 He nodded stiffly. "Don't stay too long. You only get one rest day a week. Spend it wisely."
 "Yes, Captain."
 Orion glanced at her long legs one more time before he exited. He really did try to order his eyes to behave but they did not obey his order. That disobedience had to change if he were to continue with the plan he had in mind, especially when it possibly involved those shorts on a daily basis.
 He made his way to the simulation room at the far end of the corridor, too lost in thought to think about the equipment he was supposed to be inspecting. He ended up mindless fiddling with the wires. Hunter was right to warn Orion about being romantically involved with people, though he was being a bit of a hypocrite.   No. There was no way Orion was going to be distracted. His duties were far more important. But... No. Just no.
 He'd finished up his inspection in the simulation room and the classroom half-heartedly and he was reapproaching the gym and gun simulation room. He decided to not inspect those particular rooms. Besides, he had his troop's performances to overview because the faster the basic training was completed, the faster he could advance them onto field training.
 Despite his best efforts, his curiosity got the better of him when he glanced through the open door and into the gym when he passed it. The sight made him pause and fold his port into four quarters, the magnetic panels snapping into place to make a rectangular prism. He shoved it into his belt, not taking his eyes off Asteri who now hanged on the rope higher than she had ever gone before.
 Her jaws were clenched with effort and her hair stuck to her forehead with sweat. She had never looked more like a soldier. But something flashed in her eyes and she stopped climbing. Doubt. She made her way down onto the mat below with soft hisses under her breath. He left before she saw him, a million questions already bubbling.  
 Athena stared at the numbers jumbling on the screen of her port. Her teacher had left two hours ago and she was still on the same question she was on before the professor left. If her nanny had not been permanently discharged from her duties and if her mother had not been ill, she would have already completed all ten questions the professor had given her.
 She glanced at her bedroom door warily. Her sister had been far too busy lately with her own research in her labs. She would never help her.

  But Athena hoped she would. She set off with her port to Rovina's labs. She stood in front of the giant oak doors for a long time before she scanned the chip in her hand to open the doors and went inside.
 Rovina was leaning over a microscope, her silk cheongsam with beautiful cherry blossoms peeking out from under a white lab coat. She didn't look up when Athena entered.   Instead she said, "Baby, can you pass me my port?"
 Rovina clearly was not expecting Athena to be the one to enter. But she silently grabbed the port from the table Rovina was pointing at and handed it to her. Only then Rovina saw her.
 She frowned immediately. "What are you doing in here? Get out! You'll break something."
 Athena quickly held up her own port in front her. "Please, jiějiě, can you help me with mathematics?"
 The older girl leered down at her. "No. I don't help failures. You're not going to be able to do the rest of them anyway. Now, shoo!"
 Athena bowed her head, clutched her port to her chest and turned around to leave. At that moment, a tall palace guard entered the room with a glass of juice on the tray in his hands. He frowned when he saw Athena. Rovina straightaway chirped how delighted she was that he was back and gave him a peck on his cheek.
 Athena noted that this was not the palace guard she had seen come out of Rovina's chamber in the middle of the night when she was returning from the royal observatory.   But no matter whom the guards were, Rovina would always choose them over Athena. Because, unlike her, they were not failures.
 Even in another life, with another name, Teri was still failing. How right was her sister? She was failing now and she would fail again. She stared up at the fivestars on the ceiling and thought perhaps the Crux in the sky was closer toreach than these painted ones. With every inch she'd climbed, somehow the starsseemed to shy further from her.  She cleaned the bag she was using and gave her best attempt at trying to place the mat back on top of the tall pile. When she got back to the sleeping quarters, both M and Danika shrieked at the sight of her. The little droid ushered her into the shower and then patched her hands up again while Danika, harbouring a large bruise on her jaw, scolded Teri like a misbehaving child for training on rest day.
 Just as she finished, Jill came into the room with a couple of other women from their dorm. They all bore newly formed bruises every day that it was not surprising anymore.
 "You want to come watch us play football?" Jill asked. "It's not like the football games you people play in Asia."
 Despite her exhausted body, Teri agreed. Danika and Jill took her to the grass valley where she mapped the stars, just next to the obstacle course. There were now four makeshift poles, stuck to the ground on each side of the field. Men, even a few women - one of whom was Jill - from every platoon were running around the field, throwing and kicking an oval shaped ball, tackling each other. Some captains, including Captain Towers, were out on the field, too.
 Captain Kesswell and his brother sat on the opposite side of the field with Captain Joyce. Commander and Captain Joyce were deep in conversation while Captain Kesswell was staring at her. His elbows were on his knees and his eyes were hooded, his face as expressionless as ever. A sudden chill ran down her spine. He was looking at her the way he did after the news report of the massacre in Aga. Guilt swelled inside her and she was about to look away when he abruptly stood up and stalked away. His tall figure trudged up the hill and disappeared from sight.

  Danika nudged her side. When she turned, Danika had a smile on her face. "He was staring at you."
 She nodded slowly. He looked about ready to murder her. Danika furrowed her eyebrows as she leaned forward and looked at Teri.   "Teri, what's wrong?" she asked gently, placing a hand on Teri's shoulder.
 Teri forced a smile. "Nothing, Danika," she lied. "I'm just tired."
 Everything was wrong. She was forever failing. War would break out any day now. She still hadn't figured out what she was supposed to do to try and prevent Australia from falling under Empire's hold.   Her captain despised her. Nothing was new but everything was different now, in ways that she couldn't explain. Ever since she left the palace that night, nothing made sense. A month had passed but the stars were still not her home here. She hadn't had a home in over seven months.
 "Why don't you go have a nap and get some rest?" Danika suggested.   She nodded and when she dove into her bed and slept the rest of the day away, no one give much thought.  
 Decks threw yet another punch at Asteri, who ducked at the very last minute. He eyed her every movement but it was impossible to calculate Asteri's next moves, even for Orion. Probably because she had never made a move. But at least Decks was trying. Asteri, on the other hand, had not shown any improvement or had any determination to improve aside from her extra practice yesterday. Holston was looking at Orion with unbelieving eyes.   Some people were smirking and making fun of Asteri as if she couldn't hear them. Jillian, Danika and sometimes Ander yelled out words of encouragement to Asteri. Darren tried to hush them all but Orion kept his eyes on the people on the mat.
 Decks struck again and Asteri stepped back, eyes widening as she nibbled on her bottom lip. She glanced at him quickly then drew her attention back to Decks. Her fists clenched tighter as if ready to attack him and for one brief second, her eyes shone. Punch him, punch him! Orion mentally chanted, not wanting to let that burst of determination disappear. But alas it did.
 When Orion grudgingly ended the spar, Holston had the biggest smirk he'd ever seen.   Darren leaned in and whispered, "I'm not seeing the improvement, O."
 Orion clenched his jaw. "I will get him out of here."
 Asteri was on the hill again tonight, giving him the perfect opportunity to approach her. He threw on a sweater over his shirt and made his way out of his quarters on the second floor of the Officials building. He declined Captain Kennet's invitation to play cards with the other captains as he passed the common room and slipped out the door into the bitter winter air.
 A few trainees on patrol strolled around in their uniforms and some greeted him as he passed them. He walked past Jillian and Ander, whom he'd paired together, but they were too deep in their heated conversation to notice him. Probably just as well, he would rather not have been involved in the argument they were having. He held back a bark to leave social issues outside of duty and continued, sliding in between the alley between two buildings until he came to the mouth of the valley where the hill was.
 Asteri lay on her back in clothes she'd been wearing when he first set his eyes on her. She was not wearing shorts, which - he had to admit - he was immensely grateful for. He proceeded towards her and stood over her, looking down. Her eyes widened and she gasped, scrambled up frantically and saluted.
 "Captain."
 He really should tell her that she didn't need to salute every time. "At ease. I'm here to join you on your," he paused and glanced up at the sky hesitantly, "stargazing."

  She stared as if she thought he was joking, her brown eyes searching his. When he stared back, she shifted her gaze to the ground, realising he was dead serious. "I-If you wish, Captain."
 She sat down and he took a place next to her on the grass. The view was plain and unworthy of any note; just the clear land and the dark sky meeting the horizon. She was looking at it as if this was the most magnificent view in the world. There were so many things he itched to ask that it was impossible to know where to start. So he began with what he needed to do first.
 "You're still failing," he deadpanned.
 She nodded, fighting to hold his gaze. All he could see in her eyes were disgrace and shame but no hint of surprise to be having this conversation.   He continued, "You need to stay behind for extra training. I'll personally assist you. Consider this your last chance."
 "Yes, Captain."
 "Call me Orion when I'm not on duty." It came from the tip of his tongue; something that was out before his brain could register; something that he immediately wished he could take back and shove down his throat.   She stared at him, mouth agape. And she stared at him some more before she looked up at the star freckled sky. "Orion is a constellation," she murmured, more to herself than him.
 "What?"
 She pointed up. "There, Captain. I mean, O... Orion. Those three stars in a straight line make up Orion's belt."
 He stared in wonder at the glint in her eyes and had to almost pull his eyes up to where she was pointing at. He saw the three stars but had no clue what she was talking about. "The belt of what?"
 "The belt of Orion the Hunter," she said, a little louder. "Those two stars over there are his legs and the one up there is his head. Those five stars are his bow."
 He froze. "Orion the... Hunter?"
 Oblivious to his surprise, she said something that he didn't catch. He nodded absentmindedly, still trying to comprehend that his parents named both their sons after a single constellation. Did Hunter know this?
 "One of the most famous versions is that Orion was a famous hunter and he boasted that he could rid the earth of all the wild animals. This angered Mother Gaia, Goddess of the Earth, and she sent a scorpion to defeat him. Orion realised that he could not defeat it so he... he jumped into the sea."
   She paused. "Apollo, God of the Sun, told his sister Artemis, the moon goddess, to shoot him because he was an evil being. So she shot him with her arrow but realised too late that he was her friend. Artemis begged the gods to bring him back to life but they refused. She made him a constellation so she could always see him."
 Orion's mother never told him that story. Probably just as well. He would've been angry at his parents for naming him after someone who died from boasting.
 Asteri was still staring up, lips slightly ajar.   He asked, "What about you? What's the story behind your name?"
 She bowed her head and fiddled with her fingers. "It means 'lost star'. Verloren means lost in German and Asteri means star in Greek."   "What does that mean?"
 "It means I'm lost."
 Of course. Her parents were supposedly dead. Any other day he would've used this as an opportunity to test mental strength. But now, too many questions burned inside him.

  "What are you doing in the military? Why did you volunteer?"
 "I have to," she whispered, still looking at her hands. "My... My mother told me to fight back. She told me to stand up for our people. I... I don't know what else to do."
 "You're not standing up for anyone by letting yourself be beaten and missing every shot." She didn't react to him knowingthat she'd missed on purpose every time. She uncrossed her legs and pulled them into her chest, resting her bruised chin on her knees. "I know, Ca- Orion but hurting people is not what my mother wanted. Ralph Waldo Emerson said, "Peace cannot be achieved through violence," and he's right."   She was talking as if she alone could make a difference in this international dispute. He eyed her carefully. "What made you climb down yesterday?" "I-I don't know."
 She did know. "Why do you miss every shot on purpose?"
 "I don't like violence."   "It doesn't matter," he snapped. "It's what you have to do. You joined the army, and now you train like a soldier. This isn't a choice. Deputy Holston is taking steps towards discharging you and unless you get over your stubbornness, you're out."
 Asteri only nodded and nibbled on her lip, a habit he was taking more notice of. She stared up at the sky, her eyes darting across it as if she was looking for something. There was that wonderment in her eyes that he had only seen in the way his father looked at his mother right before he told her he loved her. But unlike his father, Asteri didn't do anything. She just stared and stared, searching and never finding.   He finally asked, "What are you looking for?"
 "Reassurance," she whispered.
 "For what?"
 She didn't answer. When he looked at her - really looked at her, now - he could see her misery. She watched the sky above her like she longed to be up there. No matter how hard he tried, he couldn't see how the sky could be as fascinating as she was making it out to be. It was just dark with tiny specks of light.
 She unfolded her arms over her legs and stretched. Then she lay on the grass like she was doing before he came. After an internal debate, he lied down too, much too awkward to be sitting. The coolness from the ground seeped into his back but it was strangely relaxing.
 She pointed towards the sky again and he followed her fingers. "Over there," she said, "just next to the Southern Cross is Centaurus."
 "What's his story?"
 "His name is Chiron and he was a centaur; a half-human and half-horse creature. He was told by the gods to torture Hercules during his quest to break a spell. Chiron was wounded by Hercules and because he was immortal, he would have to suffer the great pain forever. So he asked Zeus to end his suffering and the god let him die and placed him among the stars."
 Orion was still stuck on half-human-half-horse creature. He raised an eyebrow. "Horse and... human?"
 She nodded. "There's the minotaur, too. He's the son of a queen and a bull."
 "What?"
 She turned to him and reddened. "Nothing, sorry," she muttered, shaking her head and closing her eyes as if she just realised that she had made no sense.   Minotaur and centaurs; such creatures had never been in any of the bedtime stories his parents used to tell him and Hunter when they were younger. All he heard every day were goats, bears and wolves dressed up in grandmothers' clothes.   If Asteri hadn't looked so at peace, he would've demanded she told him about the minotaur. But she lay there with her eyes closed, breathing softly, and he didn't ask more. He looked up at the sky that Asteri was so fond of. There was so much more to her than she let on. She was a girl who watched the stars, searching for reassurance in them; a girl who could quote ancient scholars and was wiser than her age suggested; a girl who would fight but without weapons; a girl much stronger than she realised.
 What was she hiding? After a few more minutes he left, feeling like he was intruding on an intimate moment between a girl who loved the stars and the stars who watched over her. If anyone saw the two of them together for long, rumours would start and Orion could not have that.       
 If you guys liked the chapter, please don't forget to click that little star and let me know your thoughts! :D Questions: What do your names mean?

 

Chapter 8

This chapter is dedicated to YolandaHale for her kindness. Thank you! Chapter 8
 After four years of friendship, Orion finally came to the conclusion that Darren was a complete idiot. He ordered his men to stretch and warm up for the run as he waited for Darren to grace them with his presence. The recruits had noticed his sour mood and no one dared to make a peep. Good. He was about ready to shoot someone through the head.
 Asteri watched him curiously as she jogged on the spot but his attention was on Ander and Jill, who were on the opposite ends of the group. Whatever had happened between them last night, it pushed Jill towards Darren and if Orion didn't do something about it, trouble would start.
 At two minutes past five, Darren finally appeared. Orion glared at him and barked orders at their men to start running, not taking his glare off his friend. This time, he let them run in front. Darren met Orion's glare with an exasperated roll of his eyes before he attempted to run after the soldiers but Orion held him back at a walking pace.
 "What was that last night with Jill?" he demanded.   Darren sighed. "Stop getting your panties in a twist, O. That was nothing."
 The muscles in his jaw tightened as he growled. "You pushing Jillian up against a wall and shoving your tongue down her throat was not nothing."
 Darren nodded like this was as big a deal as stepping on ants. "It was nothing. She and Ander had a fight and he left her alone on patrol. And then she kissed me when I went to talk to her."
 "So what; you kissed her back?"
 "Well, yeah. I didn't want to make her feel awkward."
 Orion was trying really, really hard to not explode at Darren, taking deep breaths to calm himself. Here he was, trying to keep Darren's job safe, and he was acting like he couldn't care less about what had happened last night. Because it wasn't a 'kiss'; it was way more than a kiss. Sure, Orion had caught his friend in way more compromising positions with girls before but this time it was different because he was her superior. If anyone found out, Darren might as well kick his own backside out of the army.
 Orion opened his mouth to tell him so but Darren cut him off. "Orion, stop worrying," Darren said. "No one saw us and there is no proof."
 "Clearly you haven't seen the bruise on her neck."
 Finally, Darren reacted. "Frack. Seriously?" Orion narrowed his eyes and Darren nodded slowly, looking into the distance in thought. "Right, well... Maybe people will mistake that for bruises from combat training. Or maybe they'll think it was Ander."
 Orion cursed, "Gods above! Darren, you will be discharged if anyone reported you and had photo proof."
  Then Darren looked at Orion the way he had been looking at Darren just seconds ago; scrutinizing. His eyebrows furrowed as he gazed at him. He sensed the shift in the atmosphere and saw the flash of tables being turned in Darren's eyes. They told him something he'd really rather not hear.
 "Well, what about you then?" Darren retorted, folding his arms over his chest as he stopped walking. "You seemed pretty comfortable with Teri last night too."
 Orion scoffed, trying to keep his cool. "I wasn't kissing her, Darren. I didn't go anywhere near her, much less touch her. It was an official visit regarding training." "Of course it was. That explains why you were both lying on the ground next to each other, looking up at the sky like a sappy, old married couple?"

  Orion argued, "I've been trained to change to my behaviour to suit every situation I face. If it meant going along with her psychobabble to complete my task then so be it."
 He realised too late that he had just called himself a liar, especially when he hadn't been lying. He wasn't 'going along with psychobabble'; he had been truly interested. Plus, it was not accurate to call Asteri's diverse knowledge of stories psychobabble.   Darren nodded but it didn't reach his eyes. Orion shook his head in frustration, running his fingers through his hair. "Don't do something that stupid again, Darren," he warned before taking off on a jog.  
 "So, Teri, I saw you and Kesswell outside last night," Jill said as she nudged Teri, scooping a spoonful of soup into her mouth.
 Danika's widened eyes snapped in Teri direction, stiffening in the middle of eating their breakfast. If Ander was sitting with them today like he usually did – he had chosen to sit at a table far, far from theirs – Teri was sure he would've had the same reaction.
 "What did he want?" Danika asked her.
 "He came to tell me I needed to try harder," Teri said. She wanted to tell them his name was Orion and that she now had to train privately with him because she was just a few steps on being officially discharged.
 Jill raised her eyebrows sceptically. "Seriously? Is he trying to kill you?"
 Danika nodded. "Captain's always yelling at someone to pick up their backsides."
 Jill nodded in agreement and the two submerged in a conversation that Captain Kesswell wouldn't like to hear. It included having a gun up places so Teri didn't share her thoughts, she only listened and watched as she picked at the watery scrambled egg on her plate and sausages that were still tinted red inside.
 Danika was humouring the thought of their captain being involved in a romantic relationship when Teri glanced at Jill, who was staring off into the distance. Jill's eyes were softer than Teri had ever seen them but stormier than the monsoon sky. She followed the direction of Jill's eyes and reached Ander. His jaw was tight and his body was rigid. His eyes were on fire and were shooting flames at someone. Puzzled, she followed his glare to a table at the front of the dining hall.
 She was suddenly greeted by a pair of familiar dark eyes. Captain Kesswell's eyes. He didn't look away when her eyes met his; he only continued to stare. Remembering the times she almost lost her eye from a fork and accidently shooting at him, heat rushed to her face. Not to mention his beautiful eyes. There was whole other sky in them, waiting to be explored. She could get lost among those stars.
 Her breath hitched in shock. Great stars... What was she thinking? This was her captain she was fantasizing about. Her mother would've been so ashamed of her. When she turned back to her friends' conversation, they were both watching her expectantly.   She gulped and muttered, "D-Did I do something?"
 "You made an 'argh!' sound," Jill said. "What, did you try to picture Kesswell in a relationship or something?"
 "No, I- I was just... thinking. Why is Ander not sitting here, Jill?"
 Jill rolled her eyes and stabbed the remaining sausage on her plate with her fork, making her jump in her seat. "I don't give a damn where or why that son of a gun isn't sitting here! He can be on Mars for all I care."
 Danika placed a hand on Jill's arm gently. "Hon, what happened? I thought you two were fine now."
 "Fine as frack," Jill spat. "There is no 'we'. I tolerate him and he tolerates me."

  Even though Jill was glaring daggers at Ander, longing was hidden behind it. The same longing she had seen in Ander's gazes also, more often in him than in Jill. Jill had called it puppy love. Teri had read enough books to be sure that it was not puppy love. It was unconditional. According to romance novels, anyway. Because in the end, what did she know about love?  
 Today was a simulation day. Teri dreaded every step she took into that room and wanted to apologise to Danika again and again. Glancing around her, no one looked too happy to be there but didn't dare complain as Captain's mood hadn't lifted. Even Gregor Harrison made a face before reluctantly attaching the patches to his temple.
 She inhaled a shaky breath as she placed the two patches on her temples and lay down on the bed. Once upon a time, her mother would've told her, "Do not be afraid, my little star." Teri slipped into the dream knowing that her mother was no longer the woman she'd loved, but the woman she'd killed.   She stood among the tall, dry grass with an R19 in her arms and the visor of her helmet retracted. The smell of ashes filled her nostrils and immediately she searched for the source of the scent but the only thing around were the others in black uniforms in the huge field of weedy grass that seemed to engulf them to their waists.
 "Can you smell that?" Danika asked, trudging over to her as she sniffed the air.
 She nodded. "I can't see anything burning."
 Captain Kesswell appeared in the middle of the group and yelled, "Visors on! External speakers on and keep the comm lines open. From this point on, you do not question orders, soldiers."   A shrill whistling noise filled the air, followed by a loud boom and the tremble of ground. When she turned around, clutching her gun tighter, there were now buildings in the landscape that was empty just seconds ago. They were on fire with thick, black clouds of smoke billowing up into the sky. Jill's curses echoed over the sound of panic through the comm in her helmet.
 "Duck and search for the enemy!" Captain ordered.
 There were none. But now, people were running out of the lit buildings, gathering what they could as they fought their way out of the smoke.   "Do you see any?"
 "No, sir!" some chorused.
 "Good. Now what do we do?" he asked. No one answered.   There was a little girl trying to climb out of a window on the second level of a building. Teri couldn't be sure but one side of the girl's dress was stained red. She was looking down at the car on the ground beneath her window and she was crying. Mummy, she was calling.
 "What do we do?" Captain repeated.
 She ran down the grassy field before someone could answer. The girl's legs were dangling off the windowsill now and she was crying for her mummy who was nowhere to be found. Teri sprinted.
 "I'm coming!" she called out.
 The girl looked at her; tears were streaming down her face, dirtied with soot. Teri dropped her gun on the ground and climbed onto the car. She reached out her hands to the girl on the windowsill and beckoned her closer to her hands. The girl withdrew into the room.
 "It's okay," Teri reassured. "I'm here to help you. You're going to be fine."
 The girl sobbed, "I want my mummy!"
 Teri answered, "I know."
 For a moment, she paused and stared at the girl. Only now, did she realise that the girl's eyes were hers. The exact same brown orbs that always looked for her mother, always longed for her. The same fear reflected in each other's souls.

  "I know," she repeated softly. "And... I promise I'll find her. Please, come with me."
 Teri pulled the child into her arms and slid off the car. The girl cried into her shoulder, clinging onto Teri. There were soldiers, rushing in and out of half burnt buildings, helping civilians out of town. Heartbeat pounding in her ears, she blindly followed them. Shouts and curses of soldiers filled her helmet from the comm and they deafened her, head spinning.
 Another whistling noise broke the chaos and on instinct, she dove into an alley and behind a large community bin, covering the girl in her arms as well as she could. The cause of the noise landed about two streets from her hiding place and the impact slammed her head against the bin. Squeezing her eyes shut, she panted and the girl wailed.   When she opened them she wasn't behind the bin any more. She was standing in the grass with the girl holding her hand. In the distance the burning town was engulfed in magnificent red and orange with rolling dark smoke rising into the sky like a beast from the deepest realm of hell.
 "Stella!" a woman cried.
 There was a crowd of people behind them, as well as a few of the soldiers treating wounded civilians, Captain Kesswell standing in front of them. A middle aged woman was racing towards them, arms outstretched in front of her with tears in her eyes.   The girl gasped, "Mummy!" as she let go of Asteri's hand and ran towards her mother, throwing her tiny arms around the woman's neck.
 Teri fought hard to force a smile onto her face. Captain approached her and nodded but his face was not visible from the tint of the visor that only his helmet seemed to have.
 He said, "Next time, don't forget your gun."  
 Orion bristled, flexing his jaw. He was sitting in front of Darren and Hunter, discussing the matter of Darren's little stunt last night. The idiot decided to 'come clean' and told Hunter what happened the night before and Orion had the misfortune of walking into their discussion when he came to talk to Hunter about Asteri's story of the constellation Orion.   So far, it was going better than Orion had expected and that was wrong. Hunter was letting Darren off with a warning because, as Hunter had said, 'this was not an official report'. This was messed up as heck.
 "I don't understand," he said. "There doesn't need to be an official report when the person himself is confessing to you."
 Darren frowned. "Are you trying to get me discharged, O?"
 "No! I'm just-" Orion growled. "Hunter, I specifically remember you telling me that relationships were bad decisions when you're in the armed forced. Where did that wisdom go?"
 Hunter leaned back on his seat and put his arms up in surrender. "Nowhere. When I said that, you were fifteen and in love with the princess."
 Gods above. Darren hadn't known this and there was a perfectly good reason why Orion hadn't told him that. He'd never let Orion live this one down. As expected, Darren's eyes bulged in utter amazement and slammed his palm down on the table, a smirk making its way onto his face. Orion buried his face in his hands and groaned.
 "No way!" Darren exclaimed. "Wait, the crazy one or the hot one?"
 Grinning, Hunter said, "Princess Rovina," and Orion glared at his brother.
 Darren howled in laughter, holding his stomach and wiped imaginary tears off the corner of his eyes. Orion glanced at the clock on his comm-band and thankfully, it was nine minutes to 1700. 

  "I'll be in the training room if you need me," he announced and left the room, not daring to look back.
 Orion had ordered Asteri back to the training room at five p.m. for intensive training. As he crossed the grass area between the Officials building and the Sector of his platoon, his mind very unhelpfully played out the image of Asteri in shorts, her long legs visible for the entire world to see. It reminded him that he was not immune to distractions as all good soldiers should be and sparked his will to do better.
 Asteri was already in the room when he arrived, tying up her shoelaces on a mat in the centre. Sure enough, she was wearing those shorts again. She stood up when she saw him and fidgeted with her fingers, pressing her lips together in uncertainty. The first thing that came to Orion's mind was, "How are her legs so long and graceful?" Then he shook that thought away and locked it up, hopefully never to be heard from again.
 If things were going to be this way, he was going to have to level the playing field. He took off his shirt.
 Her eyes grew as wide as saucers and her whole body reddened as he stepped onto the mat, shirtless. She gulped and her eyes looked at everything but him, hugging herself. He internally smiled to know that he had the same effect on her.
 "We're going to start with your punching techniques," he said and she nodded curtly, finding the wall very interesting. "On the mat. Only attacking for now and forget the defence."   She stepped onto the mat and positioned herself with her feet apart, knees bent and arms bent but her body was directly facing Orion.
 "Body on an angle," he instructed. "Move your right foot back and put more weight on it. Now punch."
 She stared as if he told her to kill him.   "This is the military, not kindergarten. There's only punishment for refusing to hit and follow orders. Punch me and that's an order."   She inhaled a deep breath and exhaled as Orion waited for her hit. After what he'd seen today in the simulation, he should've looked down upon her but somehow he couldn't help believing that Asteri would grow out of the little girl whom she saw herself to be.   Something slapped his stomach. When he looked at her and she was looking at her hand in horror as if she couldn't believe what she'd just done. Her innocence would be cute if he was not trying to get rid of it.
 "That was pathetic. Harder. Use the force of the swing and the power from your shoulder."
 The next half an hour was spent at the punching station, Asteri punching and Orion calling out mistakes. He had somewhat convinced himself that he was used to seeing her legs and with a small amount of effort he could ignore that distraction. Asteri, however, could not.   Every time he moved close to her to reposition and guide her movement, she'd inch away ever so slightly and didn't look at him for a while afterwards. Her cheeks become red to a point that worried him. It was ridiculous. With Asteri refusing to come anywhere bear him progress was slow.
 Most of the time, he'd instruct from a distance but she simply did not understand what 'use the force of the swing' meant. His frustration was extending beyond wanting to chew his own fingers off. He stepped up and stood behind her, her body stiffening immediately. Before she could slip away, he grabbed her elbow and brought it up, tugging it backwards as far as she could.
 "Tuck your fingers in and swing your arm to punch," he said impatiently.
 She swang her arm and the impact of her fist against the bag sent it moving further than she'd managed to that day.
 Orion sighed. "Finally. Keep doing that."
 Asteri did what she was told and as he watched her he envisioned her in the simulations again. She was impulsive then but it was understandable. She was brave, braver than she believed herself to be. Selfless, too. The way she looked at the mother and daughter could've stirred rain clouds on the brightest days. It was interesting how she never mentioned anything about her father.
 "What did you notice about the simulations today?"
 She punched. "They – the people were us," she muttered.
 "They were people you believed yourselves to be," he corrected. "Change arms and remember to swing. Why a little girl?"
 She changed position so that she was now facing him and then continued punching. Her knuckles were reddening but she didn't say anything about that. She only whispered, "The last time I've been sure of myself was when I was six."   It was clear she was going to say no more of the subject. Orion could think of at least ten different ways to make her talk but the misery in her eyes cut off everything he was going to say. He had never seen someone so sad. And besides, those methods were not going to gain him any respect from her either.
 "Right," he said. "That's enough for today. Come back tomorrow at five again and I expect to see that swing."
 Right on cue, his stomach growled. Outside it was darker than he'd realised. He grabbed his shirt and slipped it on before making his way towards the exit.   He was at the door when Asteri called, "Orion."
 He turned. She immediately looked away and swallowed. "I mean, Captain Kesswell. Are you alright?"
 Without really meaning to, Orion let a small smile play on his lips. "I'm fine... Teri." If you like the chapter, please let me know by voting and commenting, guys! 

 

Chapter 9

This chapter is dedicated to Bitter_With_Venom for the amazing reviews she'd given me. Thank you very much. :D Chapter 9
 Athena was playing with the heirloom her mother had given her, rubbing her small fingers back and forth on the pretty blue gems. It shone arrays of multicoloured light from the evening sun seeping in through the windows of the shuttle. She was almost bouncing on in her seat, barely able to conceal her excitement and a magnificent grin was spread across her lips.   The journey to her grandparents' estate in Russia had never taken longer.   "Wǒmen dàole, māmā?" she asked again for the umpteenth time, turning to her mother sitting beside her.
 Her mother stroked her hair tenderly and smiled. "No, love. We're not there yet."
 She wanted to show her grandparents the beautiful necklace which she now called hers. She wanted them to be proud of her. She wanted them, for once, to look at her the way they looked at Rovina when they praised her for her achievements. For a six-year-old girl, being entrusted with something her mother deemed important was the greatest-
 Beep beep beep! An ear-piercing wail echoed through the ship and the walls began to tremble, the furniture shaking and clattering. Her mother instinctively pulled the girl into her side and frantically called the pilot through the speakers. There was no reply except for the crackle of an abandoned communication line. The ship lurched and Athena felt the its rapid descent into the plots of farm land beneath them, her stomach churning and rising into her throat.
 She screamed as she clutched the necklace to her chest with her life and buried her face in her mother's embrace. She was upside-down then she was on her side, objects whooshing past and hitting her. The ashy scent of smoke wafted into her nose and she choked, tears brimming her eyes. Suddenly her mother's arms around her were gone and she was flying everywhere, thrown against walls and tumbling furniture, broken shards of glass slicing into her skin.
 Upon opening her eyes for a mere second she saw her mother in her seat, restrained by the seatbelt but her head was limply thrown about. With a final deafening groan and a thunderous crash, the ship hit the ground and sent her flying towards a window.
 This was the only thing Teri remembered from the first six years of her life. She was lucky to survive it, even if it meant a heart of synthetic tissues and machinery made her not completely human. Then she remembered that the only person in the world with a metal heart was supposed to be dead in the Yangtze. This was something she couldn't share with the people she'd began to be comfortable around. Like a scar, it repeatedly reminded her that she could be caught any day and each day she wasted was one day closer to the inevitable.   As she headed out to the dining hall for breakfast, all she could think about was how she could possibly tell anyone of what she knew without being deemed a crazy lunatic.   Teri shivered from a gust of chilly wind and hugged herself tighter. The skies were stormy grey that day and promised at least a drizzle later. She might not be able to see the stars tonight.   When she entered the dining hall, the first eyes that met hers belonged to Ander. He was sitting by himself again and his food was untouched. She glanced over at her table across the room to her friends. They were eating and laughing about something. Jill was occasionally glancing at Ander out of the corner of her eyes.
 Teri hadn't a clue what had happened and didn't know whether it was her place to say anything. Love was fragile matter; she knew nothing about it. After a long moment of indecision, she grabbed a tray of food from the front and slipped between rows and rows of tables towards Ander's, not meeting the eyes of people who taunted and teased her as she went.

  " May I sit here, Ander?" she asked cautiously.
 "Of course," he said with a forced smile.
 She took a seat in front of him and ate, unsure what to say. It wasn't her business and she didn't know how far back their story went but she wanted her friends happy. It was clear to even the blindest people that Jill and Ander loved each other.   Ander pushed his tray aside and pulled out his port, unfolded the quadrants and scanned his handprint. The screen blinked to life and on it was a beautiful drawing of Jill. He slid out a stylus from the crevice hidden in the edge of the device and began to add more details like the lines above her eyes.
 "You must love her a lot," Teri said.
 Ander nodded. "I loved her since high school but I'm not her type, apparently. Too quiet and peaceful, she said."
 She hesitated before saying, "I don't think that's true. She does care for you."
 Ander scoffed. "Yeah, maybe that's why she kissed Towers," he muttered bitterly.
 Teri started. "She..." she trailed, lost for words. She had never imagined Jill would do such a thing to Ander, especially not when she clearly returned his feelings. Or maybe Teri had just been reading this wrong.
 He shrugged. "It's okay, Teri. I'm done with this ridiculous mess. I've finally faced that she'll never settle with me."
 "Ander, would you like me to try and talk to her?"
 He smiled ruefully. "Don't tire yourself, Teri. It's useless. Besides, nobody knows what's waiting for us; especially when we're in the army."  
 It was raining when training began after lunch. It was the kind of rain that drenched everything in its path with big, wet droplets pelting down heavily to the point of almost being painful to stand beneath. As a child, ran fascinated her. The sky was upset. She'd stand on her balcony under the rain and reassure the sky that everything would be fine and she'd convince it to stop crying and let the stars shine.   The stars were the least of her worries right now. Captain Kesswell had decided that the weather was perfect for training on the obstacle courses and they were crawling under nets, climbing over walls, swinging on slippery bars and sloshing across the muddy ground. The course was difficult enough when it was dry. Add in the rain and Captain's orders to pick up the pace every few seconds, it was a nightmare.
 "What are you? Princesses? Hurry up!" Captain barked.
 How ironic, she thought as she tried to swing her arm onto the next bar. Her fingers were barely hanging on, threatening to give way. She'd done this course seven times that day, seven times on the row of twenty slippery bars. She could hardly keep her eyes open for two seconds due to the muddy water dripping down her face.
 "Stuck, Asian brat?" Pudge sniggered as he swang past her.
 She finally swang her arm but, as expected, her fingers slipped. For one terrifying moment, she was on that ship again, twelve years ago, falling. Then she landed on her side in thick inches of mud, the impact knocking the wind out of her lungs.
 Harrison, following after Pudge, roared in laughter. His feet came dangerously close to Her head that she had to quickly scramble up to avoid being kicked.   Captain Kesswell called them in and ordered them to run on the spot. She ran as fast as she could manage on her exhausted legs, her breaths shallow and rapid. She didn't know metal hearts could ache this much.
 "Not fast enough!" Captain yelled.
 People around her sped up, all looking pained. She squeezed her eyes shut and forced her legs to move faster but they weighed a ton. Her whole body protested, muscles in her legs burning like fire despite the low temperature and her head swam. But it wasn't enough for Captain Kesswell.

 "Drop and give me thirty."
   She pushed her aching arms up and bent down. With unimaginable amount of effort, she pushed up again and then collapsed onto the ground. She couldn't. She just couldn't go on anymore. She could only lie there, face pressed against the soggy mud as tears pooled in her wet eyes.
 "Alright, that's enough for today," Captain Towers, who had kept quiet until then, spoke. "Go clean yourselves up."
 People heaved up and staggered off to the dorm, groaning and hissing. Her whole body burned in shame and disgrace as she tried to push herself up and failed. Danika crawled towards her and helped her roll onto her back and sit up, grunting from the effort.
 "There you go, Teri," she said, wiping her forehead with the back of her hand and smearing even more mud on her face than before. "Some training, huh?"
 Ander came and stood over them, sticking out his hands in front of them. Danika and Teri grabbed each hand as he groaned and pulled them up. Like Teri's, mud was clad on their white uniforms and were matted in their hair. The wet clothes clung to their body like a second layer of skin, brown patches and grass stuck on them. They looked like sewer rats. Danika looked down at herself and laughed. As always, Teri became more grateful towards them.
 "Lory and Jamieson, you're dismissed," Captain Kesswell interrupted. "Verloren, I need a word with you."
 "Yes, Sir," Danika said with a salute before smiling at Teri in what was supposed to be reassurance as she left.   They both knew what was coming. When Teri turned towards her captain, she looked down at the ground, unable to meet his eyes. He'd asked for thirty push ups, she hadn't even done one. While others had done at least fifteen rounds of the course in two hours, she couldn't finish eight. She wrapped her arms around her body and braced herself.
 "Well, I'm going to go, too," Captain Towers said as he gave the captain a wink and a Cheshire grin before he jogged away.
 "Good riddance," Captain muttered. He stayed silent for a while and with each passing second, her heart began to race and her nerves buzzed like a thousand bees beneath her skin. He finally said, "Look at people when they're talking, Teri."
 She released an invisible sigh and raised her head. By stars, he looked like a dashing hero dropped out of a romance novel. Like everyone else, he was dripping wet but his black uniform was free of mud and his hair had darkened and was floppy. His eyes seemed to shine against the gray sky and the universe in them seduced her into speechlessness. He ran his fingers through his hair, sleeking it back. She suddenly remembered his shirtless state the day before and heated up like an oven.   No, he was not like the men she'd seen come of her sister's room. He was even more beautiful. He was the first man she'd seen shirtless but she was sure of this.
 Captain coughed loudly before he asked, "How many laps did you do?"
 Ashamed of her own thoughts, she harshly bit down on her bottom lip. Who was she to think such thoughts? He was a captain and during combat practice Decks had once told her that he was the son to the most infamous family in the armed forces. Teri; she was...nobody - not even a soldier. "Seven," she answered quietly.
 Captain narrowed his eyes. "Do you know how many a real soldier is required to do in one hour?"
 She shook her head.
 "Eighteen. I want another six laps, go."
 Another six! She was cold, wet and tired. The rain showed no sign of ceasing any time soon. The obstacle was a circle the size of a football field and was made up of bars, planks, ropes, ditches, walls, nets and tyres. She had to scale walls, run through fifty meters of tyre rings, swing across ten meters of bars and more!

  Her knees wobbled and she wanted to vomit as she stared at the course in front of her. She looked back at her captain to see that he was already looking at her strangely; his head was tilted and his eyebrows were furrowed.
 She pressed her lips together and cleared her throat. She tried to keep her voice steady as she said, "Yes, Captain."  
 Standing in the pouring rain, watching Teri struggle to climb the wall was the most fascinating thing Orion had done all week. Her expressions changed drastically from doubt to determination and then morphed into fear. She was on her second lap now and it had taken her twenty minutes. She hadn't complained once, though she stared up at the two-metre wall like it was the Great Wall of China. Just when he thought she was going to give up, she grabbed the rope and climbed.
 For the third time in a row, her feet lost footing on the dent and slipped right off the wall, her body slamming into it. Her face reddened, as it did every time she failed to do something. She squeezed her eyes shut and exhaled a huge breath, shaking her head as if she was mentally talking to herself. When she opened her eyes he expected that spark of determination to appear but he was disappointed to find that it didn't. Instead, she looked at him, almost pleading with her huge brown eyes.   And holy crap, it hit him hard. Every bit of ruthlessness he had lived by waved him goodbye and jumped out the window. How could he make her keep going when she was about to pass out from exhaustion?   He sighed and that worried him a lot. What was he doing? He wouldn't let anyone else stop, would he? Well, maybe he might've. After all, Hunter would've allowed them to stop, right? Hunter had compassion and Orion was trying to follow in his brother's footstep so it made sense that he should let Teri stop. Yes, it made sense.   "You know what your problem is?" he asked to turn himself away from the internal battle.
 "No, Captain."   "You don't believe in yourself. That self-doubt is the very thing that stands in between us and victory. Start thinking more of yourself, Teri. You're lucky Holston isn't here today to see you or he'd kick you out without a second thought. Finish off this lap and you can go."
 She merely nodded without a word and continued. After another three more tries, she finally managed to climb up the wall. Just watching her was tedious and painful because she took five times longer than a soldier would take to complete the lap. As she leaned against a pole of the bars, catching her breath back from the tyre rings, he walked over to her. She was smiling, and he almost stopped walking.
 She had one of those radiant smiles that could light up the night. He'd never seen her smile like that before and his brain immediately decided that it liked her smiles. Then he chastised himself because he wasn't supposed to 'like' her smiles. 'Liking' her smiles would lead to something else; something more complicated than he cared to be a part of. Not to mention those big brown eyes of hers.
 Gods above. No.  He put on his signature scowl and impatiently said, "You will do better next time. Consider this a warning," and left, suddenly annoyed at the rain, the ground, Holston, Teri, himself and every other thing he could think of.
 Because being annoyed was easier than facing than truth.
 The truth that he might've been developing... feelings.  
 Rovina was bubbling with joy as she changed out of her dress and into the silk nightgown her maid had left hanging in her closet of luxuries. The French and British armed forces have finally increased their firepower to twice that of Australia and her army now had 1.2 million personnel in total. She had made some advancement in her experiments too.   She giggled as she glanced at the globe on the table in the study through the open door. Coincidently, it was turned to Australia's side and she sighed blissfully. This would be like taking candy from her sister. Australia was so very small compared to her Empire of Asia and Europe combined.
 "If only you could see this, mother," she murmured. "You would be so very proud of me."
 She had been so involved in her preparation that she hadn't much time to think about her mother lately. She walked further into her closet and when she reached the end, she crouched below the colourful materials of clothes hanging from the rack. In the corner was a pile of old clothes that she hadn't worn in months. She needed to get Jiaying to take them away. She pushed the clothes off, digging into it until she found the golden box hidden beneath it all.
 This box and the object inside it were hers by birthright. Athena had no claim on this whatsoever and yet her mother had given this to someone who should've been nothing but scum on the side of a road.   It doesn't matter anymore, she thought to herself as she smiled.   She pressed on the heart-shaped button on the side of the box and it clicked open slowly. Normally, Rovina would've normally played the necklace around on her fingers and carefully put it on herself before admiring the way it glinted of her golden skin in the mirror. But what she saw made her gasp out loud and her eyes widened in white hot fury. The necklace was gone and there was only one person who could've been stupid enough to have dared to touch it.
 Athena.

 

Chapter 10

Rovina is played by the beautiful Liu Yifei. See how many pictures of Rovina I have up there? This is me discreetly trying to tell you that she'd my favourite character. And the fact she has so many faces. UPDATE (30/11/2017): OH MY GOD. Liu Yifei plays MULAN in Disney live-action remake! I'm so excited. It's also kinda ironic that she is who I imagined Rovina to look like. XD This chapter is dedicated to angerbda to say a big thank you for beta-reading this story. :) 
 Chapter 10
 Teri had counted two hundred and thirty-six scratches on the ceiling, tiny marks barely visible against the white. Her stinging eyes refused to close and give her the rest she desperately needed. Her heart was beating faster than normal and blood pulsed through her veins with a thump-thump rhythm at her temples. Her fingers and toes twitched constantly as she tried to take a nap during the little time she had before training began. Most of the women had already left for the training room.
   She had been awake since 0300 for patrols with Decks and at five, she'd been on the 2-mile run. She had vomited afterwards, just like she often did. But this time, it was not just from the run. She'd dreamt that her mother had forced poison down her throat until she was bleeding from her eyes, nose and ears and spewing the warm red liquid as it fought its way up her throat. She drowned in her own sticky blood.
 "Your anxiety level is really high," M stated frankly as she hovered up with the fan that had replaced the wheel beneath the little tin body. "Not to mention your adrenaline is like the engine of a space liner. You can run around the whole world like this."   "Do you have any more medication?" Teri asked shakily.
 "Sorry, Teri," she apologised. "Anxiety meds ran out a few days ago, remember?"
 Now that she'd mentioned it, Teri did remember. She sighed.
 M whirred over to the table beside her bed and landed, replacing the fan with the wheels. She said, "Well, think of it this way; you can fight better." M paused for a moment before saying, "Shouldn't you be going now? It's thirty-six minutes past one."
 Teri gasped as she jolted up from her bed and quickly changed into her uniform. Captain was going to be furious. He hadn't been happy either when she nearly fell asleep during field training this morning, when he had been talking about military jargon. His glare could set the sky on fire.  
 Orion impatiently tapped his foot on the floor as Holston smirked beside him. The recruits were practising combat on mats spread across the room, the smell of sweat and sounds of grunts filled the room. Darren was at Jillian and Ander's mat, 'teaching' Jillian how to throw proper punches. Orion was too angry to yell at him that she punched better than half of them. At least Ander was trying to get rid of him with a scowl permanently etched on his face, much like Orion.
 "Where is your star pupil, Captain?" Holston asked just to point out her absence.
 "Deputy, please-"
 Just at that moment, the said pupil decided to grace them with her presence. She came rushing in like a hurricane, her hair spilling out of her bun like a firework and - Orion blinked. It was strangely attractive. Then he reminded himself that he was supposed to be the angry commanding officer and she was the unpunctual soldier in his platoon.
 Teri hurried over to him and saluted stiffly, her cheeks flushed as Harrison and his gang laughed and jeered at her. Orion silenced them with one of his famous glares that said "Shut up or die." They stopped immediately and returned to their blocks and punches. He trained his eyes on Teri.

  "Is this a joke to you?" he barked lowly.
 She flinched and swallowed, her head bowed down and tucked between her shoulders. "N-No, sir," she stuttered.   "Ten laps around the room. Now."
 She nodded and backed away, breaking into a light jog. Decks, who had been partnerless and stretching on his mat, followed and caught up to her, his gangly legs matching her steps. He smiled and began talking to her. Orion found his frown deepening. Just the picture of the two running side by side looked... wrong.
 "Hartigan!" he called. "Did I tell you to run?"
 Decks slowed down as he shot a look in Teri's direction. "No, sir," he replied.
 "Then stop running and go practise on the bags! And you," he turned to Teri, "faster! I've seen toddlers run faster than you."
 The deputy's Cheshire grin had never been so wide. His lips were curled up from ear to ear, yellowing teeth on display for all to see. His beady gray eyes mocked Orion, practically saying, "You couldn't do it. You're not fit to be captain of a platoon." Orion steeled himself and pulled his fingers into fists so tight that his knuckles turned white in seconds. He wished it was raining again today so he could train on the obstacle course where Holston wouldn't even dream of stepping near.
  Darren was still busy with Ander and Jillian and now was not the best time for Orion to lecture him, especially when his own feelings about Teri were still clouded. Of course, he'd never be reckless enough to do something stupid, like Darren, but his old captain's words kept ringing in his ears. Trust your instincts. They're what keep you alive when you're out there.
 The problem was that his instincts told him to get to know Teri better. He would bet his left leg that this was not the 'instinct' his captain had told him about.
 As Teri ran, Orion set the rest to spar. He watched each person closely and was mildly satisfied to see that most had improved. They had learnt to watch their opponents and use what they could to their advantage. Pudge had never had a problem laying his hands on a woman but Ander had quickly learnt that if he wanted to be here, he had to obey orders even if that meant he'd have to hit his girlfriend.   But they were nowhere near good enough. He only had another six weeks left at most to complete basic training. He had to push them harder than his captain had pushed them.   Teri finished her laps in time for her spar with Decks. She was jittery today, unlike her slouched figure, shrinking into herself every time he called them up. Her eyes were large and she flexed her fingers constantly, breathing hard as she bit her lip and stepped up. She was edgy. Decks took his place in front of her, almost relaxed compared to Teri's tense state. He nodded and smiled before getting into position, Teri following shortly after.
 Decks began by lunging for Teri's right leg to take her to the ground, which was now the requirement. Punching techniques were no longer the subject of practice; Orion didn't have enough time to perfect each and every one of them. If they could throw decent punches, it was good enough for now.   Decks was fast and Teri had slow reflexes. He'd learnt to use this to his full advantage. Orion had to admit he was good at reading body language, making up for his lack in size. He yanked Teri's leg out from beneath her and had her on the ground. He quickly rolled her onto her stomach, Teri's body flopping like a doll, and pinned her arms behind her back with one hand, the other on the back of her neck.
 On the other side of the mat, Holston was looking at Orion with a happy glint in his eyes. Orion gritted his teeth and yelled, "Reset. If I don't see you attempting to block, Verloren, you're on duty for the whole night by yourself." 

  What he really wanted to say was, "Come on, Teri. Remember what I told you. Believe."
 Decks and Teri repositioned themselves. As always, Decks made the first move, this time aiming for her midsection. He threw his arms around her stomach and pulled her down to the mat. As she landed with a loud oomph, she blinked as if she was in shock for a moment before quickly regaining her senses. Decks tried to roll her over again but this time, it didn't happen.   Teri stuck out her fist and a loud crack echoed through the room, taking everyone by surprise - including Orion. While Decks was momentarily shocked by Teri's punch at his jaw, she scrambled up to her knees and hooked an elbow around his chin, her free hand holding her elbow tightly in place.
 Decks didn't move. Holston didn't move. Orion didn't move. No one moved. No one breathed. The room was dead silent and Teri and Decks's heavy breaths were as loud as land mines. Everyone's eyes were bulging and Holston's happy smile was replaced by a look of utter disbelief.   Cautious, Orion looked at Teri. She was shaking. Her pupils were dilated and her lips were slightly apart as she slipped her hold off Decks's neck. Her hands were trembling like an earthquake. She stared at her hands and her eyes slowly lifted to meet Orion's.   This was not Teri at her best mental state. She was shaken and that moment was driven by adrenaline, not will. He didn't want her to think he was disappointed but this was not right either. So he only stared back blankly. He wanted to be proud that he'd taught her something. He wanted to be proud of her, too, but he couldn't be because this was not her real strength. It could've fooled Holston for now but Orion knew he'd achieved nothing yet.
 "Go, Teri!" Jillian screamed nevertheless and a couple of other women cheered, oblivious to what had actually happened. "That's my girl!"
 He ran his fingers through his hair in frustration. The port folded at his belt beeped at the same time Darren's did. Orion unfolded it and the message read:
 URGENT ASSEMBLY CONJURED AT 1630 HOURS IN MEETING ROOM. SENT FROM COMMANDER KESSWELL.
 He frowned at the little screen and reread it.
 "Everyone dismissed."
 Darren strode over to him as people returned mats to the pile and poured out the room. His eyebrow was quirked in curiosity as he asked, "What could that be about?"
 Orion shrugged. "I don't know. We better hurry up," he said.   Darren turned around and said, "Are you two not done?"
 Decks and Teri were still on the mat, standing next to each other. Decks replied, "No, sir. We'll practice a bit more because we didn't have much time earlier."
 Orion's immediate thought was, Alone? Not happening. He had tried to support his thought by quickly adding that Teri was going to have extra training with him anyway and that she needed more professional help than Decks'.   "Darren, you stay and assist these two," he ordered. "I'll fill you in after."
 Darren narrowed his eyes and then a smirk replaced his features, one side of his lips curled up to his ear as he nodded. "Why, Orion?" he challenged.   Being the professional liar he was, he easily replied with, "Those two are the worst in this troop. If no one guides them, neither will improve. I want you to stay and train them for today."
 Deep down inside, though, he knew the truth.
 He quickly left the room without a second glance, making his way over to the meeting room which was one level above the dining hall. When he finally entered, all other captains and Hunter were already seated at their spots in the circular rows of seats around a spinning holograph projection in the centre. 

  The holograph displayed a repeating clip of several people with guns sprinting down the street, pointing at the windows of houses and shops. They wore scarves over the bottom half of their faces and all wore red jackets with black pants. The street was filled with parked cars on roadsides and some had people inside. The street looked Australian but Orion didn't recognise the guns. A cold sense of dread seeped into him, chilling him to his bones.
 "Pardon my lateness, captains, Commander. What's this?" he asked as he sat down in his assigned seat.
 Hunter, across the room, motioned to the holograph. "This is a recorded clip of a terrorist attack in the coastal town of Gnoorea in Western Australia early this morning."  
 Teri lay on the grass, looking up at the dark sky. The wetness of the ground soaked into her back but that was okay. For the first time in months, she was smiling out of her own will. It was peaceful and quiet, the petrichor lingering in the air from the slight drizzle earlier that evening and wrapped around her with comfort. She couldn't come last night because the clouds had hidden the stars. Now in the sky the constellation of Orion loomed over her, his arrow drawn ever so proudly. Behind him a giant scorpion stalked him but the hunter didn't seem to notice.
 "You're smiling again," a deep voice said.
 She had been so lost in thought she hadn't seen Orion standing over her. She shot up, whimpering when her body ached in protest. She was about to stand up and put her hand to her forehead when he held his hand up.
 "Don't," he interrupted. "Don't salute. I'm not on duty."
 Even when he wasn't on duty, he held an atmosphere of authority around him, one that people respected. It set her on an edge when he scrunched his nose at the ground distastefully before sitting down next to her. Her heart sped up and she gulped, nibbling her bottom lip. Her nerves hummed and buzzed at how close he sat. There was no more than a foot between their legs, much closer than the metre distance he left the night before.   "Why were you smiling?" he asked, his voice strained.
 "I-" she began but her voice had come out squeaky and high-pitched so she quickly stopped herself and cleared her throat before flustering out, "I've realised something bad."
 He quirked an eyebrow and tilted his head. "Then why are you smiling?"
 His eyes sucked her in, almost to the point of forgetting reality and she had to look away in hope of her speech making at least some sense and saving herself a tiny bit of embarrassment. "It's new," she said, eyes on everything but Orion. "I've never... felt this before."
 She decided that the sky was her best choice. Out of the corner of her eyes, she could feel him watching her and the hairs on her nape stood up. Her stomach housed a swarm of butterflies. This was bad. This was worse than bad; this was terrible.
 When he had told her to believe in herself yesterday, that was the point she realised that she felt something for him. It made her grin like an idiot because she'd never before felt the notion liking someone and for a moment she was flying and nothing could take her down. For a moment she was invincible. But hours later, away from his encouraging words, the cover of invincibility faded away and she was breaking again.
 This mission was never supposed to take a turn that way. Her plan was to find someone who'd listen to her, someone who would believe her and take her for more than a silly girl everyone knew she was. Her feelings for him were completely irrational and complicated. What had she been thinking?
 "Why do you like the stars so much?" he asked, breaking her chain of thoughts.
 Due to lack of better judgement, she turned towards him and for a second she thought his eyes were on her lips before they flickered up to her eyes. She scolded and convinced herself that it was just the effect of the moonlight. She willed herself to look in his eyes.
 "My mother was very fond of stars. She taught me how to map them and about legends of each constellation."
 He pointed to the sky, squinting. His eyes were on the stars but they were distant as if something was troubling him but was trying to hide it, distracting himself with the stars the way she did.   "That one," he said, "is Orion, isn't it?"
 He remembered.   She stared at him. Not laughing at her when she told him about the stars was one thing. But being genuinely interested in them, the way he seemed to be, was a whole other matter. People had pointed their fingers, laughed and talked behind their hands about her when they found out about her passion. After all, was it not pointless to watch stars when she could've been contributing to society the way her sister did?
 But Orion didn't do any of that. His face was expressionless but he waited for her answer expectantly. Was he really interested or was this a distraction?
 "Yes," she breathed steadily.   He nodded. "Right. Tell me more."
 Her heart was skipping every second beat as she beamed. For the rest of the night, she told him about the constellations of the Crux, Ursa Major, Taurus and Gemini. She told him about the different skies from her home to Australia. When she hesitated and stopped herself before she could get too carried, he encouraged her to continue and she'd babble on all over again. All the while, he listened to every word she'd said and made faces at mythical creatures too wild for his imagination.   She itched to ask him if something was bothering him but he didn't give her the chance. He shot question after question, barely leaving enough time for her to finish answering. But this was okay.
 Because for the first time in months, someone was listening to her and she didn't plan on letting this opportunity go, even if that meant causing her heart to malfunction from the speed it would race to whenever she was near Orion.  
 Rovina hadn't been down to the cryopreservation chambers in years. The last time was eight years ago but she could still remember that chilly feeling when the elevator door opened to reveal a room, dimly lit with cool blue light, with five rows of cryopreservation glass tanks. A low mechanical whirr-whirr-whirr filled the room but apart from that, there was silence. The scent of death assaulted her nostrils.
 Many of these tanks were occupied by bodies of long dead relatives, frozen forever in ice, but there was one that she was looking for in particular.
 She stepped out of the elevator and onto the marble floors, her heels clinking as she walked to the particular chamber in the third row, six tanks down from the right. She had come here to boast to the occupant of tank number 39. She had even dressed up in her best hanfu and applied the best makeup she had.
 "How are you, dear sister?" she chirped, smiling widely. "You'll never guess what happened today. Father had announced that he'd give me Russia as present for my birthday. Imagine! I'm going to become queen!"
 The body of a six-year-old girl in the cryopreservation chamber didn't move a muscle. She just stood behind a layer of ice that distorted her features, eyes shut and lips in a tiny smile - just an illusion of the ice. Rovina's smile slid clean off her face.
 "You wretch!" she spat. "I'll never understand what mother saw in you! You should've stayed dead. Do you hear me? You should have stayed dead! That heirloom was rightfully mine and you took it from me. You took mother away from me. She's dead because of you! The heirloom is lost in the river because of you!"
 Rovina's rage rolled off her in waves. She'd been holding all this in for too long. She had wanted her sister gone since the day she found out. She was rid of her once but Athena found her way back into her life and now that she was gone again, she had taken something that meant the world to Rovina.
 This time, though, she was finally free of Athena. Or was she? What if that old crone was right? What if Athena wasn't gone?   Oh, who cared! It didn't matter anyway. The plan was already in motion. If you enjoyed the chapter, please let me know by VOTING, COMMENTING and SHARING. :D
 


 

Chapter 11

                  Chapter 11
 Teri took a tray of food from the counter at the front and wove through the maze of tables and people until she reached her friends' table. That term was becoming more and more familiar now. After a month, it no longer sounded awkward to say and she'd began to believe that maybe she wasn't so hopeless. She hadn't grown completely accustomed to this word that people here used so freely and sometimes without much value in it.   She didn't know much about friendship either, having been confined in the palace walls her whole life without a child her age to be friends with. But she was convinced this was true friendship. Danika supported her with kindness, Jillian with her colourful words of encouragement to kick people's backsides, Ander with silent but reassuring smiles and Decks in training with a never-ending supply of jokes to cheer her up. Maybe Orion could've been her friend, too. Her body heated up just thinking about being friends with him.
 Jill narrowed her eyes and watched her closely as she slid into her seat next to Danika. "Why are you all red?" she asked.
 Ander and Danika turned to look at her. She squirmed in her seat as she decided that runny chicken and corn soup was more interesting than the conversation she was dreading to have.
 Danika gasped. "Captain's looking at you, Teri."
 Her heart skipped a beat but she didn't dare to look up, slowly stirring her soup with a spoon, watching the greenish-brownish mixture of uneven chicken pieces, globs of egg and a couple of corn pieces.
 Danika nudged her. "You're thinking about him, aren't you?"
 Her head snapped up. That fact that she could hear Orion telling her, "Don't be afraid to stand up for yourself," made it all the more difficult to deny.
 "N-No... I'm not," she lied. Her tomato-red face must've given her away.
 Jill smirked and folded her arms on the table. "Yes, you are. Come on, Teri; we all know you like him. Plus, you two have been awfully close the last two weeks."
 "It was only training, Jill," she reasoned quietly. It would've been a terrible idea mention that every time they trained combat, Orion had felt the need to lose his shirt and send her into a wormhole of discomfort and an unhealthy amount of ogling that could not have been helped; something she was not entirely proud of.   "Training what, exactly?" Jill retorted. "Kissing?"
 Danika smiled. "Jill, stop torturing the poor girl."
 "What! Am I the only one who's seen her and Kesswell on the field at night, lying next to each other?"
 Oh. Great. Stars. Jill had seen that? Teri's body flushed and the heat could've melted the metal bench beneath her. Danika nodded, confirming that Jill was not the only one. Ander didn't look at any of them but the tiny smile at the corner of his lips told her that he knew, too. Her mouth dried up and she felt the sudden urge to force the soup that tasted of rotten fish down her throat.   Jill continued, "They lie there together and talk until midnight about stars and stories."
 "It... It's not like that," she attempted to deny.   She pleaded Danika with her eyes for help to stop Jill's ramble of nonsense but Danika was smiling, too. She turned to Ander and his eyes questioned, "Then what is it like?" But before she could utter a single word, he turned to Jill.
 "Will you go out with me on the next rest day?" he asked.
 His nonchalance took everyone by surprise and for a moment, all attention was off Teri and on Ander. The last few weeks, the fractured relationship between Jill and Ander was slowly sealing up, mostly due to Ander letting Jill win every argument. But every word they had passed was weighed down by tonnes and tension sizzled in the air. Ander was always courteous despite Jill's constant rejection and never showed a lack in faith. Until now. It was as though he knew the answer and this was purely out of politeness, not because he wanted to.

  Teri watched Jill stare at Ander for a while with creases in between her eyebrows. For a brief second, hurt flashed in her gray eyes but she blinked it away, quickly replacing it with indifference.   She shrugged and muttered, "Whatever."
 Her response surprised everyone more than Ander's nonchalance. No one continued their conversation, which was a normal proceeding after whenever Jill and Ander spoke to each other. Teri silently thanked and apologised Ander for it.  
 There was something so dangerous and lethal about the way Pudge lunged at Teri. There was no questioning the man's strength but he still fought to figure out how to put it to use. For one, he lunged with his arms but not enough power coming from within his legs. He didn't push to bring his whole body forward towards Teri and that allowed the girl to quickly step backwards from his reaching arms, half-panicked and panting.   He hid a smile behind his frown, feigning dissatisfaction. Teri had been improving and Holston, opposite Orion on the other side of the mat, could see this. The old man had permanent frown lines on his forehead and around his eyes. This was the last day he'd be 'overseeing' Orion's training and he was not amused. He was constantly worried Orion and his men would mistreat his precious training centre.   On the mat, Pudge circled Teri like a hawk seizing a field mouse. Teri had won several rounds with Decks and Orion had decided to switch up some of the pairs, setting her up with Pudge. After what happened that night, he really didn't want to but she needed to be challenged. So far both matches were won by Pudge, managing to pin Teri every time. There was no attacking on her part, as always, but with Decks she had managed to reverse roles and hold him down instead.
 Deciding Pudge was not challenging her enough, Orion called, "Pudge, use your legs."
 But this time, he didn't pounce. He bent to grab her upper left leg, a weakness of hers, and tried to pull it out from beneath her. Orion mentally yelled at Teri to block and ground her feet the way he'd taught her just days ago and as if she'd heard him, her left arm went around Pudge's neck in a headlock and pulled her arms upwards, along with Pudge who gagged and choked.   She yelped and immediately let go of her hold on his neck as he dropped into a crouch.   "Are you all-" she began but his leg stuck out and swiped her feet off the ground, cutting her off.
 She landed on her back with an audible cry leaving her mouth. Pudge wasted no time in straddling her legs to stop movement and pinning her arms over her head with one hand while the other held her throat, none too gently either. This was wrong. This was very wrong. This was a very compromising position, one that annoyed Orion out of his wits.
 "Get off, Pudge," he ordered. Then he added in a less defensive tone, "Good job; you won. Asteri, don't be fooled by anything."
 When Asteri got off the mat and returned to her friends' side, Jillian loudly muttered, "He's so fracking jealous."
 Judging by the way she was looking at him straight in the eye, she probably meant for him - and the whole room - to hear. He decided to not dignify that with a response even though whispers reverberated around the room like wildfire. After all, Hunter and Alison didn't seem to care too much about rumours surrounding them either.  
 It was haunting to hear the training room so quiet. Teri could hear every breath she took, heavy inhales and loud exhales, as she sat cross-legged on the mat she'd placed in the middle of the room. It was dark outside, almost half past seven, when Orion was due to arrive. She counted the beats of her heart, two fingers pressed to her wrist. It was faster than usual. It was always faster than usual before her one-on-one training with Orion.

  She stared up at the Southern Cross on the ceiling, one that nobody had managed to touch yet. It had occurred to her that if she could touch those stars, then she could touch any star she wanted. If she could do something this arduous, she could do anything. Maybe she could even save her people. You have to believe in yourself.   She smiled as Orion's words echoed in her mind.   "Good, you're here," Orion said as he strolled inside. "Let's get started."
 She stood up and his eyes flicked to her legs, her upper thigh bruised from Pudge's locks. Then, to her utter disappointment, he threw his shirt over his head and onto the ground, next to her jacket which lay in a neat fold. Eyes up there, Teri. Eyes up.   She should've been used to seeing his half-naked figure after two whole weeks but she wasn't sure she'd ever get used to this sight. It made her blush furiously every time.
 Orion stepped onto the mat in front of her and grounded himself, feet planted firmly. "Today, I want to see your attacks. I want more than punches; I need to see you hold someone down."
 As awkwardly as ever, she tried to twist his arm and press it against his back, swing a punch at him, elbow him, ram into him but nothing worked. The only thing that came out of this was unnecessary amount of skin-to-skin contact that sent her scrambling away from him as soon as he let go of his grip on her.
 "Rule number 2," Orion said, running his fingers through his hair in obvious frustration.
 Rule number 2: know your strength. Teri's only strength was her size. Her small frame allowed her to slip out from holds without too much difficulty but it was utterly useless when she was attacking. Unless...
 She threw a fist at his jaw and another at his abdomen. He blocked both. She swang her leg around at his side but he was faster. He angled his arm so that her leg hit it instead, right on her shin. She cried out and dropped to the ground, clutching her leg to her chest with a grimace. His eyes openly displayed concern, an emotion she'd rarely ever seen him hold.
 "Are you okay, Teri?" he asked, crouching down onto his knees, one hand on her shoulder.
 Focus. She eyed the place on her leg that she was clasping, slowly peeling her fingers away one by one. Orion looked down at her hands closely, ready to check for injury. Perfect. She moved her hand away completely and pounced, gripping his shoulders as he fell backwards, taking her down with him. She didn't waste time; she seized his wrists, pinned them beside his head and sat on his legs the way she'd seen people do, catching him off guard.
 She blinked and paused as she realised- She caught him off guard. She'd caught Captain Kesswell off guard. Rule number 5: do not be distracted by anything; always stay on guard. She stared down at him in amazement while he stared up at her with a strange look in his eyes, similar to Ander's when he watched Jill.   They both stilled, breaths held and staring. His gaze flickered down to her lips and her heart skipped, her eyes drifting down to his mouth too. His upper lips were the perfect arches of a bow and the small white line of the scar had never looked closer. She wondered if she would be able to feel it against her lips if he'd just-
 Orion's wrists fought out of her loosened grips and he rolled her off him, roles reversing. In less than a second her hard-earned victory floated down the Yangtze. She was pinned under him, his warm hands gripped her wrists and his face just hovering above hers. Her heart pounded on its metal cage, demanding to leap out of her chest.   His beautiful dark eyes roamed everywhere on her face, finally landing on her lips again. His grip on her wrist loosened and his fingers slowly slid into her palm, then threaded in between her own fingers.

  -close the gap.
 "Ahem!" someone coughed from the door.
 Their heads snapped towards the door where Captain Towers leaned against the doorframe, smirking.  
 He scrambled off her faster than lightning, ready to wipe the smirk off of Darren's face. He held out his hand for her but she didn't see and picked herself up. He could feel Darren's smirk plastered to his back.
 "Rule number 5: do not be distracted by anything," he told her. "I'll see you tomorrow."
 He reminded himself of that rule and rule number 6: do not be fooled by anything.
 Orion watched as she nodded at his dismissal, her milky skin flushed red and hair spilling out of her bun in that attractive way. She picked up her jacket and hurried off with her head bowed down. He pulled his T-shirt on but his eyes couldn't leave her. He followed her out, standing next to Darren who still leaned against the door. His smirk only grew. If Darren hadn't come and interrupted, would he have closed that gap? He sure as hell wanted to.
 But he couldn't have been gladder that Darren did come, stopping him from doing something he'd certainly regret later. The worse thing was, Orion had completely ignored - no, forgotten that this was prohibited. At that moment, they were both ordinary people and he was proud of her for successfully deceiving him and pinning him.   He watched Teri as she half-jogged down the hall towards the elevator.
 "Since when did training include taking your shirt off?" Darren asked smugly.
 "Shut up."
 "I have to say though; killer legs."
 Orion glared. "I said, "Shut up.""
 Darren laughed and held up his hands in surrender. "Don't shoot the pigeon; I just came to tell you Hunter wants to see you in his quarters."
 He frowned. "Why didn't he just comm me?"
 "Your port was turned off. I wonder why," Darren replied flatly.
 Oh, right.
 The elevator had long descended with Teri and Darren made his way towards it. "Oh, by the way," he called, turning around as he walked backwards, "your shirt is inside out. Goodnight, Orion. Tell me about your dreams tomorrow."
 He gave Orion a final mischievous wink and turned around. Orion decided he deserved that after giving Darren trouble for kissing Jillian. He owed him for saving his dignity. He flipped his shirt outside-in and cleaned up the training room before walking over to Hunter's quarters. Hunter had been away for the last two weeks, deployed at the town terrorized by rebels. He'd only gotten back last night and had been busy since.
 Hunter was on his Port, his head almost inside the screen. He looked half dead. There were giant purple bags under his eyes and his cheekbones were more prominent from having lost weight. If their mother were here, she would scold him until his ears bled.   "Wow," Orion commented, sitting down in front of Hunter's desk.
 "Has mum commed you?"
 "No."
 "Good. Don't tell her about this. She'd push every personnel who agreed to send me there off her chopper."
 He didn't doubt this. Their mother was a fierce woman despite her size. She was a Senior Master Sergeant in the air force and was famous for her do-or-die attitude that saved thousands of lives during the civil war in South Africa fifteen years ago. 

  "What happened there?" Orion asked.
 Hunter sighed. "The situation is worse than we thought, O. Half that town's population is in favour of joining forces. That dozen or so people were the brave ones who are taking action. We have them handled for now but we lost two men. Almost the whole town is burnt to the ground."
 "Why did you want to see me?"
 "We have orders to go through every volunteer's profiles again for history and background. Anyone whose family has moved to Australia from the Empire after the Revival will be kept a close eye on."
 Orion quirked an eyebrow, his mind immediately drifting to Teri. "That's a bit discriminatory, isn't it? I thought we were way past racial discrimination."
 "It's warfare, Orion, whether we admit it or not. We might not be officially engaged in war but we're not far from it now, especially after that unofficial attack on the town. We do what we have to."
 And they did. They sifted through the list of trainees in Orion's platoon, picking out people deemed to be suspicious. In the end over forty percent of his men were taken note of. Orion didn't expect any less. Ninety-eight years ago, the Emperor of the Northern Empire revived its culture and traditions once more, threading old traditions into the modern world. Laws became stricter and many migrated to Australia, who was still recovering from the dwindled population as a result of the devastating Fourth World War.
 "So Holston seemed pretty peeved at dinner today," Hunter remarked casually. "What did you do?"
 Orion glanced up at him. "He's no longer 'assisting' me with training."
 Hunter smiled through his tired eyes. "Ah, I take it the girl is improving."
 "Teri, yes."
 This time Hunter looked up at him and raised an eyebrow in question. "Are you getting defensive, Orion?"
 Orion shrugged. "I have nothing to be defensive of."
 "Don't lie, O." Hunter shook his head and grinned. "I know that face. You like her."
 "I do not," he snapped a little too quickly. "How about Morgans? One of his parents migrated from Britain in 2116 and married a New Zealander with Australian citizenship."
 "Yep, you like her."
 "What part of 'I do not' do you not understand? I'm trying to work here."
 "We've already established that he's not going to be taken note of. And I understand every part of it and more; you're trying to change the subject because you don't want to admit it. That's what you did with the princess."
 "I didn't do anything with the princess."
 Hunter rolled his eyes. "I'm not going to win this, am I?"
 "No."
 Hunter didn't say anything for a while, just staring at the hologram of Teri's profile with great interest. "You know, you might be right. There are no records of her anywhere past her parents. Her records have nothing. Her school records barely say anything and no medical records either."
 Orion looked at his brother. "She just turned eighteen; maybe her records are slated."
 "No, that's only for criminal record," Hunter argued. "Medical records should be there right from the day she was born. All there is here is a scratchy birth certificate."
 "She has anxiety, is that enough for you?" Orion deadpanned.
 "How do you know?"
 "It's not hard to tell. Look, if you're so fussed about her medical records then I'll send her to the medical ward tomorrow, okay?"   Orion knew this was not what Hunter meant but somehow it had become a natural reaction for him to defend her. It was pathetic and ridiculous, especially when Orion had pointed this out first. But now he was sure she was just another innocent victim of the Empire with nowhere to call home, even if she was an illegal immigrant.
 Hunter smiled. "You're defending her because you like her."
 "I. Do. Not. Bring this up one more time and I'm calling Mum right now."
 Hunter shut his Port and folded its quadrants up into a thin rectangular prism, a light smiled still lingering on his face. "Fine, I'll back off. I just want to tell you that political leaders of countries of Africa are coming here for annual Union Day celebration in two days' time. I need you to pick ten of your best recruits to represent your troop of volunteers at the ceremony."
 Orion had been told of this by General Moore himself but he nodded anyway. He knew this celebration was a conference in disguise. After all, what better way to hide a secret political conference to discuss matters of war than behind the name of annual celebration that rejoiced union?
 "Okay, if that's all then I'm going to bed now," Orion said.   Just as Orion was about to exit the room, his brother yelled, "You like her, Orion!" So this is the end of Part 1, guys. Trouble is really going to start in Part 2. Word of advice: have a box of tissues nearby. :)

 

Part 2

Part 2 "Our greatest glory is not in never falling, but in rising every time we fall." - Confucius Stars look down to shake their heads, blood is shed on soils of red. Losing trust is losing hope, but to succeed you must cope.      
 Part 2 is dedicated to the brilliant Pennywithaney. She is an amazing writer and person. Go check out her fairy tale retellings! They are wonderful. Hi, everyone. Thank you for sticking with me so far.All your votes and comments are very much appreciated, in helping me win something in the Wattys! 


 

Chapter 12

The picture above shows the dress I based Teri's dress off in this chapter.                   Chapter 12
 Foundation Day was an official rest day, one where not even the morning run was required and Teri could sleep in from her night duty. When her port chimed with a notification, she hadn't expected it to be from Orion Kesswell. It couldn't have been an official message. His official messages were sent from a military port named CTOKesswell. Her sleepiness subsided immediately and she sat up in bed, quickly scanning her handprint on the screen. She should not be this excited. It was only a message.
 But it was a message from Orion.
 It simply said, "Come to the training room now."
 It sounded urgent. She looked at Danika's port on the bedside table but it hadn't chimed. He only needed her to come. She wasn't quite sure why but she rushed out of the room, nearly running into Emma and Lauren on the way as she quickly used her fingers as a makeshift hairbrush. She fixed up her clothes in the elevator so that it was somewhat decent, pulling down her shorts to cover more of her legs and pulling up the neckline of her top to cover her chest.
 Why do you bother? He doesn't care about you anyway.
 She slowed her heartbeat down and tried to come up with logical reasons as to why he needed her to come. Maybe she was being discharged. That was the only reason he would want to talk to her.
 Orion was leaning on the pile of mats in the corner when she unsurely stepped into the room. He looked at her then his eyes drifted to her legs and she tugged her shorts down. As he walked towards her, she could see he was holding a silver envelope.
 Stiffly, he said, "You are required to attend the Foundation Day ceremony this evening as a guest and a guard. Read this." He thrust the envelope towards her. "It'll tell you the requirements and bring it tonight."
 He spoke fast, almost too fast for her to comprehend. She took the envelope and he dashed out without another word, speed walking down the hallway and into the elevator. If she hadn't known better, she would've thought he was nervous. But because she did, she guessed that he was probably in a rush, preparing for tonight like everyone else.
 She carefully eyed the envelope, something she hadn't seen very often. It was exactly like the one Orion had given Jill yesterday, as well as a few other people. She waited until she was back in the sleeping quarters to open it. Emma and Lauren were surprised to see the envelope in her hands and quite honestly, she was too. Yesterday, he seemed to have handed the envelopes out to the best people in the platoon. She definitely was not one of them.
 "Oh, my God," someone exclaimed. "Is that an invitation?"
 Danika was fixing a clip into her fringe to keep it out of her face as she scurried towards her. Jill followed, frowning at the envelope in Teri's hands.
 "Yes. Um, Captain just gave this to me."
 "What, just now?" Jill asked incredulously. "How the hell does he expect you to get ready for the biggest event of the year in less than ten hours?"
 Teri took out the folded piece of paper from the envelope and skimmed through it. It specifically said to wear formal clothing but had to be able to conceal a gun or long range weapon of some kind in case of unexpected situations, especially when all leaders of the Southern Union were going to be in one place.   "Why did he pick you?" Jill continued. "No offence but Danika can defend herself better than you and she's not invited."
 "I think - I think he made a mistake," Teri said in agreement, even though it hurt a little.

  Danika sat on the bed next to Teri and cried, "No, he didn't! Don't you see? He kept an invitation because he wanted to invite you but wasn't sure if he should or not. If that doesn't scream love, then nothing does."
 Danika was so sure of herself, grinning from cheek to cheek, and Teri wanted to believe it. But alas, she was not foolish enough to think that. So she just politely smiled and shook her head, blushing. Maybe Orion only decided to invite her because she had been able to shoot a holographic bullet at him yesterday during field training. After all, that shot had won her team the victory. Yes, that had to be it.
 "You're stretching it, Danika," Jill told the overexcited woman with a bored expression. "I think he likes you but love is going too far. That guy doesn't have a heart. Enough with this anyway. We need to get Teri a dress in town today."
 Teri wasn't too sure how she ended up in a boutique in the bustling town. Everyone was busy preparing for the celebration tonight by pinning up Southern Union flags and hanging them up in windows. The whole town was covered in white, yellow and green stripes of the flag; white representing peace, yellow representing wealth and green representing prosperity.   It was a lot like travelling through the town during Chinese New Year with her mother when she was younger. People were rushing everywhere, decorating their houses and shops with streamers and flashing lights for tonight. The Revival in China had made the New Year celebration festive and colourful, sweet aroma of spices, desserts and scented candles wafting around the streets as she'd travelled down in the royal carriage.
 Beautiful lanterns would light up the night and candles would float down the river on lotus leaves. Majestic dragons and lions would dance around the cities and suburbs to the upbeat rhythm of musicians. Red packets would be hidden in trees and crevices of streets by the generous for curious children to find.
 She wanted to go home. She hadn't looked back since she'd left and now, all she wanted was to run back and find Lifen, her mother figure when her mother couldn't be around. She would swim across the seas just to be able to see her home again, to relive the life she once had. Just once; maybe for the last time.
 Danika's jerk at her elbow stopped Teri from freezing solid in the middle of the shop. Teri let Danika pick out a dress for her, provided it was modest, because there was something she wanted to do. Plus, Danika was almost begging on her knees because Jill hadn't let her choose a dress for her.
 "This one?" Danika held up an emerald green dress with long sleeves but the neckline was far too low and would put the metal patches of her heart on show.   "No, thank you," she declined, moving to a mannequin wearing a beautiful pale pink sleeveless dress that flowed out from the waist like a flower, diamond studs and pearls elegantly decorating the waistline and the neckline. It was not the exact one but it was very similar to the one she'd seen in the window of a shop in Nyiup, the one Marci had fawned over countless times but was too expensive for Nina to buy.
 "Excuse me," she said to a sales assistant nearby. "May I buy this?"
 The girl, about the same age as Jill, smiled and nodded enthusiastically. "Of course! I'll take a new one out from the back. The same size?"
 Teri nodded and the girl disappeared behind a door the back of the boutique.
 "But that's too big for you, Teri," Danika said.   "It's for a friend," she explained.
 Danika sighed in relief. "Thank goodness! Because, look: I'd found the perfect one for you. And it comes with matching gloves," she sang.

  She was holding up a blue satin dress that flowed all the way down to her ankle but had a split on the side, somewhat covered by glittery blue sheer material that wrapped around the skirt of the dress. The neckline was perfect too; a V-shape that curved around her shoulders and a silver piece of fabric covering the shoulders in a pattern fit for a warrior. On Danika's other hand were long gloves made from the same glittery material that covered the skirt.
 "It's perfect," she told her.
 Before returning to the base, Teri dropped by the post office. She packed the pink dress in a box, wrapped it with gift paper and mailed it to Marci.  
 Prime Minister Harriet Campton was giving a long and tedious speech on the podium in front of the giant chamber filled with over a thousand officials and leaders to commence the celebration.   Orion was seated near a table of political leaders from Africa, along with Hunter and his parents. His eyes discreetly memorised as many faces as possible and his hand was never too far from the gun at his belt, finding comfort in the weight of the weapon that rested next to him.
 Darren was a few tables away with the soldiers from their platoon, dressed fashionably like everyone else in the room. And like many others they possessed weapons hidden beneath their clothes. He glanced at Teri. She was beautiful with her hair let down - for the first time ever - to frame her face in waves. He tried not to let his eyes linger too long on her before turning his attention back onto the prime minister.   Orion had never been a fan of speeches, finding them awfully dull and distracting. Unfortunately for him it was followed by three other guest speakers and he put this time to use by looking around the room for possible emergency exits and hiding places.   Something was in the air; he could feel it on the hairs on his nape. It was the sense of dread just around the corner, one he didn't want to go poke with a stick but at the same time was curious of.
 He glanced at Hunter. He was looking at the man speaking on the podium, seemingly unaware of the dread Orion was feeling. Hunter, unlike him, normally did not mind such extravagant celebrations with a lot of people.
 The sense of dread still lingered even after the speeches had finished, tables cleared out of the chamber to make room for entertainment and dancing. A band of musicians was playing uplifting orchestral music at the front and the political leaders have resorted into the private conference, only leaving other guests and soldiers in the chamber to socialise amongst each other.
 Orion stood by his brother and parents as they discussed the economical state of the country with a guest from Nigeria. Orion needed to talk to Hunter urgently. He tried to send discreet messages to his mum by occasionally looking out to the floor where a few couples waltzed to the music. Without intending to, he spotted Teri with Jillian and Emma on the other side of the hall, near an exit.
 Teri was talking with a small smile on her face, subconsciously touching her thigh where her gun was strapped to her leg under her dress. A man Orion recognised from Captain Joyce's platoon approached them, his back turned on Orion. He couldn't see the man's face but Teri's shocked expression was clear on her face as he said something to her.   She glanced at Jill uncertainly and Jill's eyes met his. She smirked at him before pushing Teri straight into the man, almost making her fall down if he hadn't stuck his arms out and caught her. Jill was a force to be reckoned with. Orion suddenly regretted inviting her, and Teri.
 Teri smiled awkwardly at the man as he led her onto the floor and began to dance, putting his arms around her. Orion did not endure a sleepless night of debate to see this. He'd spent hours arguing with himself whether he should invite her or not. He wanted to invite her because maybe he could've snuck in a dance with her but on the other hand she was nowhere near being the top ten soldiers in his platoon. 

  Inviting her would've aroused suspicion and risked ruining his reputation. But he mustered up the courage and got over his pride and gave the invitation to her this morning. He didn't do that just to see this.
 Hunter whispered in Orion's ear, "You, little brother, have it bad."
 Orion ignored him and nodded at something the guest had said, following along with his parents' nods and thoughtful expressions but not really paying attention.
 The nameless man turned to the brothers and then back to his beaming parents and praised them for bringing up such successful sons. The conversation continued on again and Hunter finally excused themselves away, claiming they had duties to carry out. He dragged Orion to a corner that looked the least occupied. The sense of dread was one thing but Orion kept his head up above the crowd, looking for a certain familiar face.
 "Come one, give me a kiss," Hunter said as soon as they arrived, puffing his cheek and sticking it out in front of Orion's face. "I know you want to for saving your desperate backside."
 Orion cringed and pushed his brother's face out of his own. He crinkled his nose and said, "I'll leave the kissing for Alison when you propose to her tonight, okay? I wanted to ask if you feel it, too. That feeling, like something is going to happen."
 "Yeah. I'm going to propose to Allison."
 Orion gave him a look.
 "Alright," Hunter sighed with a smile. "No, I don't feel it and frankly I was not expecting that question. I assumed this would be about a certain Chinese girl because you kept staring at her. You're just being paranoid as always, Orion."
 "I'm serious, Hunter," he argued. "I can just feel it."
 "I don't think that's what you're feeling."
 "Gods above! Are you even listening?"
 Hunter's hands clasped on his shoulders and he shook him. "I'm listening and I'm hearing. I know what you're getting at but no one would be stupid enough to try anything with five hundred guards outside and everyone inside armed. Live a little, Orion. Tonight is a night for celebration so go and have fun. Just this once, for me."
 He kept silent, absorbing in what Hunter had said. Maybe his brother was right; no one would be stupid enough but he still couldn't shake that feeling off him. It was like a limp that he couldn't hide. Hunter's stance was steeled and Orion knew that he was not backing down. He sighed.
 "Enlighten me on how to 'live' and 'have fun'."
 "To live is to experience new things and to have fun is to allow yourself to appreciate the beauty around you once in a while. But because you're Orion Kesswell, I'm going to have to spell it out for you: go and ask that girl to dance with you. Ester is her name, right?"
 "Asteri," he corrected.
 Hunter smiled. "Go get her. That's an order."
 With that he left and disappeared into the crowd, presumably to find Captain Joyce. On the dance floor Darren was spinning Jill around to the music without a care in the world. The way he looked at her shocked him. His friend couldn't actually have cared for her, could he? Watching them now, it was clear that even though Jill looked utterly bored it was a different story for Darren.
 What is the world coming to?
 He had to stop psychoanalysing everything. Hunter was right; he was too paranoid.
 He stopped caring about what people were going to say. It wasn't against the law to dance with a girl. It wasn't going to affect the way he performed as a captain either.

  He looked out to the dance floor but Teri was no longer there or anywhere in the room. There was the guy she'd been dancing with, talking to some people and Orion exhaled in relief. This meant that there was only one place Teri could've ventured to.  
 The garden of Parliament House was deserted except for the guards standing at their posts or patrolling the grounds. The air was crisp and bitter, the cold biting at Teri's skin through the sheer material of her gloves, mist condensing every time she breathed out.   The senator she'd been assigned to had left for the conference, leaving her with nothing to do. A dance with the man named Jason was slow and stuffy from all those people packed into one room. More people meant more chances of her being recognised - although, who'd pay attention to her? Out here, under the stars, she was almost at home.   She gingerly touched the star pendant at her chest and sighed, her eyes seeking out for that one star that was never there. What do I do, mama? Please tell me. Just give me a sign.
 "I thought I'd find you here," a deep voice said behind her.
 Orion was strolling towards her, looking even more handsome in a captain's uniform; a dark green coat with insignia of two silver bars on each shoulder and pressed black pants. Strung on the side of his belt was a gun - SM52, she suspected - which reminded her of her own loaded revolver at her leg. Orion looked down at her hand that rested on the revolver.
 "Stop touching it or you might shoot your own foot," he warned, but his tone was light.
 She swept stray strands of hair out of her face and tucked it behind her ear. His eyes followed her hands. "It's a real gun," she said lamely.
 He just chuckled, a sound her heart skipped a beat at no matter how many times she'd heard it. "You look nice," he said casually.
 She almost choked as she uttered, "T-Thank you." Hesitantly she added, "You look nice too."
 "Dance with me."
 She started and stared at him, mouth agape. Did she hear right? No, no, she couldn't have. Captain Kesswell would never ask a recruit to dance with him, especially her. He respected the rules too much for it - but he was looking at her as if he was expecting a reply.
 Orion tapped his foot on the ground though he didn't seem impatient. "Teri, can I have a dance?" he repeated.
 "But... You're my captain."
 Orion shrugged as he stole a glance at the noisy building, swallowing. "Well, then. I'm ordering you to dance with me."
 Something told her this shouldn't happen and that it was wrong. Deep down inside her though, she was bubbling with joy. She may have been a princess but Rovina was the one whom everyone instantly fell in love with. She had always been the wallflower, the one ignored even by her own father. She'd never thought that she would ever be asked for a dance. Twice in one night!
 She bit her lip to hide her grin and curtseyed. Orion bowed and took her hand, placing a palm on the small of her back as he moved her to the music from the building. She dimmed her excitement down to not seem so eager but inside, she was soaring. She could've flown to the moon and back a thousand times.
 "You dance very well," Orion said, spinning her around then reeling her back into his arms. His tone was complimentary but his eyebrows were drawn together, peering down at her as if he suspected something.
 She gulped and looked away. She was supposed to be a simple girl from a village on the outskirt of China. She wasn't supposed to know ballroom dancing.
 "I-I learnt it from a friend," she said hastily. "I-I lost him...during the uprising."
 Orion fell silent. Teri peeked up at him from between the strands of her fringe. He was staring at her so intently but his eyes were soft. The colourful lights decorated around them lit up his entire face, shading in the contours with hues of blues, reds, yellows and greens. His sparkling eyes were impossible to look away from and his hand, softly resting on her back, spread warmth through her and chased away the cold. What if he was the sign she'd asked for?
 The music came to an end and she made a move to slip out of his hold, disappointed, but his hands didn't let go. Instead, he pulled her in so that she was pressed against his chest. He could surely have felt her heart beating like a stampede of wild animals.   She nibbled on her bottom lip. "Orion, the song..." she trailed, cut off by his darkened eyes on her lips.
 Her eyes fell on his lips, memorising the rise and fall of the perfect bow, tainted by the scar that ran down it. She wondered how he got that scar; how it would feel against her own lips. Despite herself, she rose onto the balls of her feet, her shaking hands on his shoulders. Orion tilted his head and her eyes fluttered close on their own accord, holding her breath in anticipation.   He brought his head down slowly until his lips hovered just above hers, until she could almost feel them moulding -
 BOOM!
 Until an explosion interrupted and the entrance of the Parliament House came tumbling down.  I just want to say a HUGE thank you to everyone who has helped me reached a magnificent rank of #17 in Science Fiction! THANK YOU. And please don't kill me when I post the next chapter. 
 


 

Chapter 13

The necklace above looks pretty much exactly the same as the one I'd imagined for Teri's heirloom, except it's supposed to be gold instead of silver. Dedicated to pumpkincheesecake for being awesome and for shipping Orion and Teri as much as I do. :)
      

                 Chapter 13
 The ground shook and debris flew from the building. Orion swore. Half of the entrance of Parliament House had collapsed, littering bricks and glass on the floor and steps leading up to the giant doors, along with a couple of uniformed bodies of guards. Teri gasped and he immediately stepped in front of her as sounds of gun shots began inside the building. Screams filled the air and people started to scramble out over the pile of the destroyed entrance in panic.
 Hunter was wrong.   Natural instincts took over his body, pushing out the shock, and he pulled his gun into his hands in one swift move before he raced up the steps.
 "Orion!" Teri yelled but she followed him up.
 He was about to snap at her to stay away when he remembered that he had been preparing her for this; she was a soldier, too, and her duty was to protect her assigned leader. As he climbed up the rubble, fighting against the flood of people rushing in the opposite direction, he looked back to see that she was fumbling with the skirt of her dress to arm herself. He should not have invited her.
 He pushed that regret away and shoved against panicked bodies until he was inside the hall. Soldiers were guiding their assigned leaders out of the building in groups, covering them as they blindly shot up at the galleries. Orion looked up. Behind each pillar on the gallery were two guards in uniform - around sixty in total, shooting down at the people on the ground, more specifically the politicians. It was clear they had the upper hand.
 Releasing the safety, Orion positioned his gun and aimed. Just as he fired, Teri screamed his name and shoved him, his bullet missing target by a mile. He stumbled forward and bumped into a soldier rushing for cover. He didn't bother to apologise to her and span around to find Teri.
 She was breathing heavily, her mouth ajar and eyes wide as she let out shaky pants. Orion grabbed her hand and pulled her behind table flipped on its side near the wall with red stains on the fallen-off white tablecloth. She was still panting, sweat beading her forehead.
 "Teri, what's wrong?" he demanded, holding her shoulders with both hands.
 She eyes fell on her torso and he followed her gaze. Her gun was gone. Her arm that wrapped around her waist and the gloved hand clutching at her side loosened, peeling away. Blood covered her hand and drenched the side of her blue dress, turning it dark purple.   Frack.
 Orion cussed again and again. He leaned her back against the wall, Teri wincing silently with every move.
 A bullet flew past his head and hit the wall but his attention was solely on Teri's wound. He tore her dress where the bullet put a hole in it, carefully examining the small bloodied hole in her stomach that was still spewing out blood. There was a bullet in there; what type, he couldn't tell - the guns were too far away for him to see. Orion swore again. That bullet would've been in him. It should've been in him.
 "I'm fine," she croaked, pushing his hands away from her and attempted to stand up.
 "Don't you dare," he ordered and put a hand on her shoulder.
 He grabbed the tablecloth and ripped a long strip off. He would've appeared calm but inside he was shaking. He was shaking because Teri was still bleeding even as he wrapped the strip of cloth around her waist as makeshift bandage, unable to pay even the slightest bit of attention to the gun shots still being fired. He was shaking because that bullet could've contained poison that could leave her dead in less than five minutes.

  She tried to protest and escape, clutching her wound as she tried to get back on her feet. But Orion pinned her with his glare every time.   "I need to find Senator Tinibu! He's in danger," she pleaded in desperation when he stopped her from moving again.
 A bolt of frustration surged through him and he snapped, "I don't care! He can be dead for all I care but you're wounded and unarmed. Don't even think about getting back out there." What he meant was; I don't want you in danger.
 Orion ignored the chaos behind him, people falling dead from the galleries and soldiers carrying the wounded and dead out in frenzy, and wrapped another strip of makeshift tablecloth bandage around Teri's waist. This time, she kept quiet and watched him in a way that made him want yell at everyone to cut it out so that he could finish what they'd started in the garden. Her huge eyes were hypnotic and her habit of biting her lips was annoyingly attractive.
 Focus, you piece of... he left his thought to trail, making sure blood was not seeping through the bandage anymore. He looked up at her.
 "Don't move," he said, softer than he'd intended. "I mean it, Teri."
 He grabbed his blaster and looked over edge of the table. A general taking cover behind a potted plant was yelling to shoot to kill. Orion lowered the aim of his gun but his finger on the trigger paused. He'd been aiming for three inches just above a man's head and now it would go straight through his forehead. The blaster's auto target-tracking meant it was impossible to miss. He was acutely aware of Teri staring at him in horror out of the corner of his eyes.
 He threw a quick glance at her and she was looking at him as if he'd already murdered a man. He looked away, no longer able to pull the trigger. She'd hate him if he pulled it while it was aimed at that man's head. Sense of duty was not worth it.
 He shifted his aim and shot, stream of laser hitting right on target at the gun in his hands but not before another bullet from the man's gun left the barrel and a soldier on the ground dropped. There were only thirty-three rebels left on the galleries, Orion counted.   A woman's voice crackled in the speakers around the chamber, ordering the rebels to cease fire and their lives would be spared. It was Prime Minister Campton. Before she could speak another word a sharp cry echoed out, followed by people yelling out her name. He couldn't see this happening but he knew the woman was gone.
 The general behind the plant pot began to send soldiers up to the galleries and his eyes fell on Orion, telling him to go up. Orion looked at Teri and shook his head at the general. It registered to him that this was the first time he'd ever disobeyed a direct order but he couldn't care less.
 Upon seeing soldiers begin to surround them on the galleries from either side, the rebels redirected their guns onto them, retreating slowly. The only way up or down the galleries were the two elevators, ones where hoards of soldiers occupied. It was a bucketful of soldiers against a spoonful of idiots.
 "Cease fire and put down your weapons," another voice took over the speakers and this time he recognised it as General Moore's.   The chamber was now silent in anticipation, with bullets at the ready from both sides. But thankfully, the idiots were smart enough to know they'd lost. They threw their guns down at their feet and held their hands up in surrender, except for one man. He began to yell in Chinese and behind Orion, Teri gasped.
 Until that moment, Orion had forgotten Teri was from the Empire and she could easily have been on the rebels' side. When Orion turned around, her head turned away, her hand at her waist. 

  General Moore gave orders to apprehend the rebels, the chaos finally dying down. Orion helped Teri stand, slipping an arm under her shoulders.
 "Orion, I'm fine," she insisted meekly.
 He stared down at her and refused to believe that, taking her to the large group of people at the back of the hall who were treating the wounded. Outside, sirens blared and seconds later medics were racing inside with stretchers and first aid kits.
 Orion sat Teri down among the people with less severe injuries, finally relieved that the bullet hadn't contained poison. He placed both his hands on her shoulders and crouched down in front of her.
 "I'm going to go find everyone from our platoon," he told her over the sounds of people moaning and shouting. "Stay here and wait for someone to get to you. If you move, you'll start bleeding again and you can die. Okay?"
 She nodded with a grimace. Her breathing was heavier now and her face was pale. Orion told himself she'd be fine as long as she didn't move. The bullet was far enough from her centre to not have ruptured vital organs and her bleeding seemed to have stopped.
 He left her there and walked around, dragging dead soldiers to line them up in a corner. There were at least fifty already in line and there were dozens more scattered on the floor, blood pooling around their bodies. Orion felt sick. He had never seen so many people dead. The sight and scent of blood gushing out of wounds like cherry red rivers nauseated him.   No amount of training could have prepared him for this. Even though he knew battles meant casualties, he had never imagined so many would die such horrific deaths. He never knew there'd be so much bloodshed. And the war hadn't even begun.
 One of the casualties was Harrison with a clean shot through his forehead. He was a man of only twenty-six years, with a family and a boyfriend whom he'd been engaged to for two years.
 Orion balled his hands into fists and clenched his jaws, shutting his eyes as rage burned. He wanted to kill every single one of those rebels. He wanted to give them long painful deaths. But most of all, he blamed himself for Gregor Harrison's death. A good captain protected his men. Where was he when Harrison died?   Jillian was closing a woman's eyes as Orion hauled Harrison over his shoulders. He laid the man down beside the woman Jillian was closing the eyes of with extra care.   "Teri's been shot," he told her. "Can you go and stay with her to make sure she's fine?"
 She stared at him with those big challenging eyes before she nodded and left. He knew she was well aware of his feelings for her friend and nothing he said or did would convince her otherwise. But frankly he was too tired to care. He was too tired to care about dead soldiers; his men; his feelings or anyone who knew.
 He went around the chamber and outside searching and counting his men, too numb to keep lining up the deceased. Harrison was the only man from his platoon who died but that did not change the fact that he died under Orion's care. The others, all except Teri and Emma Bane, had stuck to their assigned leaders and escaped outside with them. Fortunately Bane had managed to keep out of bullets' way.
 "Teri, stop it!" Jillian was shouting when he went back inside.
 His eyes snapped up at the sound of Teri's name. Jillian was holding Teri's arm and the younger girl was jerking her shoulder frantically to free herself. Her face was pale as snow now and her eyes were losing focus, pupils contracting and dilating as if they couldn't decide what they wanted to do. She was crouched over with a hand on her wound as she desperately tried to get away, her feet stumbling. The blotch of blood on the bandage had grown and now covered her whole side, descending down the side of her dress in dark streaks.
 Orion raced over without a second thought. Teri managed to jerk her arm out of Jillian's grip, the momentum making her fall back - straight into his arms. He steadied her and held her up by her shoulders. She was about to collapse.
 "What do you think you're doing? I told you to stay there!"
 Her hands gripped his arms tightly and her hazed eyes tried to find his as she rasped, "Please! I lost my necklace. I need to find it, it was my mother's! Help me."
 The blue shooting star necklace on her chest was gone and had been for a while. She hadn't had it on her since she pushed him out of the bullet's way.   "You're bleeding too much. I'm taking you back."
 "No! It's more important to me than anything!"
 Orion wanted to yell, "Nothing is more important than your life," but he pressed his lips together to keep his mouth shut.
 Suddenly her grip on his arms loosened, her eyes rolled into her eyelids and she slumped. He cursed and scooped her up before she could hit the ground, the intensity of panic and fear far greater than Orion had ever experienced before.   He sprinted to the medics, demanding she be treated at once. A young woman dropped the roll of bandage she was holding and rushed over, checking the wound on the girl in Orion's arms.
 "Hurry!" he begged.
  Why on earth would you do this, Teri?   The woman yelled for a stretcher and a man raced over with an anti-grav stretcher in tow. Orion gently placed Teri on it, praying for her to be fine. She looked almost lifeless when he watched the man steer the stretcher into an ambulance with other wounded soldiers and drive off to the nearest hospital.
 "She'll be fine," Jillian said but it felt more like she was trying to convince herself rather than reassure him.
 "Orion!" Darren's voice came over the sounds of everything else. It was urgent and demanded all ounces of attention Orion could muster at that moment. Darren raced over, his face painted with worry. The familiar feeling of dread crept back into Orion again and this time, he didn't doubt it one bit.
 "You need to see this," Darren said quietly.
 Darren began speed walking away and Orion followed, wondering what he could possibly have needed to see. Then something blue and shiny on the dark red carpet caught his eyes. It was Teri's necklace but now the gold chain was broken. He picked it up and rubbed his thumb along the tiny blue gems of star and the tail.
 "Orion!" Darren snapped. "Come on."
 He shoved the necklace into his pocket and continued. With every step Orion took as he followed Darren, anticipation grew and grew until he was clenching his jaws hard enough to hurt. Something was wrong, very wrong. He didn't realise Darren was taking him to the deceased people until they were halfway there. Orion hoped he was going to show him that Harrison had died. He hoped he didn't have to see anyone else.
 But a familiar blonde woman sat on the floor with her back turned towards him, clutching someone to her chest and weeping. It wasn't Harrison. It was a man in uniform. And it wasn't his father either because he was approaching the woman and the soldier from the opposite direction.
 "Darren... That's not him, right?" Orion asked desperately. "Darren, tell me that's not him."
 Darren only stared back at him with sad eyes and that was all the confirmation Orion needed to make him run like hell.   In his mother's arms was the one person Orion loved the most. He let go of the edge of emotions he'd been clinging onto all night and fell into a black hole of numbness. All he could see was the dead man with closed eyes and blood-soaked chest. All he could see was the corpse of Hunter Kesswell, his only brother and hero.
 Orion would never forget the day he became an only child. Sorry for the short chapter but I didn't want to add anything else because it'd take away the impact. This was what I meant by people wanting to kill me. My excuse: if you've seen Disney's Mulan, you'll have seen this coming. So it's not entirely my fault if I somehow do succeed in breaking some hearts. :)

 

Chapter 14

                  Chapter 14
 Orion didn't wear black to Hunter's funeral.   When Hunter was sixteen they'd had a conversation under the tree on the edge of the football field at school. Orion had just entered high school at age twelve and he was a short and chubby boy, always being picked on by his classmates. Hunter would always come and save him.
 "You're going off to university in one and a half years and I'll be stuck in this hellhole with those bastards!" Orion had yelled in frustration.   It was then that Hunter broke the news to Orion that he'd enlisted in the army. Orion was so stunned he couldn't speak. Even two years prior high school graduation, Hunter had already been scouted by several top universities in Australia. Given their parents' occupations, the news should've been no surprise but Orion had thought that Hunter had always wanted to become a doctor. Orion told him he'd enlist too, when he was sixteen.
 Hunter said that their mother would skin Orion alive if he'd told her that, which had brought on the discussion of each other's funerals. Hunter fell quiet at one point and kept looking up at the sky through the leaves of the tall gum tree.   Then he abruptly said, "Don't wear black to my funeral."
 Orion asked, "Why?"
 Hunter replied with a lob-sided grin, "Because what's the point of being solemn when it's the last party anyone is ever going to throw you?"
 So Orion wore green, Hunter's favourite colour: the colour of Alison Joyce's eyes.
 He stood next to Hunter's casket. In the background, he was aware of crying, words of condolences and loud, loud weeping. He wanted to tell every single one of them to go dig their own graves because it was so fracking obvious they weren't real tears. He wanted to chase them out of his home because no one actually cared about Hunter, not in the way Orion did. He would murder whoever had killed his brother.
 He wanted to scream and shout and cry until he no longer could. Until he no longer felt as if someone was standing on his chest. Until his brother in the casket opened his eyes and told him it was just a joke – the way he did when they were children.
 This is a cruel joke, Hunter. Just get up, it's not funny anymore.
 Orion's hand reached out to open the lid of the casket but stopped, then slowly took his hand back to his side. He was going to see if Hunter's eyes were open. But the last eighteen times had disappointed him. The nineteenth time would be no different. He would yet again be faced with Hunter's face, eyes closed, skin colourless and hollow from the first three days of eternal sleep. And his mum would yell at him in hysterics for not letting her eldest son rest in peace.   His dad would tell him that Hunter was gone.
 Hunter was buried that afternoon. He wanted that. He didn't want to be cremated because he knew his remaining family would keep his ashes and it'd be a constant reminder to hurt those he loved. He was selfless, even after he'd left them.
 Orion was not that selfless. He couldn't muster up the will to say the eulogy Hunter would've liked him to say. All those years ago, Hunter had asked him to say a eulogy and to make it funny so that people didn't have to be depressed. He wasn't being serious, not back then because it was just a joke. But it wasn't a funny one.
 Darren wore blue, Hunter's former favourite colour before he'd met Alison. He stood next to Orion, watching his mum break down again as she spoke to the guests.   "Hunter wouldn't want us to be sad," Darren said.
 "Hunter's dead."
 "Orion, I know you're in pain but for the sake of your brother, try to be happy."

  And Orion did.   For the rest of the afternoon, he went around and talked to people, played games with children of guests and most of all, he smiled and tried to lighten the mood, albeit it hadn't worked very well. People stared at him and talked behind their hands. Didn't he have any respect for his older brother? Why wasn't he mourning? Why was he fooling around with children?   But screw them all because they didn't know Hunter. This was exactly what he would've done had the roles been reversed and Orion was six feet under instead. It was time to stop dreaming about becoming a man as great as Hunter. It was time to turn that dream into reality.
 Orion returned to base the day after Hunter's funeral for the commemoration to honor those from the base who lost their lives during the attack. Even if he was not required to attend Orion would not have stayed home, because around every corner was Hunter. There were family photos in the living room; on the kitchen table was the vase Hunter made in year 6 that was now home to plastic petunias; his favorite pair of shoes on the shoe stand in the hallway and Jess, Hunter's twelve-year-old golden retriever he rescued from the storm when she was just a puppy.
 Even Jess wandered around the house like Orion, whining constantly and clawing at the door of Hunter's room. His mum locked herself in her room, her wails echoing throughout the house and his dad mindlessly watched the VidScreen, a bottle of beer in one hand. It was one in the morning. This was much more painful than anything he'd ever felt. And he was so very angry at Hunter for it.
 He knew he should be here to pick up the pieces of broken hearts Hunter had left behind. But he couldn't pick up his parents' hearts and stitch up their lives when he couldn't fix his own. If he stayed, he'd end up joining his father on the couch. He'd waste the next year or so of his life away and he'd never get to follow Hunter's last orders, his last words to him.
 Go get her. That's an order.
 So Orion came back to Hail Creek Base. He'd return Teri's necklace, one that he never took off him. He'd kiss her until they were both found; somewhere amidst the heartbreak they'd endured. He hoped she could offer some sort of comfort to ease the pain in his chest. And most of all, he'd stay alive because he promised Hunter he would.  
 Teri's secret was out.
 When she opened her eyes, all she could see was white, and then she was looking at grey tiles with strips of light in the ceiling. She smelled cold, sterile scent of hospitals before she realized she was in one. She remembered pushing Orion and the pain that erupted in her stomach. There were sounds of gunfire, and red. There was a lot of red. She was shot and then she'd fainted. Even this she couldn't have been too sure of.
 "Ah, good, you're awake," a deep voice said, a hint of excitement in his tone.
 A graying man sat next to her with a smile on his face. He was wearing a white coat and had a port in his hand.   "I'm Dr. Marvin. You've just got out of surgery a couple of hours ago," he explained and Teri's mind fought hard to keep up with his words. "The bullet didn't tear any vital organs but it penetrated pretty far in that we didn't want to risk it. If you'd gotten here a moment later, you would've been in critical condition from losing too much blood."
 "Thank you, Doctor," she murmured, but couldn't quite understand what he was saying. Her mind was fuzzy and clouded.
 The doctor cocked his head at her and looked down from her eyes and at her chest. Fascination colored his every feature as he suddenly asked, "Why did you feign your own death, princess?"

  And the world snapped in place. Great stars. He knew. She gripped the sheets in her hands and tried to deny his words but nothing came out of her agape mouth. She could only lie there in shock, pleading - pleading for him to tell her that no one else knew and that he had not told a single soul.
 "Don't worry, princess; I'm the only one who knows. I made sure of it," he reassured, holding up his hand. "I am wondering why you could possibly have felt the need to deceive the whole world."
 The doctor's features were kind and his words sounded sincere. He didn't seem to have much hope for hearing her story, though he waited. But she couldn't tell him, for somewhere in those grey-blue eyes was also judgment. To him, she was a crazy teenage girl who ran away from home. Telling him of her true intentions would only land her in a mental asylum. Besides, she didn't know him at all to put such trust into this man.
 "I know things," she muttered. "I have confidential information about the Empire and please believe me, Doctor; I'm here to help you. You don't know what you're going against. The whole world is in danger and it is not just because of the war."   He eyed her curiously and she could see it in his eyes. He thought she was stupid. "You are aware that I have to report you, right?"
 "Please don't!" she begged, sitting up abruptly, pain bolting through her body. "Please. I have to tell someone myself. And I will. Please don't report me, Doctor."
 The man smiled and shook his head. "I'm going to be very unprofessional and make a deal with you. I will not report you if you let me study your heart."
 "My heart?"
 Dr. Marvin nodded. "Your heart is a rare successful synthetic-mechanical heart, princess. You must understand that doctors like me don't get to study successful full-organ transplants like that very often. It would be my greatest honour if you would let me in exchange for me to keep your secret."
 "How long will you take?"
 "Until you're well enough to be released."
 Any other day, maybe she would've thought about this more but now, still under the effect of heavy anesthetics, she agreed without much thought. It was better than being exposed so suddenly without time to prepare.
 She spent the next two days at the hospital, devising a plan to break this news to Orion. He would listen to her. He always had. Even so, she could not help being so ashamed that she'd lied to him and to the whole world. But mostly him. Because she'd been lying to the only person left on Earth who might've truly cared for her since the first day they'd met.
 War was around the corner now and she'd already wasted a month. Orion might hate her for it but this was a step she had to take.  
 Teri didn't know that six people from her base, including Commander Kesswell, had died that night until Danika attacked her with a hug as she got off the transport hover with other injured recruits. Two days later, the commemoration was a solemn affair, families of the deceased invited in honor of their beloved. Everyone was dressed in black and despite the high afternoon sun the world was dark and cold.   There was silent weeping from family members as the captains gave speeches of condolence. Captain Joyce broke into tears and uncontrollable sobs as she spoke and she couldn't continue anymore. Towers came and slowly coaxed her off the podium.   Orion then took the stage, dragging his feet across the floor before standing in front of the microphone. His cheeks were hollow and his beautiful eyes had lost the spark of life, the stars no longer shining but cupped by dark bags instead. 

  It hurt. Seeing him like this pulled up memories she'd pushed down eight months ago and it tore her inside out. She wrapped her arms around herself and squeezed her eyes shut, and then she was at her mother's funeral. She was so ashamed that she couldn't even look at the coffin that encased her mother. This was her doing. It was because of her stupidity that the Empress had died. She murdered her own mother.
 Her breath hitched and she forced her eyes open. Orion was staring at her, not speaking. Tears pooled in his eyes and in hers too, the same pain reflected in each other's. If she ran to him right at that moment, he would throw his arms around her and she'd do the same to him.   When Orion said a few words, it was short and monotonous, clearly fighting hard to keep himself going, probably out of respect for those who'd lost their lives. Hearing him so broken made her ache to swim across the sea of people and hold a hand out to him.
 "Their bravery and courage will never be forgotten," he said and then paused as he glanced over at her. Looking straight at her with those sad eyes he continued, "Someone once told me that warriors who fall in battle become the stars in our sky. As long as the stars live, our loved ones will too and they will continue to shine our path when we are in darkness."
 He dragged himself back over to his seat next to Captain Paruki and suddenly Teri couldn't breathe. She couldn't do this, not when he'd just said something like this. Because once she told him, she'd no longer be Asteri Verloren, the girl he'd watched the stars with. She'd become Athena Nightingale, the queen of lies.  
 The new Prime Minister Michael Belfore was making his first official appearance on live VidScreen at dinner that evening. He was in his late forties and had been a renowned politician for almost one and a half decades. Reporters shot questions at him from every direction and he answered every single one without as much as a stutter. He'd suspected the rebels had been sent from the Empire, though they refused to talk under any circumstances.
 Teri was certain they were. The leader of the group was a man she had seen around the palace with Rovina. And just as she'd recognized him immediately, he'd recognized her.
 The PM was saying Australia could declare war any day now – it had already suffered enough at the hands of terrorists from the Empire. If it were the case, the Union would stand beside Australia. America was also finally showing some interest in the matter too.   Teri got up from the table abruptly and left her friends, the three of them looking at her in confusion. She never had this under control but now, it was worse than it had ever been. She swallowed her dread and marched right over to the table where Orion sat with Darren and Holston.
 He nodded right away with eagerness and once again, she didn't want to go on with this. He wouldn't like what he was going to hear. He'd be appalled, betrayed, disgusted. Teri hugged herself and led him out of the dining hall; more specifically towards the dormitories. Some people oohed as they passed by.
 He didn't say a single word as he followed her inside the building. She couldn't go into the sleeping quarters; there were chances of other women coming in. So she took him upstairs and into the training room, shutting the door behind them. She didn't want to do it. It would kill him. And she'd die watching him.
 "Teri, you wanted to talk?" he reminded when she'd been staring at their feet for a long while.
 She gulped, sweat beading her forehead despite the cool air. "Orion, do you trust me?"
 His tired eyes narrowed and he tried to step closer but she held out her hands to stop him. He stopped his stride and cautiously answered, "Of course, I do. Why are you asking me this?"

  You are a horrible person, a voice sneered and cackled. But she gritted her teeth and clenched her hands into fists.
 "Please, listen to me and don't say anything," she pleaded. "I promise I will explain everything."
 She inhaled a deep breath... and began.
 "I'm so sorry, Orion but I'm not who you think I am." She paused and watched his eyebrows knit together. "And I realize the risk I'm putting you in by telling you this but we are all in greater danger than you think."
 "Who are you?"
 "Please listen. Emperor Alvah and princess Rovina have an-"
 "No," he interrupted her, eyes stormy. "You tell me who you are first."
 Teri sighed and confessed in a whisper, "I'm Athena, Orion."   "Athena's dead," Orion said, with enough accusation in his voice to make her cringe.   She expected this, she told herself. "I lied. I had to. Otherwi-"
 "Prove it. Prove to me that you're Athena."
 Teri almost groaned in frustration and without second thought, she pulled her shirt up to her neck, hands shaking. Orion's eyes were glued to her bra-clad chest, not in the way a man looked at a woman. But in the way one would look at a criminal.   She felt completely and utterly naked and ashamed because for the first time, he was finally seeing her for who she truly was. A deceiving freak of nature. She had never felt more exposed, not even when the doctors and scientists poked and prodded her after the accident. He stared at the plate of metal on her chest, small silver wires protruding out from it and slinking over her breasts before they disappeared into the fabric of her bra.   Orion gawked as if he couldn't believe this was happening, his eyes on fire.
 She pulled her shirt back down, arms wrapping around her torso and shrinking into herself. She murmured, "I had to find a way to tell everyone the truth and inside the palace, I have no power. If people knew who I was, nobody will listen to me because they think I'm... I'm insane."
 "You are insane," Orion said. He grabbed her shoulders and shook her as he furiously whispered, "Do you have any idea what you've done? You'll be imprisoned even if anyone believes what you have to say."
 She expected this, too, she tried to convince herself but a part of her had hoped Orion would be less angry with her. "You said you trusted Teri. Why is Athena different?"
 His hands let go of her shoulders and buried themselves in his hair in frustration. "How am I supposed to trust you when all you've been doing is lying to me this whole time? Was any of that real or was I just a pawn in your game?"
 I deserve this. "Orion, please listen to me. The real reason Rovina wants Australia is because-"
 "No," Orion stopped her, holding his hands up. "I won't listen because if I do, I'd have to report you and you'd end up in jail. You need to leave. Be out of town before ten, just go anywhere you can. I'll report you missing."
 Teri sucked in a short, sharp breath to hide her strangled cry. This was not how this confession was supposed to go!   "Orion, this is not about me. I will do whatever it takes to protect my people. If that means death then so be it. Imprisonment is nothing compared to the lengths I'd go to."
 "To me, this is about you! Okay? I'd rather never see you again than see you in jail – or dead – because you are now classified a spy, even if you are trying to help. You can be executed! I know this means war now and nothing you say is going to change that we are overpowered. Everyone here knows that we'd be crushed like insects! That's why I don't want you to be a casualty in this mess that's already happening anyway. Pack your bags and leave. Take out your chip; I'm sure you know how to."
 His bitter words sliced her chest open and plucked out her heart, wire by wire, tube by tube. She thought he'd understand. She thought he cared about his job enough to push aside his feelings and do what was right but she was wrong. She was only beginning to realize now that Orion cared for her more than she'd ever imagined and she'd broken him further than he already was.
 She stepped closer to Orion and rose to the balls of her feet before she wrapped her arms around him. It was a hug, to show that she cared. But he didn't hug her back and instead pulled her arms off him, face contorted in pain and disgust.
 "Okay," she managed to choke out. "I'll leave."
 She turned around to hide the tears pooling in her eyes. Orion sighed behind her and a few seconds later, she heard the door slide open and then close again automatically. He was right. She was insane. What could she possibly have hoped to achieve from this? The whole world knew Australia was doomed. Her warnings would not make a difference. She'd only been wasting her time.
 Swallowing back tears, she trudged to the sleeping quarters. All of the women were still at dinner, except for Lauren who was singing in the shower. She quickly threw all her belongings into her bag including M, whom she'd grown quite attached to over the past four weeks. Maybe she should leave a note for Danika and Jill, her first true friends. No, Orion wanted her to disappear. No traces left behind.
 And disappearing was easier than it should've been for she didn't need help getting lost, not when no one would find her.  
 5 Days Ago
 Rovina was in a war meeting when she received a message from Gen, who – right at this moment - was on the most important mission Rovina had ever entrusted him and his men with. A message was most probably not good news. But when she saw read it, she was even more outraged than she would've been had the message said any different. Unable to control herself, she clenched her hands into fists.
 "Ladies and gentlemen, it seems we require some change of plans. General Khan, please prepare a troop of three hundred soldiers, Class A. We have a princess to capture." Phew! A lot in this chapter. I'd love to hear what you guys think. :) I hope you're enjoying this so far.

 

Chapter 15

Chapter 15

 This was bad.   The little red dot on the map on Orion's port, the one he had stayed up all night to watch as it travelled along the railway, had fallen off the grid. The little red dot was supposed to be Teri – no, it was supposed to be Athena. She must've taken out her ID chip and now he hadn't a clue where she could be. She didn't have anywhere to go.
 Gods above. He buried his face in his hands, hiding the sight of the map on the table. He shouldn't care where she went. She wasn't the girl Orion had fallen for. She was a liar and he was nothing more than a stone she'd stepped on in the middle of the creek to get to the other side. He was delusional to believe he ever meant a thing to her.   And yet he cared.
 For one brief moment he forgot and stood up to go and talk to Hunter about this dilemma. Then he remembered and he slumped down in his chair. Hunter was gone. Teri was gone.   Why had she been there at all? She was going to tell him something but he'd stopped her. He couldn't even be kind enough to listen to what she had to say. But if Orion knew, the situation could've been worse because he'd have to report her before he could say anything to his superiors. Maybe it was better that he didn't know. Or was it? She'd already said something about the crown princess and the emperor having something. What was it? And she'd said it was Rovina who wanted Australia, not the emperor.   Why would Rovina want Australia? She was always involved in her projects and new scientific findings, according to the media.
 The audio interface informed him Darren was requesting entrance. Orion sighed and shook the questions out of his head but switched off his port and let him in. His friend was in uniform, unlike him and didn't have hair that resembled a bird's nest. Darren looked at him in sympathy as he made his way over to the table and sat down on the opposite side.
 "You couldn't sleep last night?"
 Orion shook his head and stared at the blank screen on his port as if it might decide to suddenly turn on and show him that the little red dot had appeared on the map again.
 "Do you want me to take over training today?" Darren offered.
 "Huh? Yeah, that's...good. Great."   Darren looked around the room as if he had something to say but didn't know how to say it. He eventually asked, "How are your parents?"
 "Mum still doesn't talk to anyone and dad's...I think he's stopped drinking. My cousin is living with them for now. I think she told me he stopped."
 Darren nodded. "That's not too bad, O. Alison is taking time off. Hunter proposed to her that night, did you know that?"
 "Yeah. It's a shame," Orion replied dryly.
 "Come on, Orion. It could be worse, you know," he tried to cheer him up but his eyes were still hiding something. Sometimes Orion hated that he could see through people so easily. If only I could've seen through Ter- Athena.
 "What is it, Darren?" he said in exasperation.
 Darren rubbed the back of his neck uncomfortably and cocked his head to the side. "Orion, don't freak out, okay? This is going to be hard on you, especially right now but..." he trailed.
 "Fracking hell, just say it!" he snapped.
 Darren sighed in defeat and mumbled, "Teri's gone."
 Oh. Orion just stared at Darren, itching to correct him. It wasn't Teri who was gone. Teri never existed. It was only a selfish princess who had to come in like a beautiful hurricane and turn his mess of a life upside down. But he didn't tell him that. Darren couldn't know about it, even if he was his closest friend. Knowing would only put Darren at risk of being punished for withholding information.

  "I know."
 Darren blinked in surprise. "What? How did you know? You didn't even come to breakfast. Jill and Danika just told me that she's been missing since last night and their comms aren't going through."
 "And they wouldn't," he muttered bitterly. "She's gone. She had to go, she doesn't belong here."   "Sorry, I'm confused. What do you mean she's gone? What are you talking about?"
 Orion shot up and yelled, "She's gone and she's never coming back! She should never have come here!"
 Darren's jaws tensed and his eyes hardened in a way Orion had seen his friend do only a few times before. He stood up slowly, leaned over the table, and said in a low voice, "I'm not taking your shit, Orion. I don't know what happened between you two last night but you probably deserve this." He paused to let his words sink in. "Come find me when you're ready to be civilized."
 Then Darren left, his footsteps echoing down the hallway and Orion was alone again in his quarters which now felt too big and empty and white and hollow. If he did deserve this, then he must've been hell of a bad person in his past life. Orion looked at his port again and finally decided the moping was enough. He needed sleep and he needed to get over his pathetic self-loathing and misery.   He needed to get over her, especially since she left him without even a complaint.   Not bothering to change the clothes he'd been wearing since last evening, Orion dove straight into bed. As he twisted onto his side, something dug into his thigh. He shoved his hand into the pocket of his pants and his fingers met something cold and bumpy. He wrapped them around the object and pulled it out, immediately regretting it.
 Teri's necklace rested on his palm, the broken chain dangling off it. He was going to give this to her last night, and then he would've kissed her. But he couldn't even hug her back. And now he was left with a reminder of her existence, a knife digging deeper into his wounds. Because no matter what he was to her or who she really was, he had fallen for her.
 Orion finally fell asleep with acceptance of his true feelings, clutching the necklace in his hand.   He dreamed of a ball in the palace in Shanghai, where the Imperial family lived. Teri was beautiful in a gold and red dress that fanned around her like flower petals. She was smiling at Orion in that utterly breathtaking way of hers as she came over to him. He stretched out his hand towards hers and she extended her arm to him. But she didn't stop walking or smiling and she walked and walked, right through him. She took the hands of another man behind Orion and pressed her lips to his.   This wasn't Teri; this was Princess Athena. And Orion was invisible to her.
 Orion's sleep, thankfully, was short lived, interrupted by the audio interface yet again. This time, the replacement commander, Commander Baxter was requesting entrance. He really didn't want to see the woman's face and it would've been easy to pretend he hadn't heard the request because he was asleep. But even Baxter was better than dreaming of her.
 He sat up and fixed himself up a little before going to open the door himself, shoving the necklace back into his pocket. Donna Baxter would've been an attractive woman, with her pin straight black hair, sapphire blue eyes and the body to accompany her face. However she was quite insufferable, especially now that she was standing in Hunter's place.
 Orion saluted when she came in but she only nodded at the door and a second later a man, probably in his sixties, entered after her. He was dressed in a black suit and tie, green contacts obvious in his eyes. Definitely not a soldier.

  She scrunched her perfect little nose as she took in his appearance. "Captain," she began, stressing the word to remind him he should look like one, "this is Dr. Marvin. He requests to see one of your soldiers."
 The man held out his hand and Orion shook it with a nod. Somehow, he had a feeling whom he'd ask to see. But he asked anyway, "Who would you like to see, Doctor?"
 "A young lady who goes by the name of Asteri Verloren, Captain, if you don't mind." Orion wanted to slap that man's mouth shut but the words were out before he could stop him. Now Baxter was going to suspect something was up with Teri - if she doesn't get suspicious by the fact that she'd just gone missing last night. A fact she didn't know yet.
 Great.
 Orion glanced at the commander and then back again at the doctor. "Why do you need to see her?" he asked to stall.
 The doctor flustered and he tugged his tie. "You see, I operated on her bullet wound a few days ago, Captain, and I found a peculiar result from a test I'd conducted. I'd like to consult with her."
 Peculiar result. A mechanical heart, more like. He must know about that. He must've seen her when he – wait. Operated? She needed surgery? Orion was too caught up with her heart last night to look at her wound. He didn't know she needed surgery! Oh, Gods, no.
 "Captain, you've gone pale," Dr Marvin said, reaching a hand out to him. "Are you quite all right?"
 Baxter interrupted impatiently, "Can we see her please?"
 "No," Orion almost snapped at her. Then he cleared his throat. "Apologies, Commander. I mean, no. Asteri had gone missing this morning." He looked at Dr Marvin and nodded a little to say, "I know she's the princess."
 "Excuse me?" Baxter said, her blue eyes suddenly a lot sharper.
 Orion continued, "Captain Towers and I weren't aware until this morning but she is no longer at the base. Her ID chip was traced to St Lawrence train station until five twenty-nine a.m. but now it's off the radars."
 "Have you filed a report?"   Orion hesitated before answering, "Not yet, sir."
 She narrowed her eyes and looked straight at Orion and then at the doctor. Baxter was, despite popular belief, a smart woman. The look in her eyes told him she'd began to realize something else was going on here. That was all Orion needed: to have Baxter, of all people, on his case.
 "Captain Kesswell, if you are hiding something from me I suggest you say it now. I have a feeling there's more to this than just a missing girl."
 "There's nothing else," Orion lied easily.   Baxter's nostrils flared and she stepped closer to him. "Orion Kesswell," she said lowly. "I saw you follow her out the dining hall last night. It takes five hours by train, one that leaves at midnight, from Hail Creek to St Lawrence. Do you take me for a fool?"
 "No, Commander." Unfortunately. "But I can assure you, I am not hiding anything. I have no reason to and as far as I know, neither does Asteri."
 Dr. Marvin chose the exact moment to interrupt. "Captain, I'm afraid there is something you should know."
 Gods above! Orion almost groaned out loud. "With all due respect, Doctor, now is not the time," he quickly stopped him from blurting, his eyes pleading: Not in front of her.
   Baxter disagreed cheerfully, "Nonsense. Now is the perfect time. Please, go ahead. Tell us what we should know."
 Orion wanted to punch that false smile off Baxter's face and he would've, had she not been armed with a blaster at her belt. Never mind that she was his superior; he was just about done caring who was who. The doctor looked up at him and his grey eyes were apologetic and helpless. Orion sighed internally. He was a fool in thinking he could've hidden something this big from his own commander.

  Dr. Marvin said, "Captain, Commander, I'm not sure if you are aware but the girl is not Asteri Verloren. I was to keep this information a secret and I'd promised her I would. But I hadn't realized that when I operated her, I'd forgotten to turn one of the security cameras in the room off. The tape had reached the board and now I have no choice but to report her."
 "Why come here, then?" Orion asked before the man could say her real name.
 Baxter said, "You know who she is, don't you, Kesswell?"
 "No," was Orion's immediate response. And don't call me Kesswell.
 Baxter rolled her eyes. "You're fooling no one, Captain. Doctor, who is she?"
 Dr. Marvin gave Orion one more grave, apologetic glance as he replied, "Princess Athena Nightingale."  
 Teri didn't know where to go or what to do.   She had taken the next train that would take her out of Hail Creek and had ended up in St Lawrence, southeast of Hail Creek, on the coast of Queensland. At least that's what the sign at the front of the train station said. This feeling of not being sure of where she was, was familiar enough for her to not be frightened anymore. It was hardly the first time she'd roamed the country she had little knowledge of.   It was only five in the morning when the train arrived but the station was packed with travelers of all different kinds – elderly, families, businessmen - that no one paid any attention to the girl dressed in black. The first thing she had to do was withdraw a decent amount of cash then dig the chip out of her hand. Once the chip was out, money in Asteri's account would no longer be accessible.
 She took out M from her bag, carefully untangling the droid from a shirt and pressed the On button. M emitted a familiar buzz before her eyes blinked on.   "M, can you help me?" Teri whispered even though she was perfectly secluded.
 "Um, is there a reason you're whispering? Because my volume control is whacked and I can only switch between two ticks: normal and loud. And I mean, like, LOUD."
 Teri clasped M to smother the LOUD she'd just demonstrated, her mechanical voice echoing off the walls, cringing because M was indeed LOUD.   "No, M, it's fine," she said, still whispering. "You must have a knife in your compartment. I need you to take my ID out."
 Teri saw this coming way before it did. M began to demand why and when Teri told her everything, M's personality chip almost blew up. She flew around the small room in frenzy, at war with herself on whether she should report Teri to the authorities or help her. Teri sat on the seat of the toilet, hands folded in her lap. She was almost counting on being reported. In such moments of weakness, imprisonment sounded like a paradise compared to not knowing what her next step would be.
 At least then, maybe somebody would listen and not shut her out. Like Orion did. Gods, it hurt to think of him. What she had done to him... It was beyond reason, even if she had never begun to like him – even if she still was not falling for him. She had never regretted anything this much in so long, not even when she left the palace.
 "Teri – I-I mean, Princess. Are you okay?" M stuttered.   There was no point in lying. Not anymore. "No, M. I'm not okay."
 M landed at Teri's feet and her eyes enlarged as she looked up at her. Then she let out a sigh and slid a square patch open on the top of the cylindrical shape. And a small plasma blade flung out.
 M said, "I am probably violating about a thousand protocols right now and I certainly do not approve of what you're doing but I'll help you."
 When Teri came out of the toilet, there was a spot of blood on a suspicious area of her pants from cutting her hand to take out the chip. But that gave her an excuse to shop for new clothes when the supermarket opened. She bought clothes that normal people would wear, something with more colour than black from head to toe. She swapped her black shoes for blue ones and her black bag to a dark blue one.
 At a dingy hairdresser's she dyed her hair black and cut it so that it was not so jagged, albeit it was a bit shorter than she would've liked, almost too short to tie up. But it was necessary because any moment now the VidScreens in town would be displaying a picture of her with the caption 'MISSING' or something along those lines.   But she was out of town before midday, before any signs were shown. It was strange because Teri was so sure Orion would've reported her missing by now. Why hadn't he?
 She needed an identity and she knew where she would get one. She didn't want to risk leaving traces of her so she left on foot, on a seventy-kilometer journey along the coast back up north. She didn't leave enough time for her to realize she was tired and had slept for little over three hours the night before, only allowing herself to rest at diners in passing towns to eat or to relieve herself.   The highways were mostly empty, save for a few cars, none of which bothered to ask why a girl was walking along it with a flying red droid for company. Along the way, M asked question after question, and needing a distraction, Teri answered them all as truthfully as she could.
 When she crossed the town of Ilbilbie, the sun had well and truly set and she had only a few more kilometers before she'd reach her destination of Marion. She was now trekking the sandy dunes of the coast, only lit by the moon high in the sky. The muscles in her legs felt as if they were about to tear themselves apart at any moment and her eyelids kept on fluttering down.   Never did she think she'd have to make this grueling journey again. Marion was nothing but a few huts propped along the shores of Coral Sea - too small to even be mapped. It was a shore where lone refugees such as herself could sneak in and forge a new identity to start over a new life in Australia. It was a black-market organization that had been linked with the one in the underbelly of Shanghai. They'd given her the name Asteri Verloren and she would've been glad to never have to face those people again.
 Yet here she was, going back to see them again. She could practically hear that man sneering, "Did you miss us, your highness? Came here to blackmail us again? Well, now you're not a princess anymore. No one would listen you." You're just another homeless waste of space. She was not entirely counting on him giving her a place to stay for the night either.
 Who would? After what she'd done.
 Just as she was about to climb another dune of sand she heard voices and the sound of engine. She dropped to the ground on reflex and pulled M down to the sand with her; a courtesy of Orion's training. She motioned for her to be quiet, placing a finger on her lips.   The voices from the shore were too far and muddled to make out, carried by the wind. It sounded as if there were quite a lot of people assembled. And they were not speaking English. They spoke Mandarin.   Her heart skipped a beat. She crawled up the slope on her forearms, barely breathing, and took cover behind tall reeds and rocks. She almost gasped out loud at what she saw.
 Parked on the beach was a large military transport hover bearing the insignia of the Northern Empire; a dragon curled around a sword. Around the hover were Chinese soldiers - hundreds of them! – unloading crates of cargo from the back. Teri would place a good bet that the crates held weapons.
 Suddenly someone near the dune she was hiding behind shouted and she ducked her head closer to the ground, almost breathing in the sand.   He was shouting, "Arm yourselves! We leave for Hail Creek at 2000 hours!" If you like the chapter, don't forget to vote and comment, guys! :) Also, the names of towns mentioned in this chapter are real places in Queensland, Australia, but the towns have been 'modified' to fit my needs.


 

Chapter 16

This chapter is dedicated to @marissameyer22 the author who wrote The Lunar Chronicles, which has inspired me to write Lost Star. 
 Chapter 16
 The man's voice continued yelling commands but it was moving away from Teri's hiding spot. She huffed out a breath she didn't realise she was holding, heart thundering in her chest. Vibrations of the metal and wires hummed inside her, her ribs tingling. M was looking at her with huge eyes and the line that made up her mouth was turned in an upside down curve.
 "We need to go," she whispered, crawling back down the dune after one last glance up at the soldiers.
 M didn't ask questions and she flew after Teri, staying close to the ground. Great stars, this was horrible. She had to warn Orion! She hoped the darkness of the night would conceal her. The ruckus of the shuttle made her heavy breaths and M's whirr inaudible as she snuck away from the dunes and back onto the highway.
 Then she ran like hell all the way back to Ilbilbie, her exhaustion overtaken by adrenaline.   "Who are they?" M asked.   "Soldiers from the Empire," she panted frantically, pulling out her port from her bag, some of the money spilling out along with it. Oh, who cared about the money anyway! She left it there and took off towards the train station.
 Teri's trembling fingers fumbled across the screen in attempts to call Orion's port but he wasn't picking up.   "M, check the time for the next train to Hail Creek."   She tried to call Orion another sixteen times but he didn't pick up.
 "Orion, please," she begged, almost crying from desperation. "I'm sorry. Please just pick up."
 "Teri, the next train towards Hail Creek is at nine-thirty and it's only twenty past seven!" M cried, whizzing around maniacally. "This is really bad! By the time we get there, those soldiers will have obliterated the place!"
 Teri placed a hand on her racing heart to calm it down, but to no avail. Satellites would pick up signals from the shuttle sooner or later, she reasoned with herself. But knowing Rovina, there would be people in security headquarters who would cloak the shuttle at the right times.   "Oh, my God, Teri. What do we do?" M asked, her volume on the verge of slipping into the LOUD zone.
 Something. They had to do something! Her only option was public comms. She span around to look for a booth in the train station when the VidScreen mounted on a wall caught her eyes. She choked.
 Her picture was on the screen and it was captioned 'WANTED'. Not 'MISSING' but 'WANTED'. She didn't want to imagine how that could've happened. She didn't want to imagine why she was wanted. She had a feeling she already knew the answer.
 There was a comm booth against a wall but there was also an officer working there to charge money for those who chose to use notes instead of their chips. Without a chip, her only option was notes. That meant she'd have to face that officer and risk recognition. He was already eyeing her.
 She turned away from him and let her now-black hair frame her face. She glanced around with the suddenly realisation that she was alone in this station, except for the officer. There was a gun at his belt. But parked outside the station was a black car. Not just any car; a hover. A hover which could travel faster than military shuttles.
 "Teri, what are you-" M began but Teri cut her off with a finger on her lips.
 "I have an idea," she whispered and casually made her way out of the empty station with M in tow. But the officer's eyes still burned on her back. She clenched her fists. If she had to fight for it then so be it.

  She didn't look back through the glass wall that separated her from the officer and trained her eyes on the hover. It was a one-seater but it was more than good enough for her. There was the hatch, the small light at the handle flashing green. It was unlocked. Good. The flying, however, would be a whole other matter.
 "Lord have mercy!" M gasped when finally she caught onto Teri's train of thoughts. "You can't be serious. You don't know how to fly that thing!" She paused, and then, "Do you?"
 "I know how to," she replied stiffly. I just never have.
 "Oh, God."
 Teri walked to the hover and reached for the handle. But a hand caught her wrist midair and spun her around. It was the officer from the comm booth and he took one look at her panicked face before he frowned. Teri's mouth dried when he forcefully uncurled her fingers to reveal the fresh, red gash on her palm.
 "It's you!" he gasped as his hand flew to the gun.   Before Teri realised it, her foot had connected with his kneecap and he hit the ground, crying out in pain. She grabbed the gun from his waist and - The butt of the gun was slamming into the man's head. His eyes rolled into the back of his head as he flopped to the ground.
 Teri stood over him, gun in her hand, as she stared, unable to decipher what had happened. Then it clicked in and bile rose to her throat, dropping the gun at her feet and screaming before she clasped her hands over her mouth.
 "Wow," M said, looking down at the man. "That was... Man, if you fought like that and got bruises all over you every day, I hate to see who your opponents are."
 "I killed him," Teri rasped, inching away from the man until her back hit the hover. She pressed herself against the metal, trying to melt into it from the horror of what she'd just done.
 M laughed, "Don't be ridiculous, Teri! His heart is beating fine. You are not physically capable of killing a man with the butt of a gun. At least, not at the state you're in. Go ahead and feel his heartbeat."   Sceptical, she looked at the man cautiously and peeled away from the hover, crouching down with a hand outstretched towards him. His chest rose and fell slowly – thank the stars! - but she placed her hand on his chest anyway. Faint heartbeats thudded on her palm and she exhaled, shoulders slumping.
 "I'm sorry," she apologised.   "Ooo-kay," M sang. "Time's a-wasting! Let's go, let's go. Just drag him into the station or something."
 Teri pocketed the gun and hauled the man into the station. She tried to pull him up onto the seats but he was too heavy so she left him on the marble floor, spreading her purple hooded jacket on him; an apology for stealing his car and knocking him unconscious. She opened the hatch of the car and followed M inside. Jill would be proud of her.
 She stared at the panels and the wheel in front of her, recalling what each button did.   "Frankly I don't believe you when you say you know how to drive," M told her.
 "I do," Teri insisted.   If M was human, she would've put her hands on her hips as she said, "Have you ever driven one before?"
 She didn't answer.
 She would be a fool to say it wouldn't be difficult, or complicated. Cade had taught her how a hover car operated and what each of the buttons did. He must've thought she was joking because he'd smiled as he explained. She'd been dead serious.
 Oh, gods. She had to grip her thighs to stop herself from thinking of what had become of Cade, the boy who'd helped her more than he realised. What if Rovina... She shoved those thoughts away by sinking her nails into her skin and focused on the buttons.

  The big green button on the right hand side of the steering wheel on the dashboard was the ignition. The row of five little white buttons on the left were the gears. The big black one at the bottom of the row was the anti-grav for aerial mode. The screen next to it was the navigation.
 M was already typing in commands into the navigation panel but Teri could navigate well enough by looking at the stars. She didn't say this to M, who already didn't trust her driving ability.   "I'm going to get rid of the trackers," M said and tapped away into the panel. "Wait. This thing has auto-pilot, Teri!"
 "Sorry, M. No autopilot. It won't let us go over speed."
 M looked at her but didn't argue. Teri silently thanked the little droid, for everything.
 The ignition was easy and to her surprise, the driving was not too difficult either, once she got control of the steering wheel, the gears, the headlights, the brakes and the flying. Well, it wasn't too difficult if she didn't count the few times she almost swerved the car into lampposts and other cars parked on the side of the quiet streets of Ilbilbie.
 As soon as she was out of town, she pushed hard on the accelerator and floored it, gripping onto the wheel for dear life as she prayed to every single deity she could remember.  
 For the twenty-sixth time that day, Teri was on the news.
 But it was different this time – not like the wanted announcements. She was in a security clip at a train station in Ilbilbie. Her hair was black and shorter now but it was unmistakeably Teri. First she came rushing in, tapping away at her port, unaware that her port networks had been deactivated on Baxter's order, seeing as it couldn't be tracked. Then she walked out of the station, the guard following her out. She came back inside, dragging him across the floor.
 Orion was still in the dining hall with Darren, Jill, Danika and Ander. They'd been there since dinner, which Orion couldn't eat a bite of. It was ten o'clock now and they were the only people left in the dining hall.
 The man whom Teri had dragged in gave an interview to the reporter and - she stole a car. Gods above, she stole a government vehicle.
 "What the fracking hell," Jill cussed. "What is she doing!"
 Jill didn't know she was Athena. No one except Orion and Baxter did. No one knew either that Orion was probably in the process of being discharged and tried for concealing information that affected national security. All Baxter needed was proof that Teri was indeed Athena.
 "Captain, are you sure she didn't say anything or hint at anything last night?" Ander asked again and Orion wanted to slam his fist into his face at the number of times he'd asked that.
 Orion said nothing as he stared intently at the reporter on the VidScreen.   Jill was bristling now because he had refused to answer any of their questions. "What is wrong with you?" she yelled and stood up from her seat in front of Orion. "You dick, Teri could be in danger right now! She couldn't have just decided to disappear out of nowhere! And you are the only person who could have a clue why she ran away."
 Anger surging, Orion stood up and yelled back, "Do you think I don't know that? Do you think I don't know she's in danger? You have no idea, Jillian. You don't have the slightest idea why she ran but I do and it kills me to know that! It kills me that I can't tell anyone because the more people who knows, the more danger she's in. The more people who can be questioned when it came down to it."   Darren sighed next to Orion, pinching the bridge of his nose. Ander gently coaxed Jill to sit down, pressing a kiss at her temple. Orion frowned. When had these mortal enemies gotten this close? Orion was undeniably jealous of that closeness but he shoved it down.

  "It's okay, Captain," Danika said quietly, her eyes unusually dull and her face ashen. She gulped. "Don't tell us. Do what's best for Teri, and you."
 But he didn't know what was best for anyone anymore. He thought making Teri leave was best for her but it had only gotten people on her tail. He thought that letter of resignation he'd written - not typed; handwritten - was best for him too, to give himself a break and try to mend his family but... He was sure that was going to go wrong somewhere. The scrunched up paper was still in his pocket.
 Darren had opened his mouth when a sudden, thunderous crash outside shook the building, followed by commotion. They looked at each other then bolted out.
 Crashed into the white wall of the main hall was a black car with smoke fuming from the crumpled bonnet. Two guards were pulling someone out from the car and were cuffing her hands behind her back, while a dozen more had her on gunpoint. Baxter was running towards her.   Orion's heart stopped. She came back. Which meant something had gone horrifically wrong.
 "Teri?" Darren voiced his bafflement as Danika gasped and covered her mouth.
 "They're coming!" Teri yelled. "The soldiers are coming here!"
 Baxter ignored her and ordered her to be taken to the holding cells.
 "No, please wait!" she cried desperately, fighting against the two guards. Blood was trickling down the right side of her face from her forehead. "I'm trying to help you! The Chinese soldiers are coming here!"
 Baxter merely glanced at Teri before jerking her chin in the direction of the Officials building, where underground holding cells were located. Orion was in front of the commander before he realised his feet had taken him there. He pulled her by the collar and hissed in her face.
 He spat, "No, you listen to her. She's saying something and don't you fracking dare ignore her."
 Baxter didn't seem fazed at all and placed a hand on Orion's fist at her collar. "Captain Kesswell, you cannot give me orders. I am your superior and I will do as I see fit."
 Orion let go of her and pulled out the paper from his pocket, shoving it into her hands.   "This would be?" she asked.
 "My resignation." A few gasps and Darren swore under his breath. "From now, I am no longer a captain, nor a soldier. I am not asking you to listen to her as someone who's inferior. I am asking as a citizen, someone you're supposed to protect. And I'm telling you to listen to what she has to say."
 Baxter's nostrils flared and her hands balled into fists. "Very well." She turned to Teri. "Speak."
 Teri didn't bother to thank him as she poured, "A battalion of Chinese soldiers are coming to Hail Creek right at this moment. I saw them on the beach near Ilbilbie and they departed at eight. You have to evacuate the townspeople!"
 Baxter chuckled. "If a foreign battalion was in Australia, they would've been detected by now."
 Baxter turned to walk away from her and Orion would've knocked the commander's teeth out for her ignorance if Teri hadn't yelled, "The Empire has people on the security team working for them. Believe me, I know."
 Baxter stopped walking. Both she and Orion knew it was very likely that there were moles on the security team and that Teri would know there were because she was a princess of the Empire.
 Baxter ordered Teri to be taken to the holding cell for further interrogation but she got on her port straightaway and demanded a radar sweep of the area. Her face was suddenly pale. 

  Orion could only watch as the two guards took Teri into the dining hall and she walked with them without an ounce of struggle. She looked away from him as she passed by. She was safe for now and that was all Orion could ask for at that moment. He couldn't even be angry at her for coming back.
 Something red moving in the car caught his eye. He carefully strode to the open door, peering inside. A red can lie upside down on the seat and he picked it up. Medicare Assist 514, said black indented letters on the bottom followed by an identification code. This was how she had been surviving. Now it was all for nought.   He placed it back in the car and slowly walked back to his quarters. Darren followed, saying nothing. He still said nothing as Orion began packing and only helped clear his drawers of papers.
 But two minutes later, hell broke loose.   Teri was telling the truth. Orion never doubted that because she would put herself in front of a bullet to save someone else. For her to steal a car, knock out an officer and come back here, something big had to have been going on.
 Darren swore when he received Baxter's message, ordering all personnel to gear up and arm themselves, and he raced back to his own quarters. Evacuation announcements from town could be heard all the way from the base. Orion, though no longer a soldier, pulled on his thermal-resistant camo and grabbed his blaster before making his way down to the weapon storage.   He fought against the raging sea of soldiers and panicked recruits for extra ammunition and as many long range explosives as he could into the straps of his suit across his torso. Baxter saw him but didn't say anything about his resignation as she grabbed a rifle off the racks.
 There was chaos and panic everywhere. None of the recruits have had proper field training. This would be slaughter.
 He overheard Baxter requesting backup into her comm. but if Teri heard correctly, then the Chinese soldiers would arrive in less than half an hour and it would take at least two hours for reinforcement to arrive from the nearest base. Holding out two hours with two hundred soldiers, 177 of which were recruits with one month of training, was going to be a pathetic attempt.
 The soldiers were divided into two groups, half stationed in the trees on the left side of the base and other half on the right, in the bushes. Five were left with Teri but it wouldn't be enough. Then it hit him like a sack of bricks.
 On the night of the Foundation Day, there were infiltrators from China. When that man yelled in Chinese, Teri had gasped and looked away. Gods above. They were here for her. Orion swallowed his heart and resumed scanning the surroundings again, trying to pretend he hadn't realised the terrible truth.
 His breaths were jagged and sweat beaded his forehead, making his fringe cling to his skin in damp clumps. If Hunter were here, he'd tell him that there was no shame in admitting he was afraid, and he was. His nerves buzzed beneath his skin like the hum of an electric cable. He had never been engaged in a real battle and it was quite a difference from the simulations and field training he'd endured.
 In simulations, you'd wake up if you die and life would go on.
 He'd fight alongside the soldiers and recruits he'd had the honour of serving with and he'd kill those bastards who wanted to take Teri back.
 The enemy didn't come from the front or back like they had predicted. They came surrounding every inch of the base in circular formation. Hail Creek was surrounded before the first shot could be fired.  
 Teri paced back and forth in her cell. The two guards outside would not listen to anything she said. They would not react to her pleas to run, to tell everyone to run because Rovina's army could blast their little base into ash and dust. Could, and would.
 There were sounds of gunfire above them now and the guards gripped their guns tighter. Why wouldn't they tell them to run? So many would lose their lives!
 She banged on the door again and shouted, "Please run! You have to go or you'll die!"
 No reaction. They didn't even laugh at her hysterics.
 She sank to the floor, banging on the door again and again. Rovina had always ignored her whenever she didn't feel like talking and it was fine because no one's life was on the line. But now she could not be ignored. She would bang on the door until they listened to her; even if her hands broke she'd kick the door instead.
 But silence stopped her. No gunshots, no yelling, nothing. The world was dead silent.
 She scrambled up to her feet and looked out the glass rectangle in the door. The guards were still there but they were looking at each other now, guns raised and aimed.
 Someone down the hall shouted in Chinese, "She's in here!"
 Two shots echoed and the guards at her door hit the wall then slumped to the ground, guns clattering across the tiled floor.
 She. She. She was... Her blood ran cold. They'd been looking for her. They were here at Hail Creek because of her. That man on Foundation Day had informed Rovina she was alive. And they were here for her. She led those soldiers here.
 "No, no, no, no," she breathed, realisation seeping in.
 If anyone died during that... Oh, Gods.
 She barely had enough time to step away from the door before it flung open and standing in the doorway was the last person she'd wanted to see in Rovina's puppet army.
 "How are you, Princess?" asked Cade, his gun trained on her. I just want to warn everyone that after this chapter, similarities between Disney's Mulan and Lost Star will stop until the end of the book. 
 


 

Chapter 17

Chapter 17

 Teri stood, speechless and agape.
 Cade shouted over his shoulder, "I've found the princess, sir!"
 His sad, blue eyes said, "What have you done, princess?"
 Cade was a soldier now. Cade couldn't be a soldier! He was even younger than herself, barely seventeen. He was like her little brother. He'd stayed with her when she had nightmares and comforted her with stories his mother had told him. He'd always been there with his words of comfort when she needed him. Always.
 She'd been lying to him since the day he was assigned her guard, the day after her mother's funeral. She'd pretended to have lost her mind, wandering aimlessly around the palace, asking questions about anything and everything. He'd had to stay with her through all of that; put up with her insanity.   Now he was a soldier in Rovina's army because of her. And- Teri gasped. Coiled into his left ear was a clear tube stretching from the back of his head, made to look like a communicator. Inside the tube was crystal blue liquid bubbling along it. Her knees buckled, crumpling to the ground.
 "No," she breathed, staring at the boy she'd considered her little brother.
 She felt hands beneath her arm and her legs may have been moving but she wasn't sure. She was suddenly outside the building, where the stars were hidden behind layers of clouds. There was no one outside whom she recognised from the base, only soldiers in dark blue uniforms of the Empire. They were hauling limp, unmoving bodies in black uniform into the shuttle. Bile rose up her throat.
 She did this. They died because of her. She killed them. She killed them.
 A soldier was dragging a blood-soaked body up the ramp of the shuttle. She caught a glimpse of the unmistakable blonde hair and those rounded jaws and peaceful blue eyes, spluttered with red. Ander. Oh, gods, it was Ander.   Her eyes flew to the person gripping her left arm in panic but they caught onto the tall man standing beside him. General Khan looked down with at her with cold, calculating eyes. There was a coil in his ear, too. Every soldier had coils in their ears.
 "It's a shame, isn't it, princess?" he drawled. Teri let out a sob as tears brimmed her eyes. The general continued, "Put her with the rest of them. She's betrayed our country."
 The two men holding her - stopping her from falling to the ground - pulled her into the shuttle via the blood stained ramp and she left red footprints behind her. They took her into a large, brightly lit room full of soldiers, sitting on the ground with their hands bounds to the walls by wired cuffs. Every face turned to her as the men put her limp hands into cuffs. Everyone would have guessed by now that she was related to this somehow.
 They stared at her with so much fear in their eyes.
 They should be afraid. Very afraid, for what awaited most of these people in Shanghai was something far worse than death. And she'd landed them in there.
 If she had anything in her stomach, if she had any energy left at all, she would've vomited all over the dirty floor. She would've apologised to each and every one these people in this room and to the families of every person who lost their lives. And that would be nowhere near enough. Nothing would ever make up for this.
 Around the room were people she'd called friends. Orion, on the other side of the room, knew the reason the Chinese soldiers were here and his stormy expression said it as he gazed at her. His parents would've lost the only child they had left. Darren, not too far from Orion, watched her in confusion. 

  Danika had tears streaming down her face. Her one year-old-daughter, little Kaylene, might never see her mother again. And Jill. Oh, Jill. There was so much hatred and anger and pain in her eyes that she could've set the world on fire. In this moment, it had never been more certain that Jill loved Ander. And he was gone... because of Teri.
 When the men who chained Teri left and the door closed behind them, chaos took over the silence that had filled the room only seconds ago. People yelled and tried to yank their wrists out of the cuffs but only cried when jolts of electricity shot into them with each pull. Teri knew better than to try so she leaned on the wall and closed her eyes, soaking in the suffering she'd caused.
 The shuttle took off with a rumble and a groan and the chaos faded as acceptance of defeat seeped in. She could hear a few people quietly sobbing. A calloused hand landed on her cheek and she dared to open her eyes.
 The bluest eyes she'd ever seen were looking into hers; Cade's eyes. This time, they were soft as he gently caressed her cheek with his thumb. He sighed.
 "I'm sorry," Teri said but it would never ever make up for what she'd let Rovina do to him, what she had done to him. "I'm so sorry, Cade."
 He dropped his hand from her face and took her hand in it. He flipped her palm over and traced his finger over the cut she'd made that morning. There was a scar under that cut, too, making a faint X on her palm. "What were you thinking, Athena? Why did you do this?"
 "I'm sorry," she repeated. "I have no excuse for what I did. I thought... I thought that I could do this. I couldn't, Cade." I can't do anything right.
 "What do you mean by this?"
 Teri glanced at Cade's ear. "You know what I'm talking about. I'm sorry I let Rovina touch you."  He let out a soft laugh but it didn't reach his eyes. "I'm fine, your highness," he answered to her unspoken question about the coil in his ear.
 He knew what it was doing to him.   "Take it out," she begged. "Please take it out."
 Cade shook his head. "You know I can't. Not without frying my brain. But I'm fine, Athena. Really, I'm fine," he insisted, and then whispered, "Do you know why I cared for you so much? Why I still care for you?"
 Teri's throat clogged and she couldn't swallow. "You cared?"
 Cade laughed, clutching her hand, and his blue eyes twinkled. "Of course I did, Athena. You may have believed that I was only there for you because it was my job but for me it was never about that. It had always been you."
 If it was possible at all, his voice became even quieter but the whole room was so silent that everyone could hear him. "You're my redemption, Athena. You're the sister I never had a chance to look after when she had depression. She was the only family I had left and I let her fade out of my life because I was too blind to see that she needed help."
 Cade pressed his forehead to Teri's and continued, "When I read that note I died inside, Athena. I'd begged the captain to assign me as your guard with the intention of saving you because I couldn't save my sister from herself. And then I saw that note. God. I died that morning because I thought I lost you. I thought I lost another sister."
 Her face was streaking with tears now. Because Cade cared. All along she'd thought him to be just another guard who called her crazy when they thought she couldn't hear but how shallow was she?   When she thought about it now, it had been Cade who hid sharp things from her, who did not let her close the bathroom door, who potentially saved her. He'd tried to talk her out of blaming herself for her mother's death. She was lost and he hadn't yet found her but he'd pulled her out of the black hole she was being sucked into. He cared when no one had and he was always there for her.  And all she'd done was push him into the black hole instead.

  "That's why I care," he finished. "That's why I will always care no matter what you do to me. You're the person who gave me a chance to right my wrongs. You were my family when I had no one left."   Cade wiped the waterfall of tears from her cheeks, his touch so familiar yet so alien. She pulled away from him, only to press her lips to his forehead.  "I don't deserve anything you gave me," she murmured. "I never did."
 Not when she was selfish enough to leave him alone in that palace, to deceive him too.   "No, you don't," Cade agreed. "But that doesn't mean I'll stop protecting you from Rovina in any way I can, even if it kills me."
 Then she realized, "You're resisting it."
 Cade nodded tightly.
 "Stop it!" she sobbed. "Stop resisting it! It will destroy you! Just listen to what it wants, Cade, and don't try to win it over."
 Cade smiled bitterly. "I'm already losing my mind, princess, and have been for a while. Killing me now would be the greatest gift you can give me. But I'm fine. I needed you to know that I love you and that it was a pleasure serving you. Also, thank you and I forgive you."
 "Don't say that!" she whispered. "Don't thank me for hurting you! I did this to you. I did this to so many people. I have killed so many, Cade. I'm a murderer."
 Cade shook his head and smiled that boyish smile. "I told you; you're not." Then he said a little louder, "If those people knew what you were doing for them, they would be proud to die in your name. Because you know what? You're the only one I see who's tried to do something. You're the only one I see who has the courage to stand up against a monster."
 But in doing so, she had become a monster herself.
 Suddenly he winced, his neck twitched and he gasped, panting and blinking rapidly as he gripped her hand.   "Cade!" Teri cried, trying to hold his arm but her wrist was held back by the cuffs, which sent a small jolt of electricity through her.
 "I'm fine," he reassured. "But please, when you make it through this, come to my grave-"
 "Don't. Please don't say things like that, Cade. Just stop resisting and do what it wants you to. I need you, no matter who you serve. So please stop resisting."    Cade didn't say anything but, "I have to go now. Khan's probably missing me. Remember, Athena: be the rose that grows from concrete."
 He left a soft kiss on her cheek before he dragged himself out the door and ripped a gaping hole in her heart as she realised this was a goodbye. But she wouldn't cry for she didn't have the right to. People glared at her and she drowned in their resentment. She felt smaller than she ever had, more lost than she'd ever been. She curled her legs up into her arms and let her hair hide her face from shame.
 No one said a word to her but their icy silence was harsher than any word they could've spoken. If they put a bullet through her head, she'd deserve it after all her selfish acts.
 When the Empress passed away, she didn't think she could hurt more, feel more guilt than she did but she was wrong. She'd turned into a lying, deceiving monster, responsible for the death of so many people. She might as well have ripped their throats out herself.  
 When the shuttle landed in the palace of Shanghai, dawn was just beginning, petrichor of recent shower clinging in the air.
 The palace was exactly the same as she remembered but it was colder, bigger and darker. All around the island in the Yangtze, on which the palace was built, were the dark waters she was supposed to have drowned in. On the curved red roofs and turrets lined rows of golden dragons which protected the palace from unwanted beings. From her.

  She never saw the gardens her mother had adored when they took her to the underground cells from the back of the palace. A man tried to fight back against the guards that came to collect them but only two blinks later, he was on the ground with blood pooling around his head.
 "You didn't have to do that," she said to the guard who shot him.
 His cool gaze landed on Teri and of course, his eyes were glazed. He couldn't really hear her, only the order to kill that would be echoing in his head from the coil in his ear. White clouded his brown eyes almost completely; the real person inside him was long gone. This would be Cade in a few years, less if he kept on resisting.
 They put her in a cell, the entrance shut by laser-induced plasma. It looked as if nothing was there but the particles would shred anything into oblivion at contact. As far as she knew, she was the only prisoner on that level, all other cells empty. It was easier to keep an eye on her, she supposed.
 For a fraction of a second after the guards left, she considered walking through that plasma wall. But it was a coward's way out, Cade had said. She should at least face her imminent execution, her last chance to be brave.
 The cell had a roll of blanket in one corner and a toilet on the opposite corner. She curled up on the blanket and fell asleep as exhaustion finally caught up, dreading for the moment she'd have to face her father and Rovina.  
 Teri woke up when the zap of the retracting plasma door announced visitors. She pulled herself up into a standing position and took her time rolling the blanket up again before she turned to face her visitor.
 Standing in a red cheongsam, Rovina was as beautiful as the day Teri left the palace. Her shining black hair was rolling down her back in soft waves, her dark eyes were the perfect almond shape with long thick lashes, her full lips were cherry red and her skin was radiant. She had always been struck by her sister's beauty and when she was younger, she'd told her so, though Rovina never replied once.   But now, that once beautiful smile was twisted into a menacing sneer.   "Hello, Athena," Rovina drawled.
 She came alone into the cell. And the door behind her was open.
 "Hi, Rovina," Teri said quietly. She'd given up on calling Rovina jiějiě, older sister, a long time ago, after her constant rejection.
 "You're an ungrateful little wretch, you know that?" Rovina said softly but the calmness itself was a red hot poker burning Teri's skin. "After all we've done for you, this is how you repay us."
 When Teri didn't say anything, Rovina continued, "I was ecstatic when I read your stupid note but then I hear from Gen that somebody had been alive all this time."
 Teri's heart stopped. In all Rovina's years of hatred towards her, she'd never told her she wanted Teri dead. She yelled at her, insulted her, hit her and humiliated her but Teri never thought Rovina wanted her dead.   "Oh, and guess who's been hiding you from me this whole time."   Teri frowned. Someone had been hiding her?
 "Bring her in," she commanded to someone outside, her lips slowly curving into a dark grin.
 A soldier - Cade - shoved someone inside the cell with his gun. His eyes were glazed and Teri exhaled in relief because he was not resisting his orders. But the blonde woman he pushed in raised her head and Teri gasped.   Danika stood there, still in her black uniform but blood covered almost every inch of her. Her eyes were bruised and dried blood clung to her hair and face. Her lips were split in multiple places and she was hardly recognisable.

  "Danika?" Teri breathed.
 "I'm sorry, princess," Danika managed to say.
 "Please let her go, Rovina," Teri begged.
 "Let her go? She was working for me to pay off her brother's debt. Surely you remember Professor Lincoln?"
 Teri did remember. Professor Lincoln was head of Biomedical Research Lab before he was killed in an incident at a lab just outside of Beijing six months ago. He was quite young, no older than thirty. Teri had only glimpses of him couple of times, not long enough for him to be memorable, but she knew that he was foreign. She didn't know he was Australian.
 Teri nodded shakily.
 Rovina said, "It turns out he'd always planned to blow up my lab and interfere with my research. My most valuable works were lost in that explosion and your friend here is paying for it by being my spy. Otherwise her wife and daughter dies."
 Danika finally began weeping and she spat at Rovina, "She was one year old, you bitch! She was one and you murdered her! But you know what? I'd rather die than help you. I'd rather my whole family die than help you!"
 Danika tried to throw a punch at Rovina but Cade was immediately pulling her arms behind her back and he held them in a lock. Danika winced from the pain.
 Teri stood frozen in shock.
 Rovina said to Teri, "See, Athena? This is what you do. This is what you've done to every one of those who died in your pathetic name. They'd be ashamed of you."
 "No one would be ashamed of standing up against tyranny!" Danika snapped with fire Teri had never seen in her before. "There is only one Empress in this room and it's Athena, not you. Never you."
 Rovina chuckled softly and took the gun from Cade. She held it up at Danika's head.
 "Rovina, no," Teri begged. "Please. Please don't do this. You have what you want now!"
 "Watch carefully, Athena. This is what happens to traitors," Rovina said, her eyes piercing into Teri's.   Then she pulled the trigger.  
 Rovina ordered Cade to take Danika's body away but kept the gun. The image of Danika's head being flung back as plasma bullet pierced her forehead replayed in Teri's mind and she couldn't comprehend what just happened, too stunned. Blood was flowing out of the holes in Danika's head like a fountain and crimson liquid splattered on the floor, leaving a bloody trail as Cade left with her friend's body in his arms, eyes glazed.
 "You... You are a monster," Teri managed to say. "When will you stop, Rovina? Where will you draw the line?"   Rovina scoffed and she snarled, "I draw the line when all of Earth is mine. And I will make you watch all your beloved friends pay for what you've done."
 "You killed an innocent baby! Have you no heart? What would our mother say of you?"
 Rovina's eyes flashed red. "Our mother? She is not your mother!"
 "Rovina-"   "Don't you dare call her your mother!" Rovina yelled, shutting her up. "She is not and will never be your mother. She only birthed one child and that is me."
 "Stop it!" Teri sobbed and the tears she tried to keep at bay came falling out like they always did whenever Rovina yelled at her with such venom in her voice alone. Because her words hurt more than any physical pain she could cause her.

  Rovina dug her free hand into the pocket of her cheongsam and pulled out a necklace with a shooting star pendent studded with blue gems. Teri gasped.
 "How do you..."
 "Your boyfriend had it on him. This is rightfully mine and mother gave it to you, the child of a lowly scullery maid. She gave you something more important to my bloodline than anything else on earth."
 "Rovina, what are you talking about?"   "For goodness sake! You're not Chang'e and Alvah Nightingale's daughter. Your mother was a scullery maid when she conceived you with my father. My mother was so ashamed that her husband impregnated a teenage girl that she decided to fake another pregnancy to save her life and yours. She needed the media to keep their lips sealed about the scandal."
 That wasn't true. Rovina was lying. She had to be. It was simply not possible, not mention ridiculous.
 "It's true," the older princess insisted with a glare. "The worst part is that she loved you more than her real daughter. She loved a clone more than her real daughter from her very blood."
 Clone. The word echoed in Teri's mind. Clones, like Rovina's army of genetically modified clones. Clones which should not exist. She was not a clone! That was – it was preposterous.
 "Don't you shake your head, Athena. That's what you are," Rovina murmured quietly but deadly. "You are a clone. The real Athena died during that hovercraft accident twelve years ago. But my mother begged the doctors to clone you, to bring to you back to life in any way they could. And they did. They made a clone of you but you were the first person to be replicated at full age, not just an embryo, and your heart failed."
 Rovina was lying. She was lying like every other time she'd lied to her. She was lying, the way she had been for her whole life.
 "That is why you have a mechanical heart pumping blood through your veins. That's why you don't remember your life before the accident."
 "You're lying."
 Rovina looked up and down Teri's body with narrowed eyes. "It seems you've grown enough guts to talk back to me. But why would I lie? I have proof in the cryopreservation chambers in levels underground. It's in the form of a frozen, dead six-year-old girl."
 She was trying to rile her up. She refused to fall into her trap again.
 "Mother would be ashamed of you," she muttered softly.
 Rovina let out a bark of laughter, so wild and... Mad. "I know!" she barked with a huge grin. "I've known since the day I swapped her medicine for poison. I've known since the day you supposedly killed her by accident."
 Teri's heart stopped. "You..." she trailed in horror, "You poisoned her? She is your mother, Rovina! How could you do this to her? How do you live with yourself?"
 "Easily. I don't care anymore. She never bothered to care for me much anyways. She was always busy with you. Besides, I was doing her a favour. She was already suffering, dying. I ended her misery. I sent her to a better place."
 Teri shook her head slowly as she backed away from the cruel stranger standing in front of her. All these months, she'd lived with the thought that she had murdered her own mother. It had torn her apart, killed her inside out and haunted her to the point of wanting to slit her own throat. And yet the true murderer lived as if she hadn't killed the woman who gave her life. Rovina had lost her mind.
 She turned around to walk out the cell but she paused and faced her again. "I think," she said thoughtfully, "I think she loved you more because you are the prophesied child. When you were born, our family soothsayer bowed down to you and said you'd one day be the ruler of the Empire. But she is wrong. You are a failure, not a ruler. And the only reason the old crone is still alive today is because I'm going to prove it to her."   Rovina walked out as gracefully as a ballerina would sweep across the stage. She pressed the panel beside the cell and the plasma door zapped close. The necklace was still in her hands when she left.
 In that moment Teri realised that she had been wrong, too. Rovina didn't want the world out of pure greed. She wanted it because she needed the attention their mother couldn't spare enough for her. She wanted to prove she was worth something. She wanted to prove she was the true ruler.
 Rovina had killed her own mother because she wanted to see Athena, her greatest rival, break apart.   And break apart, she had. She was broken for a long, long time. But she had to mend herself now - for everyone who was counting on her, even if they didn't know it yet. A lot happened in this chapter: Rovina killed the Empress, Athena turns out to be a clone. Did anybody see these coming? Don't forget to leave a vote or comment if you liked the chapter!
 
 By the way, has anybody read the Throne of Glass series by Sarah J. Maas? It is amazing and I am wayyyy to excited for Empire of Storms!
 


 

Chapter 18

Chapter 18

 Orion wasn't sure how long he'd hung there for now, his hands in iron grips that hanged from the low ceiling. His shirt was gone; at least it was the last time he checked – whenever the hell that was. Damp clumps of fringe clung to his forehead.   He'd lost feelings in his arms but he was sure his wrists were bleeding and it had to have been hurting like hell. There must've been a few deep cuts on his back, too. His flesh stung against the cold air. The electro-circuits placed on his torso were not too reassuring either.
 The room was pitch black and while he had never been afraid of the dark, he was suffocated. He reeked of blood and sweat. Every move he tried to make brought on bucket loads of pain; maybe even worse than when he was actually being whipped or electrocuted.
 What had happened to Teri and Darren? What happened to the rest of them after he, the other captains and Commander Baxter were separated? Was Teri facing the same fate as him? No, she couldn't have been. Rovina wouldn't touch her, not when she had a reputation to uphold to the public eye as their angel. He supposed he was a tiny bit relieved about that.
 The lights flickered on and for a moment all he could see was bright white light before his eyes adjusted. Her voice came before she did, the witch. She was dressed like a goddess in a blue robe and smiling like an angel. There were two people – one guard and a soldier – trailing into the room after her like sheep, the soldier holding a whip, both holding blasters, as if Orion was in any state to harm their precious princess. Well, at least they didn't underestimate him.
 The soldier was Cade. Orion had taken an immediate dislike towards that boy when he talked to Teri on the shuttle but he put his dislike on standby and carefully watched him out of the corner of his eyes. The boy's eyes were blank and glassy, different from the warm ones he had before. The guard's eyes were like that too.
 Completely unguarded, a man strode in after them. He wore a red long coat with the Empire's crest on his chest and his graying hair was sleeked back. His eyes were like the guards'. Someone how he had always thought meeting the Emperor of the Northern Empire would be much grander than... this. He was not expecting the man to be so blank. But the attention clearly was not on the Emperor.
 "Good evening, captain," Rovina purred in Orion's face. "How have you been today?"
 "Piss off," he spat, making sure his spit landed on her face. If his split lips didn't hurt, he would've smirked at Rovina wiping his spit off. He snuck a glance at the man behind her: no reaction.
 "How charming," Rovina deadpanned, dabbing the sleeves of her robe on her face. "I would've thought such a good-looking young man would be raised with more manners. Or is that the Australian way of saying, "Good evening, your highness?" I've had quite a few of those today from your...men."
 "It's the Australian way of saying, "Piss of before I break your face.""   She pouted seductively, trailing a cold finger down his chest, and her face coming closer to his. Her father was right behind her and she was shamelessly flirting? What sort of father let their daughter flirt to shirtless men right in front of him?   "Shame," she murmured, her lips brushing against his jaw. "I quite like my face. And yours. But clearly your eyes are not set on me, but rather on Athena."
 "Athena means nothing to me," he said, almost too quickly.   There was no doubt Rovina would torture her own sister, the way she was doing to him, if that would make him give answers to her questions. How she even knew his feelings towards her sister was a mystery.

  Rovina chuckled. "It's quite adorable how you deny your feelings so fiercely to protect her. Don't worry, sweetheart; that is not her punishment. Now, are you ready to give me the answers I'm looking for? I can't promise you'll make it out alive this time, even with your pretty face. Your commander didn't."
 How could he ever have liked such a cruel woman? How could she be related to someone like Teri? Of course, Teri's beauty paled in comparison to Rovina's to the point she could no longer be classified as even pretty. If Teri was the moon, Rovina was the sun, outshining her. But Teri – no, she was Athena – was a thousand times more beautiful and she was the entire galaxy and nothing could outshine her.
 Rovina's heart was as small as a speck of dust and Athena's heart was as big as this universe, and the next.   "I'd rather die."
 "Mind your words, sweetheart. That can be arranged – very easily, in fact. Oh, yes. Clumsy me; I forgot to tell you that your prime minister has declared war this morning. You may as well decide to tell me now before I take more prisoners from your country and make them tell me."
 Orion stood by his words. He's sooner die than spill the Union's military secrets. Plus, she didn't really want to know. He and Rovina both knew there were much more effective methods of interrogation than torture. The whipping and electrocutions were just for her own twisted pleasure.
 He shrugged, the stabbing sensation of a thousand knives rippling through him. "Go right ahead. Excuse me while I get some sleep."
 Rovina jerked her chin in his direction and he braced himself for the pain as Cade came to stand behind him, whip ready. His eyes flashed warmth as he passed by but they glazed over again quickly.
 "Last chance, Orion," Rovina warned.   "Do your worst, sweetheart."   Her nostrils flared at being told no. "I was hoping it would not come to this. Give him ten lashes." With that she glided out with the Emperor in mindless tow like a puppet.
 Orion wished she'd given him a death sentence instead because keeping him alive could only mean something even worse.   The soldier brought the whip down on his bleeding back again and again. He'd had failed as a captain. Many of his men he was responsible for were dead. And Athena... He couldn't help but wish that he'd kissed her when he had the chance.  
 Danika's dried blood, a ghastly brown painting on the pristine white floor – one Rovina had painted – haunted her every waking moment. She died because she helped her pathetic attempts at fighting back. Danika was one of her closest friends and now she was gone. A strangled sob choked in Teri's throat, tears burning in her eyes.
 It would be easier to let everyone believe that she'd given up.
 But she couldn't. She wasn't sure what her next move would be yet. That was all she'd been thinking about every waking moment. That, along with the things Rovina had told her.
 You're a clone.
 It couldn't be true. She didn't even know the palace had a cryopreservation chamber and she'd studied and memorized every inch of the blueprint of the palace. There was nothing under the four floors of cells.   She is not your mother!
 This part was terrifying because so many factors suggested it was true. The Empress had black hair and dark eyes like Rovina. Athena had brown hair and brown eyes several shades lighter. Alvah had the same brown eyes as Athena but his hair was blonde from his Russian heritage. There was nothing in her appearance that suggested she was Chang'e's daughter.

  Her professor had taught her about dominant and recessive genes but she could not remember anymore. She'd never been interested in the study of science unless it was cosmology and astronomy.
 But if the empress was not her mother, who was? If she was a teenage girl nineteen years ago, she must've been in her late thirties now, thirty-eight at most. Athena didn't know any scullery maids who were in their thirties. As security measures, the palace never staffed anyone for more than five years.   No. She would not trouble herself like this. She would not fall into Rovina's web of lies again.
 She sat on the blanket in the corner with her head against the wall, thinking of ways she could make Rovina stop.   Danika's blood.
 Ander's limp body.
 Her mother's deathbed.
 Cade's empty eyes.
 Orion and Jill. Everyone else.
 They repeated in her mind again and again, a song stuck on repeat until they became the swirl of troubles that had once pulled her under depression.   Three days later, Rovina came again – the heirloom around her neck - but with someone else. He was as big as Athena remembered, his curly blonde hair beginning to grey. There were lines appearing beneath his eyes and on his forehead. His shoulders were slumped but his eyes were cold and hard. Athena swallowed her shame as she stood up and bowed to the man on the other side of the plasma door.
 "Father," she breathed, then held her breath as she braced herself. Her veins were buzzing beneath her skin and she didn't dare look up at him.
 "You are a disgrace to our family," were her father's first words to her. "You have betrayed us. You are an ungrateful girl. You don't appreciate what we do for you. We're doing this so that we can live in a better world."
 "Mother's heart would break if she was here now," she whispered. Oh, stars. She just talked back to her father. She bit her lip to stop herself from saying more. She was stepping on dangerous grounds, waltzing on a minefield.   As expected, Emperor Alvah's eyes flared red. He did not love the beautiful Chang'e Sung, Princess of the Northern Empire when he, then Prince of Russia, married her. He never learnt to love her. The only thing he learnt to love was the power that came with marrying the heir to a third of the world's population. Athena had never allowed herself to think this before, afraid she'd be ashamed of her father. But the truth was; she was ashamed of her father – and Rovina too.   She had been ashamed since the day he struck her during an argument and Rovina never said a word. Athena was only ten and she didn't understand what the argument had been about but she stood in front of her mother before the emperor could strike her mother again. Rovina yelled at her to get lost because she was in the way.
 Alvah Nightingale should not be angry at Athena, not when his affection was only seen through cameras and VidScreens.   "You are just like her," he spat viciously.   And I am proud of that.
 Then he left, just like that. His heavy footsteps echoed away from her cell. Athena finally looked up. Rovina was there, a huge smirk curled up like a snake on her face.
 "You are so pathetic," she said with a grin.   She pressed her palm on the panel beside the door and plasma disappeared with a zap. She stepped on Danika's dried blood as she made her way inside. 

  "Oh, great Gods and Goddesses!" Rovina cried suddenly, scrunching her face up and pinching her nose with her fingertips. "It smells awful in here! And you- you reek."
 Only now did Athena realize the stench of her own sweat, Danika's blood and the smell of the toilet. It was atrocious to the point her nostrils burned but she'd gone through worse when she stowed away on a fishing boat to Australia. The smell of rotten fish had clung to her for weeks.
 "Sorry," she apologized softly.
 Rovina let go of her nose and it crinkled. "Father was not pleased, as one would imagine not. He's planned your trial to be held in three days' time."   "What will I be tried for?"
 Rovina's eyebrows rose as if she couldn't believe Athena had really asked that question. "Treason against the Empire, of course. The prisoners will be held for a while longer after your sentencing. The young captain would make for handsome bargain, wouldn't you say? I hope Cade hadn't broken him too much."
 Before she could stop herself, she was begging, "Please, Rovina; don't touch him, or Cade." She immediately wanted to take back the words that gave Rovina leverage over her.
 Rovina sneered. "It was Orion's fault; he refused to talk. It doesn't matter anyway. I don't particularly care about Australia's military secrets. Although, I am curious to see what he'd do if I baited him with you."
 Athena swallowed the sour bile that rose into her throat. Orion wouldn't care what happened to her anymore after what she'd done to everyone. Orion might probably kill her himself, slowly. Her heart clenched.   "Why, Rovina?" she murmured, voice hoarse. "Why do you do this?"
 "Because this is the only way we can have peace."
 "Not the only way," she pressed. "You can't obtain peace through violence, Rovina. Think of everyone you'd slaughter to get those crystals. Think of everyone whose blood would stain the earth."
 Rovina roared, "I don't care if the oceans become red with blood! I will be the Empress of this world. Everyone on earth will bow to me."
 Jealousy eats beauty. Athena gaped at her sister and for the first time in her life, she pitied her. Rovina was smart, beautiful, talented and successful, and everything she wasn't. She admired her and loved her, even when Rovina always rejected her affection. For her, being able to do things as great as Rovina did was a mere dream. Never in her life had she pitied her sister, her role model.   Jealousy was man's darkest enemy.
 It was all because of a prophecy that was never going to come true.   "I don't want to be Empress," Athena said. "I never have. The title was and is rightfully yours. I don't want to take that away from you or to bear the burden of being a ruler. I only want peace."
 "And you will get your godforsaken peace when you're executed," Rovina spat. "If you think for a second that I believe you ran away not because you wanted my crown, you are even more dimwitted than I thought. I will make sure you never touch my crown. I will make you watch every one of your friends' death. And I will make sure every bullet the executioners shoot go through you."
 Rovina wouldn't listen to her. Rovina never listened to her. Darkness surrounded her like a cloud, reaching out, expanding, drawing in more darkness. She was only creating her own demise, too shrouded in darkness to see the light. She'd be blinded when she opened her eyes.
 "Believe what you will," Athena sighed. "But I would never hurt you like that, Rovina, because I'm not you. Not everyone is planning someone else's downfall. Remember that next time you put a bullet through someone's head."
 "Bitch," Rovina spat before she span on her heels and walked out the cell.
 Athena would never be used to the names her sister called her, each word a blow to her chest. She sank to her knees, two feet away from Danika's blood. Maybe she should save Rovina instead of trying to save the world. Her sister was travelling down a dark path and someone had to guide her back into the light. It hurt to finally realize Rovina was destroying herself and everyone around her because she didn't know anything but destruction.
 As she stared at the splotches of brown blood on the floor the will to find escape diminished. It felt as if she'd been holding the world on her shoulders for the last two centuries. She was suddenly exhausted. Exhausted and tired of being needed, tired of promises she made, tired of trying to save and always failing to save.
 "Athena." A voice had her looking up.
 Cade stood on the other side of the door and his eyes were not glazed, which meant – she frowned – he was resisting again. He held a gun in his hand but his fingers were trembling. His eyes were filled with horror and there was blood on his uniform.   I hope Cade hadn't broken him too much. It was Orion's blood.
 He flashed a card from his belt in front of the scanner beside the door and the plasma disappeared.    "Emperor Nightingale requests your presence," he said in stiff monotone.
 Her father? He was here just moments ago. Her frown remained on her face as she scrambled to her feet and dragged herself out of the cell she'd spent the last two days in. Cade dug the barrel of the gun into Athena's side, but soft enough to not hurt.   "Why does he want to see me?" Athena tried, knowing Cade was not under a trance.
 He didn't reply. So he was pretending. Athena kept quiet to not compromise whatever Cade had planned but her head was spinning.
 He led her down corridors of the floor, plasma doors humming on either side of her. Every single cell, all two hundred of them, was empty. She was the only prisoner on this floor, isolated.   Cade shoved her into the elevator and pressed the button to the level below. He kept his gun trained on her but Athena didn't feel threatened, at least not from the gun.   "When I tell you to, run and don't look back," Cade mumbled quietly under his breath.   Athena opened her mouth to argue but the door of the elevator slid open, effectively stopping her. She came face to face with another floor of holding cells identical to the one she'd been in, but now there were people in almost every cell. They were all dressed in white prison clothes like her. Most appeared unharmed except for the odd bruises but if Rovina had her way, which she would, they would not stay unharmed for long.
 "Cade, what are you doing?" she tried to ask without moving her lips too much.
 "Getting you out of here," he mumbled back, roughly nudging her to keep walking to avoid suspicion.
 Cameras were everywhere and though sound was not recorded, no amount of precaution would ever be enough in this place. Which made Athena question how in the name of sanity Cade was getting her out of here. Surely he knew she was not going anywhere without him or any of her friends even if escape was possible?
 "No," she whispered furiously, keeping her face neutral. "Not without you or these people."
 "I know. I have a plan," he assured her.   Cade let her down a turn in the corridor to more people in cells. Some of them she knew from her old platoon but a lot were from other platoons. There was Darren, his head perked up as he saw them pass by. It was an immense effort to not grab the card at Cade's belt and open the door, out of stupidity.
 Cade turned down another corridor and more eyes glared at her, hatred slamming into her. A couple swore at her and yelled that she was a murderer. She kept her eyes to the ground as she walked. Then down another corridor in a maze of cells and more swearing. What was Cade doing?
 Cade made her turn a corner and suddenly, alarms were blaring and an electronic voice screamed, "Security breach, security breach!" So what do you think of the Emperor, guys? And the 'resistance' Athena is talking about? Feel free to share your thoughts! :) 


 

Chapter 19

                  Chapter 19
 Athena froze.
 Cade darted in the direction of the elevator and she scrambled after him. He fired several shot at the panel beside the elevator and sparks and wires flew out, jamming the elevator.   Two guards came running from the opposite direction, guns in hands and Cade brought his own up in aim as he stepped in front of her. Then one of them turned into an aisle as the other kept running towards them. As soon as he brought his gun up, Cade pulled the trigger and the guard stopped midstride, then slumped to the ground, blooding pouring out of his side. The bullet was not far enough from vital organs.
 Athena held in her rising bile at the sight of Cade killing a man without second thought. His eyes told her that this was not the first time and he regretted it. But he didn't say a word and grabbed her hand, sprinting after the first guard.   "Let me go, bastard!" a female voice yelled above the wailing siren, followed by a couple more colorful words.   Around the corner, Jill was trying to kick the guard who held her by her arms behind her back, forcing her back into her open cell. The scanning panel next to her cell was smoking. A bang echoed and the guard dropped to the ground, groaning in pain. And Cade was reloading his gun as he jogged to a surprised Jill.
 Without a faze he said, "We have to move quickly. More will be coming down the stairs and the doors I jammed won't hold for long." He shoved the card from his belt into Jill's hands. "Get the strongest person out and come to the isle at the end. Athena, you come with me to get the captain."
 She left herself no room to question who the captain was and followed Cade in frenzy. The prisoners, her colleagues, stared after her in confusion and hope as she raced past their cells but there was nothing she could do. The siren was still screaming and the broken elevator groaned, unable to stop at the level. It would be only a few moments before the jammed doors from emergency stairs were busted down. Cade had made a mistake with his rescue mission.
 He stopped in front of the cell with a metal sliding door instead of plasma. She'd never seen this room in person but she knew it was the interrogation room; otherwise known as the torture chamber. A cold shiver slithered up her spine.
 He pressed his palm on the panel on the wall and the door silently eased into the wall. The room was dark but as soon as Cade went in, the automatic lights switched on.   Her heart stopped.  
 The man with yellow hair beckoned for him to come closer. The last time he saw him, the man was in a coffin with a bullet in his chest. It was so cold and dark and the man promised light and warmth. But he was walking away.   There was light behind his shut eyelids. It was so bright, so warm against his freezing body.
 There were two voices; one male and the other female. They were so familiar but he wasn't sure he knew whom they belonged to.   Something touched his cheek and it stung but the touch – it was softer than velvet and he craved it, leaning in to feel it sooth him. His hand; something was happening to it and it fell limp to his side but he didn't care anymore.
 "Orion," the female whispered and sudden warmth flooded his chest. He knew that voice.
 He dared to open his eyes. She was here. She came for him. She came for him! He opened his mouth but made no sounds, not even a gasp. His other hand came free and the world tilted, his feet giving out.

 
 Cade unchained his hands and Athena was afraid to touch him because she might hurt him. He opened his eyes and he smiled at her and it killed her to see him so broken. When both his hands were freed, he fell on her like a puppet whose strings have been cut. She held him up with all her strength, taking care to avoid his wounds, and Cade took Orion's other side.
 Darren appeared at the door with Jill. He swore and unbuttoned his shirt as soon as he saw a shirtless, bloodied Orion in between Cade and Athena, arms over their shoulders and head drooped. Great stars. His back was littered with gashes oozing blood. She couldn't see his skin and his face and torso were bruised; blues, purples and greens spread across his beautiful body. He was shivering in the warm room.
 What had Rovina done to him?
 Swearing constantly, Darren took over Athena's place under Orion's arm and they carried him out.   "Hurry. The door there," Cade instructed, trying to point at the white plain door at the end of the corridor as he dragged Orion.   Jill and Athena raced down. Jill scanned the card on her hand on the panel and the door slowly slid open. Too slowly. The footsteps on the stairs and clamor of guards became louder. Judging by the fact they were louder than the shrieking siren, there must have been a lot of them.   On the other side of the door was a dark, narrow hallway that led down to the left side of the door, light dim against unpainted bricks walls. Athena waved her hands for Cade and Darren to move faster as they carried Orion's deadweight body.
 "We need to get Danika and everyone else," Jill said.   Athena's mouth dried and Jill stared at her expectantly with steeled eyes. Jill didn't know. She didn't know about Rovina and the blood on the floor of her cell.   "It's impossible to get everyone out!" Cade yelled.
 The floor beneath their feet was trembling now and a boom echoed against the walls, shaking everything. Cade, Darren and Orion all stumbled through the door, hitting the wall from the momentum. The jammed door, the only barrier between them and the guards, must've been busted down.   Cade's next words were so vulgar that Athena might've blushed if she was not in such a state of panic. Her heart pounded in her ears and it was almost impossible to hear the alarms, the guards or Cade's frantic instructions for Darren, Jill and Orion to dig their IDs out as he flung a pocketknife at Jill, still carrying half of Orion.
 "What?" she demanded.
 "For God's sake!" Cade snapped.   He left Orion's side, leaving Darren to carry Orion by himself, and closed the door behind them. As he fired a few shots at the panel to disable the opening sequence, Athena grabbed the knife from Jill's hands and made a diagonal cut on her palm where her ID chip was. Jill hissed and tried to snatch her hands back but Athena held her wrist tightly, coaxing the chip out of her bleeding skin with the tip of the blade.
 "Of course, you'd know how to take chips out," Jill hissed in accusation and Athena tried to ignore the sting her words left on her heart.
 Clang! Something rammed into the door behind them.
 "You can yell later, Jill. Run, run, run!" Darren commanded.   Cade thrust his gun into Athena's hands. "Take this and keep running until you see the bolted door. It'll lead you into the sewers under the city. I'll try to hold them back."
 Athena shook her head furiously. "No, you're coming with us," she grounded in finality.
 Clang!

  Jill grabbed her hand and sprinted down the narrow hallway before Cade could say a word. Her mind was reeling. Why was Cade growing smaller and smaller? No, she couldn't leave him!   "Cade!"   He was leaning against the door with all his weight when the door exploded and Athena watched in horror as he was flung against the wall and slumped to the ground like a rag doll.
 Cade... Her Cade.
 "Fracking hell!" Jill cursed and slapped her cheek, stinging where her hand had connected and tears pricking her eyes. "Shoot that bloody gun of yours! Darren, run faster!"
 "You try running with an eighty kilo man on your back!" Darren shot back, panting.
 Athena's legs moved on their own accord and the guards – around six or seven – chased after them, their torches shining in the dark. She turned and blindly pulled the trigger of Cade's gun, the lights from the torches shining in her eyes. Someone cried out. Her finger pulled the trigger twice more and another cry echoed as one torch fell to the floor. She prayed she had hit their legs, where she was aiming for, and nowhere else.
 In front of her in the distance, light poured in from a rectangular opening and a large hunched figure was moving quickly into it: Darren and Orion. Athena pumped her legs harder and she was running through the light. Jill slammed the door shut and slid the giant bolts into the hoop in an effort to create more barriers.
 The stench hit her nostrils like a brick and she cringed. The long canal of sewers was lit by the glowing algae in the sewage waters in front of the narrow strip of moist platform they were standing on. Athena tossed Jill the gun, the weight of it dragging her down into hell.
 An explosion boomed behind the bolted door like the one Cade was in but this time, it only put a dent in the door, not enough to blast it open.  "Keep running," Jill urged.
 "I have to take out their chips."
 She cut Darren and Orion's chips out of their hands in less than thirty seconds and threw them in the water. Another explosion knocked the door.
 "Teri, do we have a plan?" Darren asked.
 No, she didn't have a plan but she knew every single one of the sewage tunnels that crawled under Shanghai by heart even though she had never been here. She'd spent months memorizing the labyrinths and their crevices on the city plans from over three centuries ago. Everything above ground had changed but the sewage systems underground remained the same.
 Another blast rang out and Athena sprinted off, leading them down the path beside the canal. The third blast echoed and voices entered the sewage tunnels.
 "Teri, we need to lose them first before we try to get out of here," Darren panted.   Lose them? There was only one way she could think of losing them, especially since Darren couldn't run very fast with Orion. She turned into a tunnel. Unlike the other tunnels, this one was dark as sewage and algae had been blocked from entering it. According to the maps, this wasn't a dead end – which was good.
 "Stay here," she whispered. "I'll come back for you." Jill opened her mouth to protest but Athena held up her hand. "I know this place, Jill. Give me the gun."
 She ushered them into the dark and sped down the way they came from. The guards spotted her as she turned down into a tunnel and they scrambled after her, shouting. Perfect.   Her legs kept pumping, almost slipping on the moist ground several times and regaining balance just before she could go tumbling into the waste. The guards yelled to stop running. She ran faster and turned a corner at a junction before the guards saw which way she went. There would be an alcove in this tunnel that led up to the streets. 

  There should be one. Oh, stars. Where was that – there! Voices were at the junction now, debating which way she'd gone. She dove into the alcove where the steps to the city above jutted out from the wall. She tucked the gun under her armpit and climbed. The circular lock of the opening hatch was rigid and her sweating hands slipped, unable to grip the wheel. Sloshing footsteps approached her slowly.
 "Princess, I don't want to hurt you," a woman said in Mandarin. "Please come out."
 By the sound of her hesitant footsteps, she was alone. Athena would regret what she was going to do next.   She climbed down the steps as quietly as she could. Her own stealth surprised her. She pressed her back against the wall of the alcove and waited for the woman to come. One footstep, and then another. And then the woman was directly in front of her.
 Her fist smashed into the woman's jaw before she could register the gun pointed at her. She didn't give her time to recover as she knocked the gun out of her grip. The woman threw a punch at Athena's cheek and she took it graciously, collapsing onto the wall and dropped the gun in her own hands. The woman must've been fooled by her feigned disorientation because she let her attention off Athena to yell for back up.   That was when Athena foot connected with the back of her head.
 She flopped. Athena muttered a constant string of apology as she dragged the guard's unconscious body into the alcove to hide her. Then she grabbed both Cade's gun and the guard's before tiptoeing back to the junction. The other three guards were not there. They must've split up.
 She had to take this chance.
 She hurried back to the dark tunnel where she left Darren, Orion and Jill. Grunts echoed off the walls before she saw Darren and Jill taking on a guard each at the entrance, Orion slumped against a wall.
 Darren landed a final blow to the woman's head and her bleeding face fell to the wet ground. Jill let out a shriek, startling a shocked Athena but she wasn't under attack. She was straddling an unconscious man as she punched him again and again, his face swinging from left to right. Her eyes were wild and pained and Athena realized this was retribution for what had been done to Ander. She was only getting started.
 Darren grabbed her waist from behind and pulled her off the man. She thrashed in his arms and screamed at Darren to let her kill him. Darren took hold of her flinging arms and pulled Jill into his chest, whispering into her ear. Athena could only watch as Jill began to settle and tears start to pool in her eyes instead.   This was her fault.
 "We need to keep moving, Jill," Darren said a little louder. "If we run into more of these bastards, I promise you can kill them. Right now, Orion needs help. Alright, Ter- your highness, how do we get out of here?"
 Athena snapped back to reality. "Call me Athena. We'll go up. There's an opening about a quartile of a mile back down the way we came."
 Darren slowly let Jill go and told her to help Orion on his back. Upon hearing his name, Orion stirred and opened his eyes, the dark orbs immediately training on Athena and her knees turned to jelly. He was shivering, his teeth clattering. Darren pressed the back of his hand on Orion's forehead.
 "Crap, I think he has a fever."
 She nodded. "We should go before reinforcement arrives. I think they'd be ordered to shoot to kill next time."
 Jill helped Orion onto Darren's back then Athena gave her the gun she took from the guard before hastily moving back to the alcove where she left the woman. Thankfully, the woman was still unconscious when they arrived. Jill raised an eyebrow in question but Athena only dragged the woman out.

  "Darren, I need you to open the hatch," she said.   Darren set Orion down on his feet and Athena rushed to support him, Orion leaning onto her heavily. His body was burning and his fringe clung to his forehead with sweat. The buttons of the shirt Darren put on him were undone and she tried to button them as much as she could to prevent infection on his wounds.
 "You came back," he whispered with so much happiness that it made her stomach flip upside down.
 "Yes, Orion," she whispered back, unsure what else to say.
 "Thank you."
 Bang! A bullet flew past her shoulder. She pulled Orion into the alcove and Jill ducked in behind them. She stuck out her gun and blindly fired non-stop until a splash was heard over the gun. Silence. Athena and Jill looked at each other before cautiously sticking their heads out. A man was floating face down along the algae lit waters and on the platform where he must've stood was dark liquid.
 Jill shrugged. "What? He promised I could kill them," she said.
 On top of the steps, Darren grunted. "Got it!" he cried in triumph.
 Yells in both English and Mandarin stopped Darren's huge grin of success.   "Frack, up, up, up!"  
 She came back.
 Her eyes were wide and she whispered frantically to him to climb up the steps. He didn't want to. He was so cold and every part of him hurt. He wanted that blonde man to take him with him.
 "Please, Orion," she murmured so close that her breath brushed his neck.
 He wasn't sure how his body had managed to peel itself away from her and climb the damned steps. His mind would've liked nothing more than to stay in her arms forever. He'd pushed her away once. He was not going to lose her again.  
 Orion's pained grunts as he pushed himself into consciousness and up the steps strangled her heart but she couldn't dwell on it. The sloshing footsteps were running now and they were approaching fast. Darren pulled Orion up and Athena tried to push Jill on the steps.
 "You go!" she snarled. "We need someone who isn't afraid of guns to cover our asses."   Another voice shouted, "This way!" and Jill cussed viciously as she repositioned her gun. Knowing Athena would not be able to argue, she clambered up the steps.
 Cool, fresh air greeted her as soon as her head was above the ground but the air was the least of her worries. Laying Orion on the ground on his stomach, Darren pulled her up as if she weighted nothing. Jill was right at her heel, panting and swearing. Her head had just poked out of the hatch when she stopped and looked down into the sewer.
 A guard had grabbed her ankle.   "Bastard," Jill muttered as she shot the man straight through his shoulder before Darren pulled her out as well.
 Athena slammed the hatch shut and turned the lock. Blasting this hatch would be suicide as the explosion would take the ancient sewers and the buildings on top down on them. Even so, they had to move fast because there were other ways of opening doors.
 Darren and Jill were holding Orion up between them when she finished locking the hatch and looked up.   "Where to?" Darren asked.
 They were about five miles south of the palace, in the underbelly of the capital. The alleyway was lit by occasional streetlamps that hadn't been broken. It was just two miles east of the sector of the city abandoned for demolition and reconstruction. 

  "Do you know anyone who will help us?" Darren asked. "Orion needs medical attention and we need to get out of here before any more guards show up."
 She did know someone who would help them but she hadn't seen her caretaker for longer than a day in eight years since she was replaced and Athena didn't want to put anyone else in danger. She looked at Orion, his breaths heavy and his face set in a wince. Orion had risked everything he'd cared about that night of Foundation Day to save her and there was never a doubt that she'd do anything to help him, too, but she still wished there was another solution.
 But there really wasn't. The abandoned sectors would be the first place Rovina's men would search and it was impossible to obtain medicine for Orion.
 "There is one place," she told them hesitantly. "We'll need a car."
 Glancing behind them every two seconds, they snaked along alleys after alleys, avoiding people, security cameras and the light altogether, leaving the never-sleeping city behind them, lit by skyscrapers and neon signs. After half an hour of constant paranoia and sneaking they arrived at a huge junkyard just a few miles from the abandoned sectors.   The junkyard was unoccupied and dark, the junk barely illuminated by moonlight.
 "You are one badass princess," Darren muttered under his breath as he took in the giant piles of bits and bobs of anything and everything, including a field of seriously outdated cars stretching out in front of him. "How do you know everything?"
 Months of secret research, she thought but didn't voice it and instead pointed to a car that looked relatively intact. "That one may still work. Sometimes people just drive their cars to junkyards if no one wants to buy them anymore even if they still drive," she said, jogging towards it.
 As she tried to pry the car doors open, Darren left Orion is Jill's care and almost pranced over to the car, eyes gleaming. He cracked his knuckles.
 "Leave this to me," he said smugly. "My dad's a mechanic and I've hotwired about hundred cars before I even finished high school – well, before I joined the army anyway."
 Even Athena could tell the car was old. It was powered by fuel combustion engine and solar instead of purely depending on sleek black solar panel roofs like the new models made since 2120's. Darren was grinning as he yanked the bonnet open and eyed the engine like a starving man.   Athena finally pulled one of the back doors open and helped Jill lay Orion down across the seats. Eyes closed, Orion shivered and his teeth clattered but sweat drenched him from head to toe. Orion groaned as his back touched the seats. Athena gently laid his head on her thigh and swept damp hair out of his eyes.
 "You should be dead," Jill muttered bitterly.
 She didn't look at Athena as she tucked Orion's legs into the car but it was clear whom she was addressing. She couldn't meet Jill's eyes when they looked up to glare at her, eyes welling with anger that clouded the sadness. Then she left for Darren, slamming the door shut.
 Athena sat there, staring at the tattered dirty seat in front of her. Maybe Jill was right. She'd already gotten Orion, Darren and Jill out and they were more than capable of fighting against Rovina if they found a way to make it back to Australia. But was it selfish to expect so much of them when she had landed them in this mess in the first place? And all those people who'd died...
 Athena shook her head. She needed to get them to safety before she could think enough to wallow in self-pity. Orion's fever was worsening and when Darren finally managed to ignite the engine about two hours later, Orion had slipped in and out of consciousness several times.
 Darren drove as she gave directions to their destination from the back, avoiding freeways and roads with too many people. Jill didn't talk to her, not even a glance her way and it hurt more than Athena thought it would.
 They left the car about two miles away from the village they were headed for and travelled by foot. Athena was unfamiliar with the woods that surrounded the village, having been here only twice in her life. But she was immensely grateful that Hua Lifen's house was outside of the village, at the edge of the woods.
 The house was exactly the way she remembered it from six years ago, which had been the last time she'd visited. It was small with worn curved red roofs. It was the only house in the area and had no fences around it. Did Hua Lifen still live here? Well, she'd better hope so.
 They crept to the back entrance of the house, Orion in between Jill and Darren. Athena sucked in her breath and knocked on the wooden door. Nothing. She knocked again, a bit louder this time. A light flickered on inside and then there were voices. She exhaled a sigh of relief when she heard Lifen's unmistakable voice.   The door slowly creaked open and a middle-aged woman in her nightgown peeked through the gap. Then it flew open and the woman gaped, eyes as big as the moon.  Whew! A really long chapter this time. I'm sorry if the end seems rushed. 
 


 

Chapter 20

Chapter 20

 "Diànxià!" Lifen breathed.
 "Hua-ayi, please. You must help us," Athena begged quietly. "I'm so sorry about putting you in danger but my friend is badly injured."
 Lifen cautiously glanced over her shoulder at Orion held up between Jill and Darren.   From inside the house, a male voice called "Lifen, shuí zài nà'er?" and a moment later a man came into the room, his black hair unkempt from sleep. He stopped dead when he saw Athena.   "Chen, prepare some beds in the attic," Lifen ordered her shocked husband, waving her hands. "Take them up with you."
 "What? What are you – t-this is madness! She's a criminal. They're all criminals."
 Lifen turned around until she was fully facing him and she put her hands on her hips in that no arguing stance Athena knew well of. "Chen, I trust Princess Athena with my life. You know how much I love her and I will not abandon her or her friends. We'll talk about this later."
 Effectively ending the short conversation, Lifen grabbed her hand and pulled her into the house and then the kitchen. Jill and Darren carried Orion after a very hesitant Chen.   Lifen rushed around the semi-lit kitchen, putting the kettle on and opening cupboard after cupboard. She took them in just like that, no questions asked. She and Athena had been quite close when she was her caretaker over eight years ago but Athena hadn't expected her to risk her own life so willingly to help her.   "Hua-ayi."   Lifen stopped digging through a cupboard as she stood on her tiptoes and turned to her.   "Thank you," she said but no words could ever show her gratitude.   Lifen gave her a big smile and she wrapped her arms around her. "Anything for you, Athena."
 The embrace lasted for a second before she returned to the cupboards and pulled out a green plastic box out. Tucking it under her arm, she pulled her by the hand and ushered her out of the room where the kitchen, dining and living area were combined. The corridor was unlit but she could make out a ladder leading up to the open hatch in the attic.   "Your friends are up there," Lifen told her, motioning for her to climb.
 Athena climbed until she was in the attic lit by a couple of candles and Lifen followed her up. The attic was low but spacious, dusty boxes and old furniture stacked along the walls. There was a small window at the back wall, a pool of moonlight filtering in. Chen, Jill and a shirtless Darren were pulling out sheets and pillows from a box. In the middle of the attic a large blanket was spread out and Orion was lying on it on his stomach, Darren's shirt taken off and his wounds on full display.
 Lifen told Chen to bring up a bowl of warm water and spare clothes and Chen glanced at Athena before he shuffled down without a word. His hostility was to be expected, understandable even. They had brought danger right into their home, after all.
 "What happened to him?" Lifen asked, kneeling down beside Orion. She pulled out cotton balls, wipes, antiseptic cream and bandages from the box, placing them around her neatly.
 "Rovina," was all she needed to say.   Lifen nodded in understanding and her eyes softened. Rovina had always been abusive and Lifen knew better than anyone else. She was a victim of Rovina's harsh words and sometimes physical abuse, maybe even more often than Athena.
 Lifen cleaned Orion's wounds, wiping blood off his skin with warm wet cloths as gently as possible but he still hissed and groaned through his shivering. Lifen stuck a thermometer in his mouth and he indeed had a fever, possibly from infection. Athena dabbed his forehead dry of sweat and the cloth was soaked within five minutes.

  Orion would be alright. He was strong.
 "He'll be fine, princess," even Darren said so when he came to put some pillows down on the blanket.
 Chen came up a few minutes later with a stack of clothes. He eyed the four of them as if they'd go on a shooting spree at any moment. Especially Jill, who still held the gun to her chest like a prized possession.
 "You two shower downstairs," Lifen said to Darren and Jill in heavily accented English. "The clothes are ours. They may not fit well but we must burn the prison clothes."
 "You go first," Jill said to Darren. The clip in her voice was gone. It was softer than Athena had ever heard her and it shattered her heart to see her turn away slightly to hide the tears in her eyes.
 Darren looked at Athena and he sighed. He glanced back at Jill once more as he took the clothes from Chen and thanked him before he disappeared downstairs.   "Lifen," Chen said firmly, sitting down cross-legged beside her.
 He sat so close to her, less than a foot between them. Her father never sat or stood that close to her mother (or not mother) unless it was in front of the cameras. But Chen and Lifen: they were like a soul split into two different bodies. Their movements synched; when Chen moved, so did Lifen and their eyes communicated in a language only they understood.
 How wonderful it must be to have such an affectionate family.
 "You need to explain this," he said quietly to Athena.   "Chen, not tonight," Lifen interrupted. "They've come all the way from Shanghai and the least we could do is let them rest today. Then we'll figure something out."
 He sighed, "Alright. I'll go make something for them to eat. What would you and your friends like, your highness?"
 Of course, Chen was exactly the type of man Lifen would marry; kind, understanding and caring. Her father had never looked her in the eyes or was ever that selfless. Chen was the type of man she wanted to call her father and she was not the least bit ashamed of thinking so.
 "Please call me Athena. I'm not a princess anymore," she said, still staring at the man. "We're fine with anything, xiānshēng. We don't want to trouble you."
 As Chen left, Athena saw Jill lingering by the hatch on the floor. Her arms were folded across her chest as she gazed down to the house below them. With the dim light of the room, Athena couldn't see her expression.
  "What happened to her?" Lifen asked.
 "Her..." she searched for the right word. "The person she loves was killed when we were attacked." It was because of me.
 Lifen nodded slowly. "Love is the sometimes the most painful thing in the world, but it is the most beautiful thing in the universe. Only those fortunate enough will ever know true love."
 Athena gazed at Orion. His face was flushed and he winced every time Lifen smeared antiseptic cream on his back. She liked being near him. The days she was not with him, he was constantly on her mind and she'd worry something had happened to him. She wanted him to be happy and it didn't matter how much she'd hurt herself in the process. She had half a mind to run away to a place they'd never have to worry of Rovina or anyone else when he was better.
 She wanted him to feel the same way about her.
 Was this love?
 "Danika's dead, isn't she?" Jill asked abruptly.   Athena swallowed and nodded. "She was working for Rovina but she betrayed her so Rovina killed Danika. Right in front of me."
 "I hate your sister," she mumbled as she descended the stairs. "I hate your whole family."

  When Jill's head disappeared down, Lifen said, "She's just hurt," upon seeing the look on Athena's face. "Now help me bandage him and give him medicine."  
 Athena and Darren, now in Chen's pants and T-shirt snug on him, made a bed out of blankets on the attic floor. There was only one bedroom in the house and it was occupied by Lifen and Chen. It was also safer for them to be in the attic if guests decided to pay a surprise visit.   After her shower, Jill came up the stairs in Lifen's cotton pyjamas, the pants too short on her long legs. She dove straight into bed on the very edge, curled up into a ball facing away from them, her wet hair soaking the pillow. Darren and Athena looked at each other.   "Jill, do you want to eat something?" Darren asked softly, inching closer to her.
 "No," Jill snapped hoarsely.
 Darren sighed. "Why don't you go have a shower and eat, Athena," he suggested. "I'll look after Orion."
 Chen and Lifen were talking in hushed voices in the kitchen when Athena came downstairs. Not wanting to eavesdrop, she cleared her throat and stepped into the room to let them know she was there.
 "Athena," Lifen said quickly. She came over and shoved a pile of clothes into her hands. "You can wear these after your shower. I'm afraid I don't know the size of your bra. You were just a little girl the last time I saw you." Lifen smiled up at her with tears in her eyes. She looked her up and down several times. "You've grown up to be a beautiful woman."
 Athena wrapped her arms around Lifen. She buried her face in her shoulders and hugged her tightly. She wanted to cry, to tell her everything and to help her find herself. She'd thought she was on the road to finding herself but she had only become more lost. Now, she didn't even know who she was anymore. Chang'e's daughter, or not her daughter. A clone or not a clone. A princess or a simple girl.
 "Athena," Lifen whispered. "I know you were very, very close to the Empress and I don't mean to replace her but if you would like to, you can call me mama."
 An involuntary strangled sob came out. Having a mother figure again... that sounded amazing. "I'd love to. Thank you. Thank you, mama."
 Lifen let her go and she trudged in the bathroom. The water burned her skin but she didn't lower the temperature and let it burn her. A dense fog of steam surrounded her in the cylindrical cubicle. Her mind was like that; foggy, hazy and unclear.   Would Lifen know the truth? Was she at the palace at the time of her birth? Athena couldn't remember when Lifen had started working at the palace but she knew that Lifen worked longer than others. But her memories before the accident were all just a hopeless mess that she would have to ask Lifen herself.
 Athena sighed. What was she supposed to do now?
 She could run away with Orion. Maybe Jill and Darren would come too.
 Or she could stay and bring Rovina out of the dark.
 She leaned against the cold wet tiles. She promised her mother – the Empress she'd stop Rovina and the Emperor. If she ran away, the woman she'd called her mother would look down from the heavens in disappointment. She would break a promise that should never be broken.
 When she got out of the shower, she was no closer to figuring out what happened from that point on. Her skin was shrivelled and red but she was clean, no longer reeking of sweat, blood and waste. Gods, she had the audacity to hug someone in that condition.
 Dressed in the cheongsam Lifen gave her, she pulled herself up the stairs to the attic.   Darren was saying, "...all he talks about, ma'am. He wouldn't dream of hurting her."

  Lifen was sitting with him next to Orion when she reached the top of the stairs. Orion was asleep, his body covered by a thin blanket. Lifen looked over to Athena as she dragged herself next to Orion, in between him and Lifen, and placed a hand on his forehead. His fever had gone down a little.
 "He'll be completely fine in a couple of days," Lifen reassured her. "I gave him a med-patch." There was a yellow square sticker with rounded edges on the inside of his left wrist. Yellow for antibiotics.   "Thank you, mama."   Darren said, "I can't believe I'm in China and in Shanghai of all places. I honestly thought that the Chinese I learnt in high school would help me understand something but I do not understand a word you are saying. I wasted my free periods for this."
 Lifen laughed and even Athena smiled a little. She wasn't quite sure what 'free periods' were, never having been to school. "Get some rest, you two," Lifen said. "It's well past midnight. The boy should be stable enough now. Goodnight."
 Athena inched closer to Lifen and hugged her. She mumbled a thank you one last time and the woman pressed her lips to her forehead the way the Empress used to. It gave her a sense of security and reassurance she had lived a long time without, like things were not all hopeless.   When Lifen blew out the candles and descended the stairs, Darren took his previously claimed spot on the bed between Orion and Jill, staring at her back for a long while. His fingers on the pillow twitched as if he was debating whether he should touch her or not but then pulled themselves into fists and he closed his eyes.   It was too soon for him. Jill's wounds were still raw and open and she'd want Ander's touch. Not Darren's. But inside, she'd be yearning for any means of comfort at this moment and Athena knew because she'd been there.   She lied down at the end of the bed next to Orion, too tired to acknowledge that he was half-naked under that blanket. She was asleep within half a second.  
 A sound jerked her awake. It was wet and muffled.   She was upright in bed and looking at Orion in an instant. But Orion was fine; he was sleeping peacefully on his side, a hand on the pillow between them. The sound was coming from the boxes near the back wall where the window was. The space next to Darren was empty.
 The floor moaned softly as she tiptoed to the boxes and whispered, "Jill?"
 A wet sniff. "What?"
 She approached the hoarse voice. Jill was leaning against a stack of boxes with her knees clutched to her chest, the moonlight from the window lighting her up. Her face was wet and she was wiping tears away with her hands furiously. It was an utterly heartbreaking sight to behold. Jill was always so strong and nothing could ever seem to break down her walls. And here she was, broken and helplessly trying to rebuild her walls.
 Athena sat next to her and wrapped her arm around her shoulders. That was when Jill broke down completely and began to cry uncontrollably. Her body shuddered as each sob wrecked through her and she slipped her hands around Athena's waist, burying her face in her shoulder.
 "I hate him," she sobbed. "I hate him for dying, that fracking idiot! I didn't even know. I just kept on shooting and shooting and when I finally looked his way, he was already dead."
 Nothing Athena could've said would make her feel better, would make her not blame herself so she let her keep talking everything off her chest.
 "I'm an idiot, Athena. I didn't tell him that I love him. He died without knowing that I love him back. No one should have to die like that. If I'd just looked his way, even for a second, maybe I could've gotten him to the medics and maybe they could've saved him."
 "He did know that you love him, Jill. None of this was your fault. Everyone's fate is written individually and no one can change it." Seven months ago, it was Cade who was saying these words to Athena. Oh, gods. Was Cade still alive?
 "No, the thing is I knew that he'd loved me for years. He'd loved me since high school and he told me so. He slipped in notes into my locker every day and it always said, 'I love you.' I fell in love with his notes and eventually him but I was afraid to act on my feelings because he was so fracking smart and I was dumb. He got a scholarship to UNSW and I'm flunking everything. He had a bright future and my future was being a waitress at a pub.
 "His family would disprove of me. I didn't think it was ever going to work out between us so I kept pushing him away and I wish I'd savoured those times I had with him because he's gone now." She whispered, "And he's never going to know I loved him almost as long as he'd loved me. I'm never going to see him again."
 She was silent for a while before she said, "You know, Athena, compared to everything, it should be insignificant. His death should be nothing more than a human stepping on ants. I mean, everyone dies in some way or other and An-" she choked, "he was not the only one who died that night but... It kills me and..."
 "He's significant to you," Athena finished. "Life goes on but there's a big hole in your heart that you think can never be mended." "Exactly." Jill sniffed. "I'm sorry for being angry at you. It wasn't your fault either. I just thought that maybe if I blamed someone, I would hurt less so I tried to put the blame on other people. You, the Emperor, Rovina. Because it's human nature, isn't it? You think that if you direct all your anger onto something else, it'd hurt less. It doesn't. I still feel like crap."
  Jill sniffed and laughed, drawing away from Athena. "I'm pathetic. My boyfriend and friend are dead and I'm being pathetic." She laughed again. "I still cannot comprehend that Danika is dead."
 Athena couldn't either and she'd seen her die with her very eyes. A tiny part of her kept wishing that it was a nightmare and the dried blood in the cell was not her blood at all.
 "Let's never speak of this moment again," Jill said, wiping her face. "I cannot believe I poured my soul. Just pretend you never heard a word of this."
 She stood up and wiped her palms on her pants. She smiled down at Athena before she walked off to the bed. With that, Jill laid down the first brick of her wall.  
 A woman stood in the shadows of the forest. She was wearing a blue robe barely visible in the dark. Her face was hidden by the hood.   The crimson lady appeared beside Athena, her dress as red as ever and the knife in her hand dripping blood. But her teeth were not sharp anymore and were clean with no trace of blood.   "You know who that is, don't you?" she said.
 "My mother," Athena replied. "But she can't be; you're my mother."  Teri.
 "I only gave birth to one child."
 Athena!
 No! She didn't want to wake up; she needed answers. "But you treated me same way you treated her," she pleaded.
 The lady gazed at her with soft eyes. "I have my reasons, Athena. But it was never my choice to have a second child."
 "Athena!"
 She bolted upright at the sound of the panicked voice. Back in Lifen's attic, the sun was pouring in from the little window. Jill and Darren were scrambling to roll up the blankets and shoving them back into the box they took them out of last night.   Orion was next to her, hands on her shoulder. His dark eyes were brighter and they were so close to hers. It took her a moment to snap out of her trance and register that Orion was awake and relatively better. And he was saying something.
 "Oh, excuse me?" she said.
 "We need to hide. Now."
 "What happened?"
 "Police; they're here." What do you guys think? Do you think Rovina was telling the truth about the Empress or was she lying again?

 

Chapter 21

                  Chapter 21
 In less than a heartbeat, she was bunching up the blanket beneath her. She stuffed it into the now half-full box and Orion brought the pillows. There were several voices downstairs. Lifen was offering tea and a male voice rudely turned down her generous offer. Athena calmed her pounding heart as she pushed down the lid of the overflowing box with all her might, struggling to close it fully.
 "No time," Orion muttered.
 He grabbed her hand and shuffled into the crevices between dusty boxes near a wall. The hatch door was closed, thankfully, and Jill and Darren were nowhere in sight.
 Orion pulled her down into a small corner between the wall and a tall cobweb-covered cabinet, a gun in one hand. She hugged her legs to her chest and Orion sat down in the same position, his side pressed against hers. She couldn't tell whether her heart was racing because of the police or because of Orion's close proximity that left zero space between their bodies.
 It was dark in the hiding spot but his eyes were bright and they were on her. His chest rose and fell rapidly and his breaths were heavy. He was so close that his warm breath brushed her shoulder.
 "Are you okay?" he mouthed.
 Athena nodded. "Are you?" she mouthed back.
 He nodded but the heat radiating off his body and seeping into her side told her different. She pressed the back of her hand on his forehead. His fever had gone down but the temperature was still high. From the way he leaned forward to avoid touching the wall, he must've been in pain. The bruises on his face were turning a yellow-green colour.
 A sudden bang rattled the house and someone yelled in Mandarin, "You idiot! Do not damage property if not necessary. We're searching for fugitives; not on a demolition mission."
 Exhaling a silent sigh, she silently thanked the stars that the bang was not a gunshot.   Another voice asked, "Sir, there's an attic. Permission to search?"
 "Granted."
 Orion swore under his breath and readjusted his position so that he was almost half on top of her. Sweat began to bead Athena's forehead and suddenly the tiny space suffocated her but at the same time it was too big. Her heart beat so hard that Orion could've heard the mechanical ba-bump, ba-bump as the synthetic tissues and mechanism tried to cooperate with the rest of her.   Something whirred; the hatch was open. Orion clasped her shaking hand and smiled tightly. He shook his head as if to say, "They won't find us," but his eyes were already thinking of plan B, C and possibly D.   The ladder creaked and heavy footsteps thumped on the wooden floor. Orion slipped his hand out of her clammy ones and positioned it under his gun for support. The footstep moved in the opposite direction of their hiding spot and sounds of heavy things being dragged across the floor filled the room.
 "Would you like me to help shift the furniture?" Lifen called. "I'd rather not have scratches on the floors."
 "Sorry, ma'am," a too-close-for-comfort female voice apologised.
 Footsteps thudded around the room, things were being shifted – but not dragged anymore – and the sound was advancing, closer and closer to their hiding spot. A three-story stack of boxes blocked the front and the cabinet next to them was thankfully tall enough to hide two crouched people. Hopefully it would not look like there was space behind the boxes, big enough to hide people.
 The footsteps stopped directly in front of the stack of boxes. Wires convulsed and twisted in her chest, tugging and clenching the tissues so strongly it almost hurt. Oh, great stars. Her heart was going to malfunction.

  The box at the top of the stack moved. Athena looked at Orion in panic. He repositioned the gun in his hand, his eyes focus on the box. He was a stalking lion ready to leap upon an unsuspecting gazelle.
 The box moved again and Orion tensed. She balled her hands into fists, ready to strike the closest part of the body possible if she needed to. The woman grunted as she tried to lift the box again.
 "Constable," the man from downstairs called, "If you don't find anything, we need to keep moving."
 "Yes, sir," she said but her footsteps didn't leave.
 And then they did; thuds across the floor and creaks down the ladder.
 Athena finally let go of the breath she'd been holding and loosened her fists, her nails seconds away from leaving cuts on her palm. The voices of police faded after a few more minutes and soon cars drove away. But she didn't dare to move or even breathe too loudly.
 The ladder creaked again and a familiar voice said, "They're gone, now."
 Orion loosened his gun and crawled out of the gap between the wall and some boxes. She crawled out and immediately ran to Lifen, hugging her tightly. "I'm so sorry," she murmured, the veins in her hands still buzzing with panic. "And thank you so much, mama."  Jill grunted and yelped as she climbed out of a box stacked on a settee, dropping her gun on the floor.
 "A little help?" Darren's voice came but he was nowhere to be found.
 Jill jumped off the settee and walked over to the cabinet Athena had been pressed against. She unlocked the door and Darren came rolling out of the bottom rack and onto Jill's feet. She kicked him off and shook her head as made her way to the window. With her height, she could see through it.
 "What time is it?" she asked Lifen.
 "Half past eleven. The senior sergeant told me they were searching every building in town from the outskirts towards the centre to block any chances of escape."
 "Well, they did a pretty crappy job," Darren remarked. "I can't believe they couldn't find four fully grown humans."
 "We were lucky," Orion interrupted. "Luck doesn't favour anything twice. We can never thank you enough for helping us."
 Lifen waved him off as she walked towards him. She pressed her hand on his forehead and grabbed his wrist. The medpatch had turned from yellow to white. "Let's get you another medpatch. It's a wonder you're standing on two feet at the state you're in. Come on. Chen has already left for work so you won't have to be cautious of your every step."
 Lifen hurried off downstairs and left Orion staring at Athena. Who is that? his eyes questioned.   "You should go, Orion," Athena said instead. "You must be starving by now."
 Darren's stomach growled. He grinned, picking himself off the floor. "I know I am," he said, walking to the ladder with a spring in his steps. Before he disappeared down, he poked his head up and said, "Hey, Athena, did you know that Orion's a cuddler? One time we went on overnight field training and Orion woke up cuddling our captain."
 He winked and disappeared before he saw Orion's famous glare and his middle finger. Jill just rolled her eyes and followed Darren down but a twinge of nostalgia flashed in her eyes as she left.   "Where are we and who is that woman? Are we safe?" Orion asked.
 "Her name is Hua Lifen. She used to work in the palace and she was one of the closest people I had to a friend. This is her home and there's nowhere safer for us than here for now. The whole country is looking for us."

  He seemed satisfied with the answer. He closed the distanced between them in long strides and suddenly she was being pulled into his – bare – chest. He buried his face in her hair and held her so closely that there was not an inch of space in between them. If the encounter with the police didn't make her heart malfunction, Orion certainly would.
 "I'm just glad you're okay," he mumbled softly. "If I ever make you leave me again punch me, okay? Beat the crap out of me until I remember this moment."
 'Okay' did not seem like an appropriate response. "You're sick, Orion," she said. "You need to eat and take some medicine." And get a shirt. Definitely get a shirt.
 "What does Rovina want?"
 Everything. "Later, Orion."
 "When I'm too drugged up to comprehend a single word?"
 She smiled. "Later."
 She tried to leave but his massive hand landed on her shoulder. He looked down at her stomach then back to her eyes. "The doctor told me you needed surgery," he said. "Are you okay? How is the wound?"
 "It's fine. The ones on your back are worse."
 He let her lead him downstairs after that, finally accepting that she was going to bring every question back onto his condition. He walked with a slight limp on his right leg and seemed too slow for his normal speed. She desperately wished there was a proper medical professional to treat him.
 When they entered the living room, the VidScreen mounted on the wall was turned on and all of their faces were on it with a giant WANTED sign and handsome reward money displayed above their heads. An anchor was announcing that no place in the Northern Empire would go unsearched until they were found, alive. Unlike the report of her supposed suicide, there was a picture of her eighteen-year-old self this time, taken upon being forced into prison.
 "I thought you were, like, twelve," Jill said from the kitchen island, pouring milk into a glass. "And killed yourself in the Yangtze," she added as an afterthought.   "Yeah," Darren agreed from the dining table, eating toast. "That picture they showed in the news made you look like you were twelve."
 "I was thirteen," Athena corrected. "Before a few days ago, that was the last photo ever taken of me."
 Jill raised an eyebrow sceptically. "You're a bloody princess. How do you not have pictures of you all over the net?"
 "I'm not like Rovina. Nobody cares about a crazy princess."
 "You're not crazy," Darren said and then paused. "Well, aside from the whole suicide thing anyway. Why does everybody think that? They always said that you were on the brink of insanity and when the empress died you lost your mind."
 Even with the possibility that the empress was not her real mother, it still hurt to hear someone mention her death. She hugged herself and swallowed the lump in her throat. "I'm useless. I care about things nobody cares about. I say things that make little sense to anyone."
 "That doesn't make someone crazy," Orion said.
 "I think Rovina played a part in it," Athena replied.
 Until the moment the words came out of her mouth, the thought had never even occurred to her but she knew she was right. Everything that had happened, Rovina had played parts in. It was possible she'd been playing a part in this right from the moment Athena was born.
 "She did," Lifen said, not glancing their way from frying eggs in a pan over the stove. "She first spread rumours that you were mentally disabled to the press. She was only twelve; I don't know whether she really meant for it to be so destructive but it turned out that way and it had worked in her favour."

  "Why does she hate you?" Darren asked.
 This was the question Athena had asked herself her whole life. It was Lifen who answered.
 "Because she's jealous. When Athena was born, the soothsayer prophesied that she would become the Empress of the Empire. Rovina, eight at that time, couldn't stand to have someone else becoming ruler and when the Empress began to show more affection for Athena than her, it drew the line. But who can blame the Empress? Rovina was never around her mother! It was always Alvah that she ran to. She takes after the wretched man who can't love his own daughter."
 Everyone was stunned into silent as they stared at Lifen's outburst, the VidScreen the only sound in the room. She slowly calmed herself and scooped the burnt egg into the bin with a spatula as if nothing had happened.   Then it hit her. What if Lifen was...
 "Mama," she began. "Do you have any children?"
 Lifen swallowed and said nothing for a long while, staring intently at the pan with another egg sizzling in it. She finally said, "Not me, no."
 Oh. The disappointment was greater than she thought possible. How desperately was she wishing for a mother? Had she really allowed a dream confirm that she was not Chang'e's daughter?
 "Why?" Lifen asked.   "I...I was just wondering. You were very passionate."
 Lifen smiled slightly. "Chen and I aren't married, if you were wondering. We don't have enough money."
 After the end of the Fourth World War, better known as the Resource War of 21st century, marriage became the only legal way for conception. Official marriage certificates costed almost a fortune and could only be granted by the government. The law was introduced worldwide for population control and children born out of wedlock were taken legally by government and raised in orphanages as punishment.
 Athena added Chen and Lifen to the list of people she'd pay back if she ever succeeded in whatever this was.  
 Orion's body was going through hell but he tried to not show it. The wounds on his back felt like salt was being thrown on it, his right knee could barely support his weight and his face was mostly bluish-green, his lips busted in several spots. He wasn't even sure when he'd gotten half his injuries. But he was in a far better place than his men were.
 He had failed his duty as a captain. He overestimated himself. He couldn't train a platoon; otherwise they would've stood a better chance. So many people would not have died if he didn't fail so hard at being a leader. Maybe Ander wouldn't have taken a bullet to his leg before another struck his chest straight afterwards.
 Lifen made him take antibiotics and stuck painkiller patches on both his wrists, a luxury his soldiers didn't have. The woman looked a little like Athena; the oval shape of her face, the curve of her nose, the shade of brown hair and brown eyes were so alike. She had Athena's kind eyes and her smiles. She was very, very affectionate towards her.
 He would bet that Lifen was related to Athena somehow but someone related to Athena wouldn't live in a place like this and they'd have enough money to pay for marriage certificate.
 Within minutes, the effect of the drugs kicked in and he could barely speak a sentence without stumbling over his words. Much to his embarrassment, he was sat down on the two-seater couch. Thankfully he wasn't too senseless to grab Athena's hand as she passed by to go and sit on the chair next to the couch, and make her sit next to him.  
 He held her hand as he slept on the couch. His grip was tight and did not loosen even a little bit as if she would disappear any minute. She didn't have the heart to pry his fingers away. At least he had a shirt on now. 

  The VidScreen was turned on and there was news of the warfront in Western Australia. Her jaw dropped. Australia had declared war. The Southern Union had just given Rovina exactly what she wanted. Rovina must've been celebrating. The Empire had pushed Australia into declaring war because they did not have public support.   "Fracking hell," Jill cussed as she came into the room.
 Darren, who came in with her, swore too. They rushed to the VidScreen and gaped at the clip of a battle, thick with smoke and ringing with gunfire, soldiers running around, crawling and some dead soldiers in no-man's land. Australian planes were launching aerial assault and – Darren swore vulgarly.
 He slapped Orion awake. "Crap, Orion, I think that's your mum's plane."
 Orion's eyes sprung open and he was up instantly as his pupils tried to focus on the scene. The clip changed to more ground troopers and then back to the airstrikes.   "No," Orion breathed. Fear and helplessness painted his eyes. She had never seen him so afraid. "That's... Frack."
 "I thought Adeline Kesswell is a veteran," Jill said. "That's probably just her plane, not actually her inside the plane."
 "No... Her own plane," Orion said. He swore. "Me. She thinks I'm dead. Oh, my God, Hunter."
 "What's going on?" Lifen asked from the doorway.
 "Orion's mother is Senior Master Sergeant in the Australian air force and war veteran of the South African War. She's taking up arms again. Orion's brother was killed in action during the terrorist attack a couple of weeks ago and she thinks she's lost Orion too."
 "I need to contact her," Orion said.   "I can get a secure line for you if you have a port or something," Jill offered. "I'm itching to hack something again. Plus, I need to call my family too."
 "Thanks," Orion said, leaning back slowly on the couch again.
 Lifen got a port from her room and handed it to Jill, who seemed a bit too eager to get her hands on something she could hack. She had never been too far from her port in the time Athena had known her.   The news switched from the warfront to a press conference where Rovina stood in front of hundreds of journalists. She looked beautiful as always but her smile was now forced, lines appearing around her eyes. There was red hot fury in those dark eyes.
 A journalist asked, "What did Princess Athena hope to achieve in her 'stunt', as you put it?"
 "When questioned, my sister had said that she did not agree with father's political views. She wanted to, in her words, 'show how the empire should be led.'"
 "So overthrow the Emperor?"
 "She denied but it was implied, yes."
 Questioned? She was never questioned. No one came to talk to her except for Rovina herself and her father.
 Another journalist asked, "What does the psychologist have to say about the princess's mental condition?"
 "I'll let him take the stage instead of passing down the words."
 Rovina stepped off the podium and a tall man in glasses took her place. He was dressed in traditional hanfu and his black hair was sleeked back with far too much gel.
 "I've done many tests and none have shown any influence of any conditions on her actions. Her mind is in perfect health."
 "So she was fully aware of what she was doing and she wanted to betray her country?"

  "Yes, we can say so."
 "But it's always been thought that Princess Athena was mentally unwell. Is there an explanation for it?"
 "It has been thought that she was but she is not diagnosed with any conditions. Her behaviour may have suggested otherwise but her mind is in perfect health. I have observed signs of depression after the Empress's death but results showed that she was fine. It's highly possible that she'd used people's envision of her to her advantage."
 Another asked, "Couldn't there be someone who had made her do such things?"
 "She was questioned under a lie detector and it is confirmed that her actions were her own choice, without influence of secondary factors."   For the first time in her life, fire raged in her veins, sizzling and crackling. How far was Rovina going to go? Would she stop when Athena was dead? She was never questioned! No psychologists came to talk to her. This was outrageous! This was exactly how it must've looked when Rovina spread that rumour fourteen years ago.
 "VidScreen off," she commanded and the screen mounted on the wall blinked off with a chime.
 "I hate that girl," Lifen seethed. "She is an absolute monster! She never questioned you, did she?"
 "No, she didn't. She killed my friend right in front of me and didn't come back for two days. No one came."
 Orion gave her hand a squeeze and smiled at her tightly through drowsy eyes. "I think it's time you explained everything," he said. "You wanted someone to listen to you; now you have four people who will."
 The truth was only a tiny bit of what she owed them. She took a deep breath and began right from the beginning.
 "All my life, Rovina has done everything she could to make me feel useless and she made me believe that I was a failure. When you hear those words said to you every day, even before you can remember, you believe it. I thought I could never do anything right and when... when my mother died, Rovina made me believe that I killed her by accident because I added the wrong vial of tonic into her water. She... She replaced the tonic with poison but I didn't know at the time."
 Lifen gasped but Athena continued.
 "The Empress made me promise that I'd stop Rovina and the Emperor and that I'd protect my people. I made the promise not knowing what she was talking about. And later I learnt that five years ago Rovina discovered a substance called neuropium in Australian soils that could manipulate brain activity."
 "So what, mind control?" Jill asked, looking up from the Port.
 "Similar but for it to work with complete success, neuropium has to be injected directly into the brain. The earpiece in soldiers' ears: the blue liquid is the neuropium and it's injected into the brain at the back of the head. Rovina controls it using a neurotransmitter with neuropium inside."
 "Cade," Orion said.
 Athena choked. "Y-Yes. It damages the brain and if you try to resist the commands, the damage is done faster and worse. She's running out of neuropium and that's why she wants Australia desperately. And she is cloning armies and armies of genetically modified soldiers to fight for it."
 Darren and Jill's eyes widened in shock. Human genetic engineering had been banned since the late 21st century due to human rights issues. Clones were not treated as humans and clone slavery became an issue. From then on, any genetic modification of humans was banned by the International Humanitarian Laws.
 "I learnt everything I could about everything and then I fled to Australia with a false ID. I needed to make someone listen because no one in the palace did. They all thought I was crazy."
 "Okay," Darren said. "What do we do, Princess?"
 "I don't know yet. But no one else is going to die."
 Later in the day Lifen came and sat down with Athena and Orion and she turned the VidScreen on again. A young woman was reporting of the palace being in frenzy because of Rovina's coronation as Queen of Russia being moved to Shanghai from St Petersburg.   Rovina's crown was made from pure gold and was worth over ten billion credits. And it was guarded by twenty best guards at all times.
 Orion, now awake, said, "The neuropium; does it work outside the brain?"
 "Yes, but not well. From what I read briefly in Rovina's notes, it only holds influence for a minute or so."
 Orion nodded slowly, deep in thought as he stared at the Vidscreen. "I may have a plan but it's risky."
 "What is it?"
 "We steal Rovina's crown." If you want to read another retelling, go and read Mirrored Snow by makexbelieve. It's a Snow White retelling and it's really cool. The writer is really creative.
 
 


 

Part 3

Part 3 "If you walk on snow, you cannot hide your footprints." - Anonymous 
 Hands are drenched in rosy blood, as life floats down the perilous flood. Wounds are deeper than plain sight, but now the stars are shining bright. Hi, everyone. If you are enjoying Lost Star so far,  I would really appreciate it if you could support me by voting and commenting/sharing on Twitter to help me win something in the Wattys this year. All your help is very much appreciated! Thank you.

 

Chapter 22

Chapter 22

   His name was Cade O'Connor. His name was Cade O'Connor. His name was Cade O'Connor.
 He served Princess Athena. He served Princess Athena and no one else.
 He couldn't remember what she looked like though. Did she have brown hair or black? Oval face or round face, tall or short, he couldn't remember anymore. He couldn't remember much of anything at all. Where did he live before? Did he have a middle name? Did he have siblings? How old was he?
 He racked his brain, forcing himself to just remember. He screamed, punched himself, hit his head against a wall and did everything he could think of and sometimes it worked. He remembered glimpses of a whip in his hands, a blonde woman with a hole in her head, another woman with pills in her hands and lifeless blue eyes. And sometimes, nothing at all.
 He wrote his thoughts down but it was becoming harder to remember the strokes of the characters or even the alphabet. He had forgotten the stories he'd once told his princess. Or were those figments of imagination his brain had made up?
 All he had left of himself was his name. Even his own body was no longer his to control. Thick fog clouded his mind. Remembering was becoming more and more difficult every day. Sometimes the fog was so welcoming and it seemed to suck him like a black hole of heaven. At least he was not fighting; at least he could not feel this pain.   His princess is safe now anyway; he'd done his job. His princess would be proud of him.
 He finally threw himself into the black hole and did not look back.  
 Athena was in the woods behind Lifen's house, looking down into the valley where the village stood. It was Yuming Commemoration Day and the little village was lit by thousands of lanterns and the music could be heard all the way from the hill she stood upon. Lifen and Chen had gone to the village to celebrate too.
 She couldn't see the bustling villagers or smell the wonderful smell of buns and desserts but she could almost taste them. She longed to be in the village, celebrating with people like she was nothing important; just a simple village girl. It had been so long since she'd last been to a festival.
 Off in the distance, the city of Shanghai was celebrating too. Multicoloured drones and aircrafts circled the city and some even displayed pictures of the legendary woman on their sides. Some drones were in the shape of a lotus blossom, flower usually associated with Zhang Yuming.   "Who's Yuming?" a voice asked.
 Orion leaned against the other side of the tree she leaned on, his hands in his pockets. After three days of rest and medication, he was looking a lot better. The bruises on his face had faded and the wounds on his back were healing quickly. His fever was gone too.
 "She saved the city from an attack by a hijacked ship during the war. She sacrificed her life and blew up the ship before it hit the city. Records say that the sky was alight for hours and debris rained down on the city. Has your mum replied?"
 He nodded, pressing his lips together. "It really was her on the VidScreen. She promised she won't be in action anymore."
 "How are she and your dad?"
 He looked down at his feet and shrugged, jaws clenching. "They're coping apparently."
 His eyes were full of words wanting to spill out. "How are you, Orion?" she asked.
 He shrugged again and looked up at the sky but didn't say anything. Hesitantly, she reached out and touched his arm, then retracted her hand as her cheeks began to heat up. She discovered last night that Orion was indeed a cuddler. She woke up tangled in his arms and flew fifteen feet away immediately. She was still recovering from the shock of it.

  "I don't know," he finally said. "I see Hunter everywhere. You might not understand how good it was to have an older brother like him. I joined the military because Hunter decided he wanted to follow in our parents' footsteps. I looked up to him for everything."
 Athena nodded. She used to look up to Rovina too.
 "He is the greatest person I know. He was kind and considerate and selfless," Orion continued, eyes wide and desperate. "And I- I don't know. I try to be like him. I always think: what would Hunter do? But nothing ever turns out right. I failed in protecting my men. Hunter wouldn't have."
 She didn't hesitate to touch him this time. "You're not Hunter, Orion," she said softly. "You're from the same constellation but you're different stars. You have to stop thinking about what Hunter would do and start thinking about what Orion would do. And what happened to those people was not your fault." It was hers.   Orion sighed and looked up at the sky once more, at the constellation of the hunter and his bow. "That's not me, Athena; that's Hunter. Warriors who die in battle become stars in our skies but Hunter gets the whole constellation."
 She followed his gaze up at the stars. She still searched for the Empress, the woman who taught her how to look at the sky and see the impossible. She wasn't sure she'd ever find the Empress but she knew she'd never stop looking because no matter what, the Empress still loved and treated her like a daughter. That alone was something that could never be repaid.
 "I missed you," Orion said abruptly. He pushed off the tree and placed his hand above her head.
 His starry eyes, so close, made the urge to move fade away. His other hand came to touch her cheek gingerly, brushing stray hair out of her face.
 "You're still my captain," she breathed but her eyes betrayed her words; they looked at his lips.
 "I resigned, remember?"
 His darkened eyes flickered to her lips and instinctively she bit down on her bottom lip. His thumb traced her lips lightly, coaxing it out of her teeth's hold. An involuntarily shudder spread through her as her eyes fluttered close. Kiss me, Orion.
 He answered her unspoken demand with his lips softly pressing down on hers and her heart leapt out of her chest. He kissed her tentatively, testing the waters as his lips moved ever so slowly against hers. She could only stand there, not quite believing Orion was actually kissing her. She couldn't feel his scar like she'd expected, only the softness and the warmth of his lips on hers.   His lips curved up in a smile against her mouth. He pulled away slightly, resting his forehead against hers as his hands cupped her cheeks.   "You don't know how to kiss, do you?" he asked, his breath blowing gently onto her lips.
 Oh, great stars!
 From his chuckle, she must've turned the brightest shade of red. He put her limp arms on his shoulders and tilted her head before his lips met hers again. This kiss was surer, lips firm and movements certain, and it left her utterly breathless. His lips moved with precision and were more demanding this time. She dared to try and kiss back instead of standing there like an idiot.
 Another smile curved against her mouth and his hand slipped from her cheek into her hair, gently tugging the hair tie off the bun she'd twisted up. Her hair cascaded down onto her shoulders and Orion ran his fingers through it, each brush of his hand against her nape sending shivers down her spine.   She was probably a terrible kisser. Oh, Gods. What if she kissed like octopus suckers? Jill had once told her about an ex-boyfriend who kissed like that.

  Just like that she was ripping herself away from Orion, panting like she'd just been on a two mile morning run. He unknotted his fingers from her hair but didn't move away. His mouth – one she'd just been kissing – was set in a line but his eyes were now amused at her state of redness. Every inch of her skin was on fire.
 "You okay?"
 She stared at his mouth and gulped. "Am... Am I a bad..." she trailed.
 "Bad what?" His smile told her that he knew exactly what she wanted to ask. He was going to make her say it.
 She sighed and looked down at their feet, dejectedly whispering, "Kisser. Am I a bad kisser?"
 His laughter filled the air. Athena wasn't sure she'd ever heard him laugh before. It was a nice sound, deep and rich, and she liked it. Apart from the fact he was laughing at her.
 "Look at me, Athena," he commanded in his captain voice. She obeyed and he was looking down at her intently. "Would you stop kissing me if I said you are?"
 She really was terrible, wasn't she? "Yes," she answered truthfully.
 "Then no. Am I?"
 She tried to evade the question by attempting to duck out but he quickly trapped her against the tree, placing his hand beside her head. He cocked his head, waiting for an answer she didn't want to give.
 "I've never kissed anyone else before," she mumbled. "I don't know."
 "Good."   She blinked. He sounded so determined to make sure it stayed that way that it shocked her to hear it. When he dropped his hands from her side and looked out to the village and the city in the distance, she was left staring at him. The warmth of his mouth lingered on hers and she wanted him to kiss her again. Maybe she should ask Jill about how to kiss properly before she made Orion go through another terrible kiss again.   But maybe she shouldn't; Jill was still mourning Ander and sometimes Athena would catch her with tears in her eyes.   What would Danika have said about them? She would've been squealing and telling them to get married already. But first she'd exclaim, "About time!" Now she wouldn't be doing anything because she was gone. Athena added Danika Lory and her wife and daughter to the list of people she'd try to find in the stars.
 Orion took her hand in his, weaving his fingers between hers. His hand was rough but warm and so big it enveloped her whole hand. He pulled her down to sit as the foot of the tree, not letting her hand go. She hid a giddy smile that threatened to rise to her cheeks despite everything. From there, they could see the town, the city and the sky clearly and she hoped that was a decent distraction.
 "Tell me about you," Orion said.
 "Me?"
 "How did you get a fake ID chip?"
 Oh. That part. She didn't want to tell him. What would he think of her if he knew? Would he be ashamed of her for being so naive and foolish?
 Still she told him, "I used to sneak out of the palace through the servant's entrance into the city because I wanted to know life outside of... being me. I found an underground organisation that forged ID chips. I had one made with the name Asteri Verloren and I left."
 Of course, she left out the part where she blackmailed the man who led the organisation because he refused to 'become tangled with royalty'.
 "How did you come to Australia?"
 "I came aboard a fishing boat that illegally transports people from shore to shore."
 The way Orion looked at her made her cringe, shamed of what she'd done. She turned away, hiding her face behind a curtain of hair. A large hand clasped her shoulder and twisted her so that she was facing him again. 

  "The family you stayed with, that was not your godfather's family, right?"
 She gulped, remembering Nina Xing's face as she offered her a place to stay.
 She shook her head. "No. Nina found me thrown out of a motel because the owner refused to house a citizen of the Empire. She let me stay with them for a few weeks before the volunteer recruitment started. She understood my struggles because she was in the same situation fifteen years ago when civil war broke out in the west."
 "Are you ashamed of what you did? Betraying your family?"
 "Sometimes," she admitted. "I feel like I'm just being a nuisance, especially when I probably wasn't going to achieve anything." I still haven't, she didn't need to say.
 "Stop," he said. "Athena, you need to stop thinking that you're not good enough. Start believing that you are because you are good enough. Think of everything you've done. You successfully fooled the world, found a way into another country on your own, endured military training and escaped from the most well guarded prison in the whole Empire. You're only eighteen and you're brave enough, you're good enough to do all that.   "You're also one of the strongest and kindest people I know. You are determined and courageous and with a combination like that, you can rule the universe if you tried. You can do anything you put your mind to and don't ever forget that. Okay?"
 Athena folded her arms around his neck and let out a quiet thank you, hot tears stinging her eyes. She hadn't realised how much she needed hear those words, how much it would've meant to her. Gods, she was so grateful she could burst.
 Orion circled his arms around her waist and pecked her cheek lightly before he gave her a heart-stopping smile. It was a good thing her heart was mechanical.
 "Let's distract each other," he suggested. "No Rovina, no Hunter, no war. Just us."
 Athena nodded in agreement.   "Have you ever been in space?" he asked.
 "I have. It was...unbelievable. There were so many stars, Orion! Everywhere I looked. It was so beautiful."
 Actually, there were no words to describe how beautiful space actually was. Her mother had organised it for her sixteenth birthday, a day she'd never forget.   "Have you?" she asked.   He shook his head. "I'd like to one day. If I can save up for it."   Athena cautiously approached her next question, careful not to trigger any alarms. "If you were not a soldier, what would you be doing?"
 "Maybe a policeman?" he said, his tone more questioning than answering. "I don't know. What about you?"
 "Astronomer, or a writer," she answered immediately and then blushed from realising how unrealistic she was being. If she grew up as a villager's daughter, it was highly unlikely she'd become an astronomer. "Or maybe a teacher," she changed her answer.   "Are you betrothed?" he asked abruptly, completely serious.
 "Um, no," she stammered as her blush returned.
 "Are you forbidden from being in a relationship?"
 "N-No. Why?
 "You've never been in a relationship?"
 How could he bear a straight face while asking such questions? Here she was, heating up like an oven!
 "You know I haven't," she mumbled. "You're the first person I've," she coughed, "kissed." Her whole body was flushed and she was sweating under her clothes. She'd never really thought to be embarrassed by the fact she'd never been interested in someone like that before. But now she was beginning to realise how odd she must've seemed to normal people.

  "You don't have to be embarrassed," he reassured. "I'm just surprised."   She dared to ask something she'd been wondering for a while in an almost inaudible voice. "Have you ever been in a relationship?"   "Only one."
 "One?" Surely someone with Orion's looks must've been quite a desired person. Or did he not like commitment? That thought tugged at her chest.
 Orion rubbed the back of his head and he coughed uncomfortably. "I was overweight until I signed up for the army."
 Athena, much to her embarrassment, scanned at every inch of Orion. He was overweight? A man of solid muscle was overweight? It was not until he coughed again that she stopped staring at his arm.
 "Sorry," she squeaked.
 "Darren thinks that's why I cuddle," he went on, his face now harbouring a tint of pink. "Hunter and I used to share a bed when we were kids and he used to hug me to sleep because I was... and..."
 Orion trailed off quietly. His face hardened but his eyes were watery as he looked out to the village. She had never felt an older sibling's love but if Rovina was to die, her heart would shatter. Like Orion, she would want the old times back, no matter how bad they were. But for Orion, whenever he looked up at the night sky he would always be reminded of the older brother, his hero, he'll never have again.
 She'd never see her first and best friend or her little brother who was most likely dead.   "Danika had a daughter," she said, to no one in particular. "Her name was Kaylene and she was only one. Because Danika didn't report me back to Rovina, she's dead and so is Danika. She was one of the most selfless, one of the bravest people I've ever met."
 "How about her husband?"
 "Wife. I think she's gone too. Danika told us that she was a nurse but wasn't paid enough to support her family so she volunteered. And Cade was turning eighteen in a few months. He was supposed to go back to Ireland to see his grandparents for the first time in two years. He's never going to see them again. And I won't ever see them again."
 "He loved you," Orion said. "I know he did, Athena and believe me: he didn't regret anything he did for you. He believed in you and so did Danika and a lot of other people. I believe in you. This is why you have to start believing in yourself."
 She thought about the door exploding and Cade being flung against the wall, his head drooping unconscious. She thought of the bullet drilling a hole in Danika's forehead. Both died believing in her.
 In the distance, giant fireworks rocketed to the sky and exploded into a stunning array of colours and shapes, some even painting a picture Yuming. It was a dazzling painting, colours splashed on a canvass of night in chaos but it was utterly phenomenal.   She imagined Danika, Cade, Ander and Hunter's faces in the beautiful chaos and they belonged there, in her sky. She and Orion watched the finale of the firework display until they sky was clear again, the painting replaced by stars. But now, it seemed like there were four more shining among the billions and billions.
 They returned to Lifen and Chen's house through the back door, Orion holding her hand. In the hallway, Darren's voice was repeatedly cussing very loudly, some words so vulgar her ears burnt.   His voice rounded the corner into the kitchen, where she and Orion had come in. He was dragging something in. When he saw them standing there, he swore and dropping the thing he was pulling in.   Except, it was not a thing.   It was a person. More specifically; it was a soldier in blood-soaked uniform, and he now lay on his stomach, his head emptying out blood onto Lifen's wooden floor.
 Orion and Athena stared. First at the soldier and then at Darren. Darren stared back. He opened his mouth to say something but then closed it. Open, and close again.
 "Oh, good. You two are back," Jill appeared behind Darren and exhaled. Her dark skin was ashen and her eyes were bloodshot as if she'd been crying. "Teri, I need you. Now."
 Her voice was too urgent for Athena to question. She immediately followed Jill out to the hall and then into the small bathroom. Jill's shaking fingers fumbled with the doorknob as she locked it. "Jill, are you okay?" Athena asked.
 Jill shook her head and sat on the toilet, dropping her head in her palms. She mumbled something. Athena had to strain her ears to catch her words but there was no mistaking them.   Jill had said, "I'm pregnant." b
 Who saw this coming?

 

Chapter 23

                  Chapter 23
 For a full minute Athena stood frozen in her spot, somewhere between shocked and not knowing how to respond to such a statement. Was she supposed to congratulate her? But Jill didn't seem to think it was something to be congratulated. Tell her she was sorry? Sorry for what?   As Jill's teary eyes drifted up to hers, she could finally manage a, "How?"
 "It's called sex, Athena," Jill snapped.   Her cheeks warmed. "I-I know but... How is that possible? Who's..."
 "Remember the day A-Ander asked me on a date? The night before that. You all noticed that we were acting strange and now you know the reason. Oh, my God, what the frack have I done?"
 "Are you sure, Jill? Have you tested?"
 Jill brushed past her towards the sink, turning around after she grabbed something. It was a small pink plastic stick with a screen on one end. The word POSITIVE was written on it in green letters, followed by a pixelated smiling face.
 Athena chewed on her bottom lips, uncomfortable with the situation. It wasn't everyday someone announced to her that she was pregnant. Jill set the tester back on the sink and sighed.
 "I was spotting so I asked Lifen if she had a kit. I don't know what to do, Athena," she whispered and it was like her confession all over again. She looked lost, like the wall she was beginning to rebuild was crumpling down again. "My child will grow up not knowing who its father was, how great he was or how much he would've loved it. And then there's the bloody conception law."
 Athena gasped as she suddenly remembered. If Jill was not married by the time the baby was born, the baby would be taken away from her.
 "They're not taking my baby," Jill said firmly as she looked down at her flat stomach in determination and laid a hand on it. "I won't let them. If it means marrying the first person I see then so be it. I will not let them take away the only thing I have left of him."
 A tear rolled down her cheek and she quickly wiped it away with the back of her hand.   "Darren," Athena said without thinking.
 "I know," Jill replied. "He likes me. But he won't want to marry me when he finds out I'm pregnant. Don't worry, Athena; I'm not going to lose him. If no one would marry me then I'd run to somewhere they can't dictate my life or my baby's."
 "Is there anything I can do?"
 Jill gave her a lopsided smile. "Get Rovina out of the picture, take control of the throne and change the goddamned law within the next eight months. If you can do that, I'll plan your and Orion's wedding. Bloody hell, I'll even look after your children."
 She was joking, right? She had to have been joking about changing the law even if she wasn't joking about the wedding part because it was nearly impossible to change an international law in such short amount of time, let alone take control of the throne.   "I'm kidding," Jill said, much to Athena's relief. "Just don't tell anyone yet. I need to figure out what I'm going to do."
 "About what?"
 "About whether I'm going to help you and Orion steal Rovina's crown or not. And that dead person in the kitchen."
 As if on cue, a woman's scream filled the house. It wasn't bloodcurdling but it was enough to tell Athena that Lifen had just arrived and she'd seen that said dead person in her kitchen.

  Jill swore and mumbled under her breath, "I told him to dump him outside." Then she said to her, "Come on. We got to go sort that out."
 When they entered the kitchen Lifen, Chen, Orion and Darren were circled around the body. Lifen's face was as pale as a sheet as she held a hand over her mouth and took deep breaths. Chen and Darren were crouched beside the soldier's head and were examining the earpiece. Orion looked at Athena with a cocked eyebrow in question.
 "What happened here?" Lifen demanded.
 Everyone looked to Darren and he gulped before explaining, "Someone came knocking on the door so I grabbed the gun and went to open it. As soon as I saw him, I shot before he figured out we're wanted."
 "We need to get rid of him before someone else comes along," Chen said.
 "We need to remove the tracking chips first," Orion said. "We should leave them somewhere in town so that it doesn't look suspicious when his captain views the chip history."
 Lifen shuffled to the drawers and returned with a small knife in her hand. She bent down to pick up the soldier's limp hand but Athena stopped her with a hand on the woman's shoulder. She eased the knife into her own hand and took Lifen's spot.
 Everyone watched as she sliced open the skin of his palm, twisting the knife up quickly before too much blood could begin to ooze. She dug out the chips imbedded in his thigh and his neck too. The chip in the neck was a military official ID chip and the other a tracker. She, too, had a tracker before for security in her leg. She'd dug out so many chips and whilst she was certainly becoming quite an expert, it was never easy.   When she was finished, her hands were covered in the man's blood. Bitter, sour bile burned at the back of her throat and her stomach knotted. She pressed her lips together, dropping the three chips and the knife on the floor before rushing into the bathroom to get the blood off.
 Orion wanted to go after her but didn't. Seeing her really doing this was unnerving. She had taken his chip out but he'd been too unconscious to remember. What he saw just now, must've resembled what it must've looked like when she took his out.   "We need to get rid of these now. They're still activated," Chen said, picking up the bloody chips.   "Darren and I'll go," Orion offered. "Your chips will show up with these if you go."
 "What about the body?" Jill asked, arms around her midsection.
 Athena returned with clean, wet hands and said, "We have to keep the earpiece."
 "How? It's attached to his head," Darren said.
 Athena looked at Darren as if it finally occurred to her that he'd killed a man. It shouldn't surprise her. They'd been trained to kill since they were sixteen years old, both he and Orion. During the attack on the base they must've shot at least one person.   Her gaze snapped up to him. For the first time, he couldn't look at her in the eye.   Athena swallowed the lump in her throat. What did you expect, Athena, she asked herself. Don't forget that you were training to become one of them, too.
 "I," she began but realised that her answer was full of uncertainties. "Pull it off."
 "Just like that?" Jill asked sceptically.
 "Yes," she breathed out. "It won't be pleasant because the wires are attached to the spine but if you pull hard enough, it'll come off."
 Darren offered to do the job of pulling the earpiece off because he felt responsible for getting them into this mess. Orion offered to take the chips into town and discard them somewhere. Lifen dragged Jill away into her and Chen's room and the men looked at them curiously. Athena didn't say anything. Chen and Darren cut chunks of skin on the soldier's neck and Athena had to get out of that room, unable to keep her guts in at the stench of blood and the sight of torn bloody flesh.

  Orion kept hair out of her face as she vomited into the toilet, rubbing her back gently. After heaving out her stomach empty, she managed to stand on her shaking legs as she pushed herself along the wall to the sink to clean herself. Orion didn't help her and she was glad because she'd already embarrassed herself enough for one night.   "I can't apologise for what I did," he said quietly. "It was my duty to protect you and I would do it again if it means you'll be safe, Athena."
 "You resigned," she pointed out, daring a glance at him in the mirror.
 He advanced towards her in two strides across the small bathroom and stood so close behind her that she didn't dare move, holding her breath. His hand rose and it brushed her hair over her shoulder, moving it aside. Then he laid his chin on her shoulder, her cheek almost pressed against his. Oh, great stars. He stared straight into her eyes from the mirror and her knees nearly gave out beneath her.
 "You need to understand," he began, his voice barely a whisper, "that it is always my duty to protect you, no matter what job I do. I make it my duty to protect you. Okay?"
 She took a gulp and nodded stiffly. Orion muttered a good and gave her a smile before he strode for the door. When he opened it Darren stood on the other side, about to reach for the handle.   Orion dropped his smile and gave his friend a tight nod before he said, "I'm going to go fix the mess you made."
 Orion brushed past him and towards the front door. Seconds later there was sound of a door sliding close. It very well could've been her imagination but she swore Orion was different with her than he was with others. He was open with her and he shared his feelings but with everyone else, he spoke little and his face was always unreadable. Her heart skipped and she felt fuzzy. She found herself staring at the empty space where he was before.
 Until Darren cleared his throat. His hands were behind his back, probably soaked in blood but Athena, thankfully, could not see.   "What's wrong with Jill?" Darren asked.
 "Nothing," she replied too quickly.
 "Princess, you're crap at lying. Seriously, is there something wrong? Should I be worried?"
 Athena opened her mouth then shut it again. She couldn't possibly tell him that the girl he had feelings for was pregnant with the child of a man he probably disliked. Plus, Jill would shoot her dead if she said a thing.
 "It's nothing to be worried about," she evaded the question. "Jill is fine. It's... It's a female thing."
 Athena heated up but Darren stopped asking questions, mostly because she squeezed past him before he had a chance to. The tangy smell of blood on him was making her feel nauseous and she needed fresh air.  
 Lifen suggested leaving the body by the river. Orion and Darren took one step further and left the soldier in the river. They'd said a prayer and an apology as his body floated down with the current, bobbing up and down.
 The way Athena looked at them broke Orion. He couldn't look at her because he'd done monstrous things, things that could not be undone. He remembered the faces of six individuals he'd taken the lives of and he would do anything to be able to fix that. He'd never told anything this before but more than a few times, he'd woken up in cold sweat.
 "The way she looked at me..." Darren trailed as they trudged up the hill in darkness of the night.
 "She's too innocent," Orion answered as a way of reassuring Darren to not think about it too much. But he knew it was pointless to even try. 

  That night, no one slept. Darren sat in his place on the bed, swearing occasionally. Jill busied herself with staring up at the ceiling. Athena lay beside Orion with her eyes closed but her irregular rise and fall of her chest told him that she was wide awake.   He was afraid to touch her. He still stood by what he said but Darren was right. The way she looked at them... He had always tried to convince himself that he was doing the right thing, even when he regretted it. But now he was beginning to see that having the power to take lives at will was not right at all.
 And he worried for her because given their situation it would be difficult for her to stay alive if she kept on refusing to hurt anyone. He couldn't lose her too.
 He finally dared to wrap an arm around her and pull her into his chest. Her eyes flew open and she tensed. He pressed his lips to her temple and let it linger on her skin.   He had a plan to steal Rovina's crown. It involved making Athena worry constantly. If something went wrong, everything would be over for them. So now, he would savour this moment.  
 A week now. It had been a whole week since her sister escaped with her merry little band. No stone in the Empire had been left unturned but the four were nowhere to be found. They'd probably raced back to Australia somehow. Either way, Rovina was fuming.   Not to mention a troop from France at the front line in Queensland was crushed under American reinforcement and she'd already lost thousands from the Empire. Of course, there were thousands more left and she could always produce another thousand or so in less than a day. But it was still troubling how strongly Australia could stand up against the Empire.   This definitely needed to be brought to her father's attention again.
 She scanned her hand on the door to her father's private study, the door silently easing open straightaway. He was slumped at his desk, a one-way hologram blurring his features. Whatever it was that he was looking at he was quite clearly lost in it.
 She cleared her throat. "Papa, you summoned me?"   He waved the hologram away and she could see his sleep-deprived eyes, ringed with purple bags underneath. Giving him a smile, she walked around the desk and pressed a kiss to his cheek.   "You should rest, daddy," she crooned.
 He simply replied, "There are some things I need to discuss with you, Rovina."
 His voice was clipped and edgy, unlike the soft tone he always used with her. Something was not right. She eyed him cautiously as she nodded and took a seat in the chair on the opposite side of the desk.
 "Is there a problem, papa?"
 He straightened up in his chair and folded his arms on the table, brown eyes stormy and dark. This look. He'd never given her this look before; only Athena. H-How could he! She was not her pathetic sister.
 "I want you to stop," he said, voice low and dangerous.   She feigned confusion, knitting her eyebrows together. "I'm not sure I understand. Stop what, father?"
 "Stop controlling me, Rovina. You gave me your word the day I decided to install the earpiece; you said you'd never control me."
 She let out a short, desperate laugh. "What do you mean? I would never dare-"  "Do you take me for a fool, Rovina!" he yelled. He yelled at her. He'd never yelled at her! "You've forgotten your place. I am your father and you are my daughter. You do not pull my strings like one of your puppets."

  "Father, I've never manipulated you!" she denied. Why was he doing this now, right when she needed him the most?
 Her father fell silent and she knew that she was fighting a dangerous battle now. His silence was far more powerful than his yells.   "You really are a forgetful person, daughter. Allow me to remind you; you forced me into all those conferences with Australia's Prime Minister, you forced me to give orders for Gen and his men to attack on the Union's Foundation Day and you made me say those words to Athena."
 "Athena!" she gasped. "But father, she betrayed us!"
 "No, she betrayed you."
 "You cannot be serious, daddy. You've never cared for her before. You cannot possibly tell me that you do now."
 He stared at her for a long time, his eyes assessing her – she could feel his scrutiny setting her on fire. Not him, too. He'd always been on her side, even when her mother never was. He couldn't do that now and ruin all her plans!
 "Rovina, I know you don't like her," he began slowly like she was a three-year-old child. "But you are old enough and mature enough to realise that she is your sister. And I've only started to realise that I've made a mistake, too."   "What mistake is that?"
 "Not treating her like she should've been treated; like a daughter."   Rovina's blood sizzled. "She's a daughter of a peasant!" she screeched. "She does not belong here. She's ruined our entire family! She killed mother."
 He laughed but there was no amusement in his tired eyes. "Do you really think I don't know what you did, Rovina?"
 She sucked in a breath. "How...How did you know?"
 "You underestimate me. I didn't say anything because I loved you too much to damage our relationship. But I have to now. I am disappointed in you, Rovina. You've gone astray. I should've taken better care of you, instead of planting ideas in your head that you are superior."
 Rovina blinked her tears back. He called her a disappointment; just like Athena. She was NOT like her! She was superior. She was better than that peasant girl could ever be!   "I'm going to withdraw the troops from Australia."
 She blinked again. She must've heard him wrong. He couldn't withdraw troops from Australia without accepting defeat. And she needed more neuropium – she needed Australia no matter what the costs were.
 "You can't do that, father," she said, horror creeping up to her.
 "I can and I will. Having Australia would let you down an even more dangerous path. I was wrong, Rovina. We are not superior. The world isn't ours to control. People's minds are not ours to control." He narrowed his eyes. "I understand that now."
 She slammed her hands on the desk, leaning forward as she pleaded, "This is preposterous, father. The court would never agree. Even Advisor Gui would not agree with you."
 He ignored her and brought the hologram up again. He changed the settings and it became two-way. She saw it now – the last family photo taken years ago on Rovina's eighteenth birthday. Strictly speaking, it wasn't much of a photo. Athena's childish face beamed on one side of the frame while on the other side in the background, her mother was pressing a kiss to Rovina's forehead and her father was smiling at her proudly.
 But her father wasn't looking at her now. He was looking at Athena's massive face covering half the picture. This was the last straw. She couldn't stay in that room anymore.
 She shot up and span on her heels, stomping towards the door.
 "Rovina," her father called. She stopped but didn't turn, seething with anger. "If you ever control me again, I will publicly disown you without right of inheritance for anything. You may leave."
 White hot fury raged inside her as she speed-walked back to her chambers, hands rolled into fists and slamming the door shut. She stood in front of the full length mirror in her closet, glaring at her reflection. What had she done to deserve this? She was better than Athena. She was smarter, more beautiful and more successful. She had done more for her father than Athena ever had so why did he love her? Why now?
   She screamed and threw her mother's necklace at the mirror and it shattered into a spider web of fractals, distorting her reflection.   She might become the queen of Russia in a couple of weeks but being an Empress was still years away. Too many years away. And now it seemed she needed to become Empress to get what she wanted.
 She had already sacrificed so much for her goal. If she had to sacrifice more, then so be it. So, what do you guys think of this chapter?


 

Chapter 24

                  Chapter 24
 The glassy-eyed soldier stood straight as a wall and listened as the princess gave orders. Somewhere deep in his mind a spark of rebellion flickered. But why should he disobey her? His only duty was to obey orders of his superiors. And he knew that this woman would rank higher than anyone after he'd done his job.
 "Do you understand me, Cade?" she asked, her voice a sharp knife in his chest.
 "Yes, your highness," his mouth replied an automated response.
 "Tell me what you are to do," she commanded; a twist of the knife.
 He repeated every word she'd said like the good, obedient soldier he was. This woman. There was something he should know about her. He did know. Actually, no. He didn't know. Why would he?   When he was done reciting, the princess's hand gently landed on his shoulder and her cherry red lips twisted into a smile like Satan's. She must've drunk blood to have such red lips, he thought.   "I promise," she whispered lowly as a thunderstorm brew in her dark eyes, "that I will make you suffer. You're going to watch every one of your friends suffer because of you. You chose the wrong person to meddle with."
  He wasn't quite sure what she was talking about. Had he done something to her? He couldn't have. He had never seen the princess before this day. Or had he?   "You may go, Cade," she dismissed him with a wave of her hand, walking away from him and towards a full-body hologram of a girl in handcuffs. He swore he'd seen that girl before. Her name was stuck at the tip of his tongue. The liar.   "Do you know her?" the princess asked, gesturing towards the hologram.   "No, your highness," he replied. And then he realised: he didn't really know her. He must've mistaken her for someone else. "Excuse me, your highness."
 He left the room with a low bow, glancing at the hologram one more time. She was probably just a girl from the VidScreen advertisements.  
 The six sat around the table of the small living room, the soldier's comm-link resting peacefully on it, the blue neuropium bubbling along the tube. The VidScreen on the wall was turned on and it was reporting live from the warfront in Queensland. But no one was really paying attention to it.
 The subject of interest now was the comm-link and the older princess.
 "Do you have any idea how we could possibly steal Rovina's crown, plant this inside and return it before the coronation?" Darren asked.
 Athena shook her head.   Jill added, "We can't have only Rovina's crown. We need to find out how to reverse the effect of the neuropium in the comm-link – and a telepathic transmitter, too."
 "That's quite a lot that we need to do," Chen pointed out. "We only have three weeks before the coronation."
 "Obtaining information on neuropium and the comm-links is going to be the most difficult," Athena said. "The information is classified and only Rovina for certain will know about it. Even my father may not know."
 "I have a plan," Orion said, and everyone's attention landed on him.
 He had been quiet the whole time, his face an unreadable mask as he stared at the earpiece. In those moments, he was the serious captain again, though he still held Athena's hand.
 "It may not work," he warned.
 "Just spill it, mate," Darren urged. "Any idea is better than no idea."

  Orion opened his mouth but something on the VidScreen caught Athena's attention immediately. Breaking news, the headline said in Mandarin. A female anchor then continued to report-
 She gasped. No, that couldn't be right. Her father...
 "No," she whispered as she stared at Rovina's crying face on the screen, shaking her head in denial. "No, no, no. It can't be!"
 Her sister was crying, loud sobs wrecking through her so hard that she couldn't speak. She was surrounded by flying recorder droids and cameras and a guard was trying to get the droids to give her some space. Her face was blotched red, soaking in her tears and her eyes were bloodshot. Rovina had never gone public in such a state before.
 "What's going on?" Jill demanded.
 "The emperor," Lifen breathed, "has been assassinated. Poisoned and stabbed three times."
 "No," Athena denied, tears filling her eyes. "No, it's not true."
 It couldn't be true! Where was her father now? There hadn't been any shots of him yet. Maybe he wasn't dead. She refused to believe them. They were lying! They had to be!
 "It is suspected the assailant was from the Southern Union, though no evidence had been found," the anchor said and the frame switched to Rovina again. This time she was more controlled than she had been before, still sniffing and wiping her cheeks with a white handkerchief. Then she broke into tears again, turning away from the cameras.
 "They're lying," Athena ground out. "He's alive. I know he is."
 Arms wrapped around her shoulder and they tucked her into a firm chest. Hands smoothed her hair down. She shook her head. She didn't need to be comforted. Her father was not dead. He wasn't.
 But her cheeks were already wet. "He's not dead," she sobbed helplessly into his chest.   "He doesn't deserve your tears, sweetheart," Lifen tried to comfort her.   But he did though. He deserved tears from his daughter, no matter whether he loved her or not. Athena still loved him even if he'd never shown an ounce of love towards her. She was at war with her own family, her own blood but it was never in her intentions for any of them to die. So why did he have to die? Why?
 "I'm sorry, princess," Darren said.
 He'd once carried her to bed when she fell asleep in their parents' room when she was a child. The Empress had made him do that. She'd heard them argue but kept her eyes closed and pretended to be asleep, naively hanging onto the hope that he might. To her surprise, his arms had scooped her up, took her to her room and he laid her on the bed. She still remembered not being able to sleep from happiness that night.
 "Lifen, can you please translate what they're saying?" Orion asked.
 When she was seven, she'd solved a difficult maths question all on her own and he'd said, "Good." The first ever complement she'd received from her father.
 Now, she would never hear him again. Never see him again. She'd never embraced her father in her life. She would never embrace him at all. She'd never get the chance to tell her that she loved him and to ask for forgiveness.   "The palace is going to be restaffed within the next three days," Lifen said to Orion. "Plans are already underway for tighter security."
 Orion's arms tightened around Athena. "Actually, my plan might work."  
 Athena squeezed Orion's hand as they slid from shadow to shadow along the walls of the alleys in the underbelly of Shanghai. In his other hand was a gun. Darkness blanketed the narrow ways littered by trash and Gods knew what, excepting the occasional light from street lamps that were still functional. They avoided those like the plague.

  Stepping over something that resembled and smelled like a dead animal, Athena led them around the corner. Loud techno music blasted from one of the buildings in the distance and suddenly two people came stumbling out of a door. One leaned on the other, staggering.
 Jill swore behind them as she grabbed Darren's hand and dove behind a giant bin only steps away from them. It was too far away for Orion and Athena and the two people were beginning to close the distance, tripping over their own feet as they veered in every which direction.
 Athena sucked in her breath and Orion did the only thing that came to mind that would preserve their identities. He pressed her against the wall and smashed his lips to hers, hiding the gun between their bodies. Athena gasped but seconds later she understood what he was doing and relaxed. He brought her hair over the part of her face that his hood wouldn't hide, making it seem as if he was running his fingers through her hair.
 They were just another couple trying to get some privacy.
 The two people hobbled past, one hooting loudly and the other giggling. Both reeked of alcohol. When they were a safe distance away Orion took his mouth off Athena's and peeked at the couple from under his hood. The girl was dressed in a sheer white dress, so short that it didn't do much to cover her red underwear. Orion crinkled his nose.
 He turned to his girl in front of him to see that her hair covered most of her face, red even in the dark, and she was panting.   "Sorry," he whispered with a smile. He wasn't.
 She shook her head. "N-No, I understand. Thank you."
 "Break it up, love birds," Darren said in a hushed voice, coming out. "We need to keep moving if we want to get back before sunrise."
 Athena nodded and continued her lead. Another two more turns of the alleys later, she stopped at a door and nodded at them. The light inside the building was off. The whole street was pitch black, buildings so tall that moonlight didn't reach the street and the stench of opium suffocated him.
 Orion could hardly believe that she had once roamed this place regularly. It was like a scene straight out of a twisted horror film.
 "You sure it's only him inside?" Jill asked.
 Athena nodded. "The last time I was here, yes."
 He and Darren positioned the guns in their hands and flicked the safety off and Jill unsheathed the butcher knife she had hidden in its case, gripping the handle tightly. Athena tried to pull the sliding door but as expected, it was locked.   "Stand back," Orion told her.    As soon as she stepped backwards, he fired at the lock on the door. For a second, he expected a loud bang to echo throughout the alley but the only sound that could be heard was the hiss of wires from the hole that had formed in the door. Then he remembered that his gun, the one from the dead soldier, had a silencer.
 He carefully slid the door open, his gun inside the room before he was. His eyes scanned the dark room quickly: he could just make out shapes of a table, two chairs tucked under it, a staircase leading up and a kitchen counter top. The deadly silence unnerved him. He motioned for Athena, Darren and Jill to follow him in.
 From what he could see, the owner of this house was a tidy person, despite his profession. Eyes scanning for anything and everything around the room, he tip-toed up the stairs. It had been months since he was last on a mission but he could still remember the nerves buzzing beneath his skin. Mostly because it was happening now.
 The upper level was lit by a faint white light in the middle of the hallway. There were five doors, all closed. Soft snoring came from one of the rooms and Orion glanced at Darren, nodding at him. A silence message for him to watch their backs.

  He crept to the door where the snoring came from, his finger on the trigger. He motioned for Jill to open the door. Athena mouthed at him to be careful. Everyone had some sort of weapon for self-defence, except her. Orion mouthed back for her to stay outside.
 Knife gripped in one hand, Jill slid the door open slowly, just wide enough for him to slip inside. He pressed himself against the wall for a moment, peeking inside. The room was small and only consisted of a bed and a bedside table beside it. On it was a figure, lying on his back. Unaware of the intruders in his house, the man snored peacefully, his chest rising up and down.
 Orion waited for a sign that he was awake but got none. There was no change in breathing pattern, not even a tiny bit. Completely out. As per the plan.
 Orion gave Jill and Darren a nod. Jill flexed her shoulders before sliding in through the gap, Darren following after. Orion stole a kiss from Athena before he went in himself. He snuck to the other side of the bed and aimed the gun at the sleeping man's head and Darren did the same on the other side.
 Then Jill jumped onto the bed, straddling the man's chest and pressing the knife to the man's throat.   And suddenly there was a knife at hers too.
 Darren was on the bed before Orion was, a gun at the man's temple. Orion took aim at the other side of the man's head, whose eyes flew around the room quickly. Jill's hand covered his mouth before he could open it and his knife dug into the skin under her chin, blood oozing out.
 Darren growled, "If you know what's good for you, you drop your fracking knife and do as we say. You know who we are and you know we will blow your head off. We want an ID."  
 Orion's new face took him by surprise every time he saw his own reflection. The day before, he'd gotten surgery and now he looked like he was a different race altogether. His hair was black now and his eyes were narrower. They were no longer dark brown and 'flaked with stars', as Athena had once told him. They were now just plain brown. The crook in his nose was now non-existent and the scar on his lip had disappeared too. His face was rounder with higher cheekbones.
 The woman had reassured him that the surgery was completely reversible but that didn't make him any less worried. He liked his face.
 "Orion?" Athena stood at the entrance of the bathroom. "Are you ready?"
 "Is Jill?"
 Athena nodded. "She's finished registering your name. The... The palace expects your arrival by four this afternoon, through the servant's entrance."
 "Wayan Lin." He tried out his new name.   "Orion..." she began hesitantly, biting her bottom lip as her ears started to redden. "Can I see your back?"
 He turned around for her as he smiled, lifting up his shirt. He'd gotten rid of the scars on his back too. He would probably reverse those changes too. If he survived this he'd like a reminder of what he'd endured to help save the world. His mother would freak if he saw her now. She'd been constantly messaging him since she'd found out he was alive. But yesterday, he'd told her to stop now because he was on a mission again.
 Orion turned back to face her. "How do I look?"
 "Different." There were tears in her eyes.   Orion closed the distance between them and pulled her into a hug, one she immediately responded to by wrapping her thin arms around him and burying her face in his chest. He didn't want to let go of her. He wanted to stay like this forever. That way, there were no uncertainties about living and not living.
 "I'm sorry, Athena," he murmured. He wished there was another way but it had to be done. He was the only one out of them who had been specially trained as an infiltrator. "Be happy, okay? I'll be fine. I'll be careful, I promise."
 "I know," she mumbled into his dampening shirt.
 "You've lost too much weight, Athena. Eat, okay? I want you to be healthy when I see you again. You need to be strong, physically and mentally. Don't dwell on the past because there's nothing you can do about it."
 Her first sob wrecked through her and seeped into him, her body shaking. He wanted to shove his words back into his mouth. He would never understand why she cried over that no good excuse of a father. Lifen had told him how he treated Athena and Orion was glad he was dead because if he saw that man again, he would not have held back from beating the hell out of him.
 "What I'm saying is," he corrected softly, "that you should focus on what needs to be done now so that you don't lose anyone else."
 Orion sighed. His new ID chip was buried in his palm, his bag was packed and his name had been registered into the list of new servants hired at the palace. Within just twelve hours, he'd memorised the blueprint of the palace Jill had illegally obtained. He'd mapped everything he needed to do as soon as he was in the palace grounds.
 All he had to do now was to board the train to Shanghai. He should go soon or otherwise he wouldn't arrive at the palace on time.
 He kissed her slowly and deeply, savouring what could be their last kiss. He branded his mouth on hers so that neither would ever forget this kiss. She welcomed him willingly, even standing on her toes and wrapping her arms around her. Now he really didn't want to go.
 "Any chance I get a kiss like that?" Darren asked with a smirk, leaning against the wall just outside of Lifen and Chen's room. Jill and the couple stood next to him. Lifen was beaming while Athena squirmed, still in his arms.
 "If you ever get married, sure," Orion answered sarcastically.
 "If I ever get married, I wouldn't want you to kiss me."
 "You should probably go now," Chen said. "The next train to Shanghai leaves in fifteen minutes."
  Orion said his farewells and then he left the Hua residence and walked towards the place that had caused pain to everyone he knew. He memorised the smile Athena forced for him as he walked out the door.  
 Three days passed since Orion had left and there were no words from him yet. Lifen had spent her life's saving on his surgery, ID and a new port for communication – the money she saved for her marriage certificate. She reassured Athena every day that for her she would give anything. Every time she'd done that, Athena became convinced again that Lifen was her mother. You didn't need to be registered to have an illegal baby, after all.
 The past three days had been silent days and lonely nights. She missed Orion. She wondered if he was okay. He had to have been because he was still a part of the wanted crew on the VidScreen reports. He must've been settling himself in his new environment and finding the right time to communicate with them privately.
 On the news that night, was also a report on Rovina's coronation as not only queen of Russia now, but Empress of the Empire. The Empire's leaders wanted the coronation as quickly as possible because of the war. The sooner it was done the more organised the country would be.
 And that scared them senseless. Rovina, Empress of the Northern Empire. Jill had claimed it a nightmare, raging.   Nevertheless, Athena made herself eat every meal despite her loss of appetite. She'd just finished eating dinner, now almost ten at night. After hearing the nightmare and mourning her father, it had taken her three hours to find the will to make herself swallow.   She was about to ascend to her lonely bed when she heard sirens outside, followed by shouting. Jill rushed out of the bathroom, a toothbrush in her mouth. She looked at the front door with wide eyes and then at Athena. Then Darren and Lifen came out of the living room, both with panicked eyes.   Chen was last to come out from his room, face pale as a sheet, and he said, "Soldiers. A lot of them. They've caught us." Uh-oh. :) I love torturing the figments of my imagination.

 

Chapter 25

Gif of Athena above ^.                   Chapter 25
 Orion's roommates were quiet and when they were not, they spoke Chinese. Short phrases and words Athena had taught him were not much use in trying to eavesdrop while he pretended to be asleep. His port was under his bed and he itched so desperately to set up a secure line and message Athena to ask if they were okay and to tell them he was fine and his job as a delivery assistant was going well so far.
 Of course, he was still being 'trained' and only had to check the correct orders had arrived and to keep track of orders being made. Still.
 The back of his head vibrated and he eagerly took out the port and unfolded it.   Message Received from Jiaying Chang.
   Rovina's personal servant. Orion frowned as he clicked on it. His roommates turned to look at him before continuing on their conversation about... goldfish? Orion didn't actually have a clue so he pushed it to the back of his mind.
 Meet me in garden.
 Orion almost wondered if he'd made a mistake in accidently-on-purpose running into her on his first day after finding out that Rovina had decided to keep her personal maid. His original idea was to see if he could find out anything from Jiaying and the girl had fallen straight into his trap. A little too far, actually. She wouldn't leave him alone now.
 Orion forced a smile which he quickly retracted as if he didn't want the other three men to notice. He told them he'd be back in a while before he left.   The lower levels of the palace were a maze that Orion was still trying to figure out, even with the memorised map. There were undergrounds levels beneath the servant quarters and his men and friends were down there. Hopefully. He passed a few strolling palace guards and he made sure to shrink into himself as if he was afraid.
 Eleven at night, the gardens in the area where staff was allowed was empty except for occasional guards and the girl sitting under a tree in a blue cheongsam. Jiaying must've been around his age, maybe a year older. With prominent curves, a pretty face and immodesty, she was quite a talk among the new male staff and some female, too.   Orion smiled and held up a hand in greeting as he strode over. She was prettier than Athena, he'd give her that. But, like Rovina, Jiaying paled in comparison to Athena. Orion swallowed the urge to do something stupid, like leave this girl hanging by turning back to his room.
 "Wănshàng hăo, Wayan," Jiaying said as he sat next to her.
 Orion said the same back to her in his best pronunciation, which probably was not very good because Jiaying smiled in amusement.
 "How was your day?" she asked.
 He shrugged. "Quite tiring. How was yours? Did her highness tire you out?"
 Jiaying pouted her plump red lips and he was surprised by his own indifference to it. "I wished she'd fired me. She broke another mirror and I cut myself when I cleaned up."
 She held up her palm that had a yellow bandaid stuck to it. She left her hand hanging in between them and Orion took his cue to take her hand and examine it. The cut must've been quite deep; the yellow bandaid was quickly losing colour as the antiseptic lost its effect.   "Does it hurt?"
 "A little bit."
 "You should be more careful, Jiaying," Orion whispered, as a concerned lover might. "The princess must've been very angry to break another mirror."

  Jiaying nodded. "Ever since Princess Athena escaped with her friends." Then she looked from left to right and leaned in closer to Orion to whisper, "I heard a rumour today that they'd been spotted near a village."
 "Really?" Orion's voice held no traces of the panic he was feeling. "Which village?"
 "I don't know which. I only know that it's along the Yangtze. Oh, and did you hear about the missing soldier?"
 "No. I only got to Shanghai a few days ago, remember?" he lied rolled off his tongue.
 "Oh, right. Well, the captain of his platoon found the soldier's tracking chips buried outside that town and the ID chip was stuck to the belly of a car."
 Exactly where Orion had put them.
 "What about the soldier? What happened to him?"
 "No one knows yet. But everyone is sure he is dead and that those four killed him."
 Orion nodded, deep in thought. "Her majesty must have a lot on her mind these days. Her father had just been assassinated, her sister betrayed her and she's fighting a war, too."
 Jiaying scowled a little, as if annoyed by his change of direction to the princess. "Yes," she sighed. "Although, she doesn't seem to be mourning for His Majesty. Of course, it's not my place to say anything. I'm just a servant."
 "That's not true. You have a right to freedom of speech. Your opinion matters no matter who you are."
 Jiaying smiled at Orion. "Thank you, Wayan. Really, though, I'm quite scared to say anything about her."
 "Does she hurt you?"
 "Sometimes," she whispered.
 Orion scowled. "Do you like her?"
 "No. Not at all. I just want to lose this job without losing my life or anyone else's."
 "What do you mean?"
 "I... I shouldn't tell you this."
 "Jiaying, please."
 She sighed. "You are the first person I've ever told so please don't tell anyone. Princess Rovina had threatened me that if I ever stepped out of line, my family will pay for my mistake. One person for each mistake."
 "Don't you ever want to defy her?"
 "All the time! I hate her. And..." she trailed and looked away as if deciding whether she should continue or not. "You must never tell anyone of what I'm about to tell you. Promise me."
 Orion took Jiaying's hand in his. "I promise on my life that I will never tell a soul."
 The girl exhaled deeply. "Princess Rovina... murdered the Empress. I saw her switch the Empress's medicine with poison and it's been killing me to not tell anyone."
 Orion's eyes widened at his cue to be surprised. "No..." His true surprise was at the fact she was so trusting. She barely knew him and she was telling him all these.
 "Yes, she did. And poor Athena thought her mother died because of her but I was too scared to say anything to anyone. I'm so ashamed of keeping this a secret. I think Athena did the right thing. For what it's worth, I hope that she's safe and trying to stop Rovina because, Wayan, killing her mother is not her only act of monstrosity."   Jiaying was about to burst into tears. Tears pooled in her contact-clad turquoise eyes and her lips trembled. She pressed her knuckles to her mouth and hiccupped. "I'm sorry," she muttered, hauling herself up to her feet. "Just... Pretend I never said a word and please do not tell anyone of what I'd told you. I beg of you."

  She scrambled up and scurried away towards the palace before he could reassure her that he won't. He hurried back to his own room too. His roommates gave him Cheshire grins, knowing that Orion had gone out to see Jiaying just like the night before. But Orion's mind was too muddled to pay attention to anything other than his port.
 Screw waiting for a safe moment. Orion set up a secure line and messaged Lifen's port, asking them if they were okay. He couldn't sleep that night, his heart pounding so hard in his chest he could hear it, torturously waiting for the buzz of his port.  
 Darren swore under his breath. Jill rushed back inside the bathroom and spat out, washing her toothbrush. Athena retracted the ladder back into the ceiling. Lifen ushered the three into her bedroom. The sirens kept on wailing.
 "Open the door!" a woman yelled in Chinese. "Do it now or we're busting in."
 A constant string of curses was pouring out of Jill's mouth as Lifen ran her hands over the wall next to the door, feeling for something.
 "Mama," Athena said, her chest heaving up and down but not getting any air in her lungs. Her heart was thundering so fast, almost to the point of malfunction and her hands shook uncontrollably.   "Found it," Lifen uttered and pressed a place on the wall with both hands.   An area of the wall next to Lifen slid open from nothing, revealing a dark tunnel just big enough for a person to crouch.
 "OPEN THE DOOR! You're under arrest in the name of the Northern Empire!"
 "Quick, in here!" Lifen hissed and pushed Athena inside.   She quickly crawled into the tunnel on her hands and knees but only about a foot in, the floor ceased and she felt steep steps that led down. Jill nudged her and she hastily descended the stairs on her bottom. Jill was right behind her and Darren followed. Before the trap door slid close and left them in total blackness, she heard an explosion.
 Jill swore. "Frack. We forgot the earpiece."
 "I got it," Darren told her. "I grabbed the guns and the port too."
 Then the port flicked on and the green light from the screen lit up the narrow stairway. Athena found herself at the bottom of the stairs. She stood up on trembling knees, holding onto the dusty wall for support. Just around the corner was a small room, only about the size of a double bed. It was empty except for an old blanket in the corner, which looked like it was home to a family of rodents or roaches.
 "What is this place?" Jill asked as she walked around the room.
 "Bomb shelter," Athena said. "The house must've been built during the Resource War. According to stories, nothing can destroy them."
 "Well," Darren began, shining the port around the room, "let's hope they're true. Otherwise, we're pretty-"
 The sirens stopped. But the silence was quickly receded by rumbling noises above them and grating sounds of things scraping against the floor. The three looked at each other in silent understanding. Athena kneeled and prayed right at the foot of the stairs for Chen and Lifen to be fine.   The sounds grew closer. The search must've reached the bedroom directly above them. If anyone thought to check for bomb shelter, they were as good as dead. There was no way out except for the way in. Fifteen minutes of rumbling, scraping, grating, screeching and shattering followed.
 Fifteen minutes of anxiety and torture later, a male voice called, "Negative, Captain," and his footsteps retreated out of the bedroom.
 The woman shouted at Chen and Lifen to tell her where 'they' were. They denied knowing their location. They denied any association with the criminals. A shot filled the house and Athena had to bite her lips to keep herself from screaming. 

  "Last chance," she warned. "Tell me where the criminals are or we'll be forced to escort you to the palace for the Princess herself."
 "No," Athena breathed. The last thing she wanted was for Lifen and Chen to be taken to Rovina, who knew that Lifen had been close to her. No one else.
 Athena turned to march up the stairs but Jill dragged her away, gripping her wrist like an iron vise. "Don't you fracking dare!" she hissed harshly as she threw Athena down to the ground.   "We really do not know, Captain," Chen insisted. "We don't know why you would think we have contact with them but I swear on my life that we've only seen them on the VidScreens."
 "Arrest them," Captain said. "And burn the house."
 Athena bit back a gasp.   "What?" Darren asked in panic. "What's happening?"
 "They're taking them to Rovina and they're going to burn the house."
 Jill and Darren both swore.
 "These bomb shelters are fire resistant, right?" Darren asked.
 Athena nodded. "Yes, but Lifen's home..."
 "We have more important things to worry about, Athena."
 She nodded again. She supposed there were. Lifen and Chen were being taken to Rovina and there was no knowing how Rovina would take her next step against her. The house was gone, which meant they needed to relocate. And Orion; what was happening to him? Was he safe?
 She didn't know. She didn't know anything anymore. She didn't know if Orion would be able to find the blueprints for the earpiece. She didn't know if they'd be able to reverse the effect of the neuropium even if they did have the blueprints. She didn't know how effective it would be even if they'd somehow managed to reverse it.
 Athena leaned against the wall and pulled her knees into her chest, trying not to let her tears fall. The feeling of helplessness seeped in as the house burned down above her and there was nothing she could do about it. She wondered if the soothsayer had prophesied Rovina as the Destroyer.
 Her sister was a spectacular Destroyer.
 Maybe Athena would one day become the Mender, fixing up everything Rovina had destroyed.  
 When Athena woke up, it was pitch black again and she'd been sleeping on Darren's shoulder. Being embarrassed was no longer a major concern anymore, given the circumstances. The port on Darren's lap had run out of battery before they fell asleep and there was no way to tell what time it was.   Jill stirred on Darren's other shoulder before she groggily lifted her head. At the same time, Darren's stomach growled and he groaned, rubbing his face with his hands.   "Do you think the house finished burning yet?" he said.
 "I can't smell smoke anymore," Jill said.
 "Either way, we need to get out of here. Athena, is there anywhere we could go for now?"
 "The abandoned sector," she said straightaway, having thought about it before she'd fallen asleep. "The demolition is not due until December."
 "Good. Let's get moving."
 Darren folded the port and shoved it into the pocket of his track pants. He handed Jill the gun with the silencer while he took the one without. He didn't bother asking if Athena wanted the gun. He knew she would refuse to shoot anyway. 

  They ascended the stairs, breaths held and heart racing. Athena felt around for the soft spot in the wall to open the hatch and after a while, she finally found it, pressing it with all her might. The door, thankfully, slid open without a sound. She bit her lip to stifle a gasp.
 Sunlight blanketed charred black walls and furniture and ashes lay in piles. Only the steel frame of the bed was intact and the mattress was half eaten, springs spiking out. The walls had only crumpled in some parts but the entire roof had collapsed, creating a deadly maze of wooden beams and planks, creaking and groaning and threatening to give out. Half-burnt things from the attic were caught in the web of beams or lay in broken, black heaps on other furniture.
 Through a shattered window in the bathroom they spotted a soldier patrolling around the house. Through the missing door of the kitchen, there were another two soldiers outside.   Crouching behind a wall in what was left of the hallway, Darren whispered, "I'll take the two from the kitchen. Jill, you take the one from the bathroom window and Athena, go around and see if there are things that we might need. Don't let them see you."
 Both nodded in unison. Athena crawled through the ashes and remnants of Lifen's beautiful home, ducking under beams. Just as she was about to crawl back into the bedroom, the first shot rang out.   Then, "In there!" a voice yelled in Mandarin and was followed by a loud gurgling noise. More shots followed and she raced into the bedroom. A slightly burned metal cabinet stood in a corner and she ran to it, pulling the doors open. Suddenly female cry filled the air.
 Athena paused for a second but she forced herself to search the cabinet in front of her. Blankets and pillows. Athena grabbed the smallest roll of blanket.   A few more shots followed and she pressed her hand on her chest to physically calm herself down. Then everything was quiet.
 "Jill?" Darren called. "Athena?"
 Athena exhaled a relieved breath. "Here," she replied, slipping out of the bedroom and over a fallen beam.
 "I'm fine, too," Jill came out of the bathroom.   Athena's eyes began to search for any signs of injuries but Jill didn't seem to have any, strolling out leisurely.   "We should hurry," Athena said. "When the tracking team realises the soldier's chips aren't moving, they'd send reinforcement."
 They scavenged what remained of the house for anything they would need. In the end they found four canned tunas that were relatively undamaged, the blanket Athena took and some knives. Darren volunteered to do the gruesome task of pulling off another earpiece to use as a transmitter.   Athena looked back as she walked away. Lifen and Chen's home was a ghost house. And they were most likely being tortured because they put them in danger. She'd seen this coming and yet she stayed at their house anyway.
 "Athena, stop thinking and start moving," Jill snapped, pulling her away. "If we succeed, we can get them out."
 She was right. Athena swallowed her guilt and left on the four hour long journey to the abandoned sectors by foot as the broken heap of the car they'd driven here would attract too much attention in broad daylight.
 It was convenient, she supposed in forced optimism. When the time came, it would be easier to carry out their plan.  
 Rovina looked at the prisoner, a man called Jason, in almost disbelief. He was picking up the chair, just as she'd wished.   Put it down.
 He did. Her eyes twinkled in delight as she brought the clear solution up to her face. It looked just like water. But neuropium had also made its home among the clear liquid. After five years, Rovina had finally figured out how to dissolve neuropium in water. And the best of all, it was still as effective as the earpiece where neuropium was inserted into the brain.
 There was no need for that anymore. Now she could just slip the substance into the water supplies and the whole world was hers to command.   Rovina laughed in pure joy. Finally! After five years! She'd done it. She'd succeeded. It was these moments that she wished her father continued to share her dreams. He would've been so proud of her.
 Bow to me.
 Jason bowed at an angle almost parallel to the floor.   Soon, the whole world would bow to her and Rovina couldn't help grinning like an idiot. She could see it already!
 "Your Highness," a palace guard interrupted her.
 "What?" she snapped. She vaguely remembered having him in her bed a few nights ago. Or it could've been that handsome one posted in the ballroom. They all looked so similar.
 "The troop has managed to capture Hua Lifen and her husband," he said, his voice quivering.
 Rovina's eyes narrowed into disdainful slits. "And what of the fugitives?"
 The guard gulped. "Captain Liu says the criminals were not found and that they'd set Hua Lifen's house alight to ensure they could not escape, if they were at the house at all."
 "They failed."
 The guard paused for a moment before he nodded hesitantly. "Yes, your Highness."
 "Do you know what my sister did? She failed, too." Rovina sighed impatiently. "Fine. Prepare an interrogation room, Class A."
 The guard's eyes widened by a fraction at the command before he quickly covered it up with a bow. Rovina pretended to not have noticed the guard's shock and returned to Jason, who was still bowed in front of her.
 Now all she needed was more neuropium. And for that, she must have Australia.   Rovina added, "Oh, and prepare a conference with my court and all war advisors this afternoon."  I hope you guys liked t and I really want to hear your thoughts on Lost Star. 
 


 

Chapter 26

                  Chapter 26
 They survived off the four canned tunas and constant pep talks for the first two days. Granted, the pep talks mostly consisted of Darren reassuring them that he was sure he'd come across an operable port charger in the junkyard soon and Jill telling him to shut up. Athena usually listened to the banter in silence as she curled up against a wall, thinking about their plan which was already falling apart.
 They were in heart of the abandoned sectors where buildings were almost stacked on top of each other, packed tighter than the tunas in the cans. A ten minute walk through narrow labyrinths of dark passages took them to the bank of the Yangtze River, where on the other side stood the bustling city that never slept. Cars sped along sky-roads and aircrafts circled the tall buildings, whizzing in and out of the city.   No one had come to search the sector yet. It probably already had been searched in the first round after they escaped. Which worked very well in their favour.   Far up the river on a small island, lights from the palace hovered above the water, reflection distorted by choppy waves. Athena liked coming by this part of the riverbank after their nightly trips to the junkyard. She could see the palace and it eased her mind a little to know that she was not too far away from the people she loved anymore.
 Maybe she could swim there.
 No, Athena. Stop your delusions. Your next step is to get in contact with Orion. Focus.
 Releasing a sigh, she turned and slinked in between the walls of rundown buildings back to their hideout, the stench of peeling paint and mould assaulting her.   Scavenging the junkyard night after night for a working port charger had had resulted in nothing but fatigue and she was beginning to feel hopeless. They'd finished the last can of tuna and the port was still uncharged. They were no closer to figuring out the earpiece. Gods know what was happening to Lifen and Chen, and Orion.
 Tomorrow, Athena promised herself. She would be brave tomorrow. With that thought, she curled up next to Jill in the corner of the dark apartment and fell asleep.  
 Athena's stomach growled softly in hunger as they slid along the alleys, armed with guns and knife. The heat of the midday sun didn't beat down directly into the alley but the narrow strip of street was stuffy and humid. Beads of sweat slithered down their foreheads and necks.   This part of town was occupied by the lower class people with barely enough income to keep themselves fed, which made her even guiltier to be stealing from them. She made a mental note to pay them back at the first chance she could. But for now, she had to survive in order to pay them back later.
 Jill picked the lock to an empty home on the ground floor. It was small and the furniture had worn down to the point where the original colours were impossible for them to guess. A holograph of a man and a woman with a beaming girl in between them was displayed on the wall from a photo-projector. Athena memorised their faces.   The fridge was nearly bare, with only a pack of four bao buns, a half empty juice carton and leftover fried vegetables. Athena mumbled a constant string of apology as she stuffed three of the four buns and the juice carton in a torn bag she found.
 "Hell, yes!" Darren cried, grinning. "They have a port charger."
 The port was already connected to the built-in charger on the wall when she returned his smile.
 "I got some clothes," Jill said, coming out of a room with a stack of clothes in between them. "I got extras for Darren because I can't go another night with that reek."

  "Hey!" Darren protested with an amused smile on his lips.
 "Hello?"   They froze. A knock rapped on the back door of the house, the way they'd come in. Darren picked up his gun and switched off the safety. Athena slowly grabbed the knife she'd laid on the kitchen countertop next to the fridge and gripped it tight.
 "Anyone in there?"   That voice; it was so familiar. She must have heard that voice before. Her mind was so convinced that it belonged to someone on their side. It was neither male nor female and it was slightly robotic and - oh! Of course!
 She ran to the door and swung it open before Darren could finish his warning to stay back. It was completely unnecessary though, because hovering on the other side of the door was M, her little red body tattered and scratched.
 And the first thing she said was, "You left me!" her eyes blinking red for a moment.
 Athena's smile slid off her face. "M, I was arrested and taken. I couldn't take you with me. How did you find me?"
 "I used your biosignature. I'm programmed with software to track my patients anywhere on the globe. It took me over two whole weeks to find you, not to mention you kept moving all over China! And why I am I sensing a seriously large built up of hormones? Is somebody pregnant in there? And while we're at it, aren't you going to invite me in?"
 "Who is this?" Darren asked, coming to stand next to Athena.
 "My medi-bot. Her name is M."
 "Okay, we can do the introductions later," Jill interrupted. "I've found a portable charger and we need to move it."
 "Wait," M said and a blue light from her eyes scanned Jill from her head to toe. "Oh, I see."
 "What do you see?" Darren asked, eyebrows furrowed.
 "Nothing," Jill said before M could.
 M's eyes turned to Athena and the lights dimmed as if in question. Athena subtly shook her head.   "She's right. I meant 'I see' as in I've got a scan of her biosignature. By the way, are any of you expecting coded messages? Because over the last two days, I've got about a couple dozen from an unknown sender coded for someone named TAS."
 Athena gasped and looked at Darren and Jill, their eyes shining like the full moon with newfound hope. They had contact with Orion now.  
 The wait drove Orion insane. He knew that Lifen and Chen were at the palace now and rumour said that their house was burnt down because they'd been suspected of aiding the fugitives. Jiaying had also whispered to him that they were in a Class A interrogation room, the room he'd been in when he was at the palace the last time.
 Though he was greatly relieved that his friends were not captured, he couldn't breathe the worry out until he'd finally got a message back two days after he'd sent the first one. During the three days, he'd sent close to about a hundred messages to the port and also a few to the old medi-bot he had seen in Athena's crashed car. Out of habit he'd memorised the droid's ID code that day. He wasn't quite sure what he was hoping to achieve by that – it had been out of pure desperation.   Jiaying had just bid him goodnight and she was running off to her room as she tried to hide her grin. Orion wiped his mouth on his sleeves on soon as he was out of her sight. Kissing Jiaying was nothing like kissing Athena. She was certainly more experienced than Athena, that was for sure but for him, it felt like kissing a dummy. 

  I'm sorry, Athena. I had to do it.
 He didn't regret it, though he did feel guilty for misleading and using the poor girl like this. In a way, he was helping her out of her mistress' clutch.   When he checked his port before he slept that night, he was expecting another disappointment of an empty message box and another restless night of worrying. But as he connected to the secure network, he bolted upright in bed.
 Message received from Hua Lifen.
 We're fine. Living in abandoned sectors, safe. We saved the earpiece and got another one too. How are you going?
 Qing, one of Orion's roommates, asked him, "Who is that?"
 "My mother," he lied. "She'd just been discharged from hospital."
 Meanwhile his fingers were typing: Getting closer. Coronation is in thirteen days.   Hurry the frack up then.  - Hua Lifen has disconnected -
 "How is she now?" another man asked.   Orion looked up at the oldest man in his mid fifties and smiled graciously at him. "She's fine, thank you. She's living with my aunt until she can live on her own again."
   For the first time in nearly a week, Orion fell asleep peacefully.  
 The next part of his plan consisted of convincing Jiaying to side with him, to – for once – rebel against Rovina. He was quite convinced she would accept his offer. The way she'd become quite attached to Orion in the past week was a good support for his theory. She'd try to catch his attention whenever he was around. It was subtle but Orion had been trained to see the not-so-obvious.   After the first night of confession of her true feelings towards her mistress, Jiaying became more open in sharing her hatred with him. She'd told him about her experiments using prisoners captured from Australia and also about her five-year long project. She didn't know what Rovina was doing that she had to be so secretive about but she knew that it couldn't be good for anyone.
 She'd told him, "Sometimes I worry that if my use for her runs out, I'd end up in that room," referring to the chamber where Rovina's 'contribution to scientific knowledge' took place.
 When Orion asked what she thought of the younger princess she answered with a shrug. "I wasn't allowed to talk to her. But I think she's very brave in trying to fight back against her own father and sister, who are much more powerful than her."
 "Do you ever wish you could do that too?" he'd continued to ask casually.
 She'd laughed, "That would be a death wish!" Then she'd stopped smiling and murmured, "Of course I do. Things I've seen, Wayan... No human should have to endure those things. All those people, cut up and limbs replaced with metal... Fed poison so Rovina could test the antidote..."
 Orion had been genuinely shocked by this. Athena had failed to inform him of this. Maybe she was not aware of this either. He could think about that out later. For now, he had a maidservant to catch up to.
 He asked a woman who was on a break at the Delivery Centre to cover his packages for a short while. The woman followed his gaze after the girl in blue hanfu uniform, going back into the palace and she gave him a wink before she took the holoboard of delivery list from him.
 He reached her just before she passed the storeroom where all unclaimed packages for staff were kept. Orion grabbed her wrist and pulled her in, quickly flashing his chip on the scanner as she squeaked in surprise. He locked the door behind them.

  "Wayan, what are you doing?" Jiaying cried in panic. "Our jobs!"
 "I know, but I have to ask you something. It's about Princess Athena."
 The panic left her eyes, replaced with curiosity slightly tinged with disappointment. "What about the princess?"
 Orion wondered for a brief moment whether he was doing the right thing or not. She could easily betray him but he doubted she would start being loyal to her tormenter when she was finally given a chance to stand up against her.   "If you could help her fight Rovina, would you?"
 "It depends on what I have to do. Hold on, no. Why are you asking me this?"
 He leaned in and whispered, "I'm sorry, Jiaying. I'm not Wayan; I'm one of the prisoners who escaped with Princess Athena."
 Jiaying gasped but Orion placed his hand over her mouth before she could make a sound and draw attention to them, supposedly doing things they shouldn't be doing in the storeroom.   "Please listen, Jiaying. We have a plan to expose Rovina's lies to the world and you're the only person who can help us do that. Do you know where Rovina keeps her files for the neuropium production?"
 Her eyes were wide and laced with fear but a spark of hope was flickering. She was thinking about this. Good.
 "Please, Jiaying," he begged in desperation. "Help me."
 Her eyes fluttered close and when she opened them again, he knew he'd almost succeeded. She gently pulled his hand off her mouth and he let her.
 "I can't," she said. "You have to understand that I can't risk my family's lives, Wayan."
 Orion sighed and looked down at their feet. "I understand. I trust that you won't tell anyone of what I just told you and please, help me by keeping this a secret."
 Jiaying's eyes darted to the door and she bit her bottom lip nervously, a trait that reminded him of Athena. She stared at the locked door intently, her eyes flittering. Finally she groaned in frustration and ran her fingers through her hair to mess it up a little, tugging at her uniform to create a dishevelled look.
 "I will certainly keep this information to myself," she began, "and... I'll see what I can do. For everyone's sake, I hope you know what you're doing... Wayan Lin."
 She grabbed his hand and pressed it against the scanner next to the door to open it before scurrying out. He fiddled around with the shelves of packages before he exited to avoid suspicion and possibly being fired for allowing unauthorised persons into the room.
 His mind was already thinking of other ways he could obtain the documents he needed. Jiaying loved her big family; he could see that in the way she spoke of them fondly with a spark in her eyes and heartfelt words. He'd expected her to refuse his proposal but her hatred for her mistress was just as strong as her love for her family. She would help in any way she could but he couldn't afford to wait around and see what she would do.
  
 Orion awoke to a message in the middle of the night. It read: I cannot sleep. Can I see you outside? Bring your port.
 He quietly pulled on the T-shirt he'd chucked at the end of his bed, careful not to wake up his roommates and made his way out, folded port in hand. Jiaying sat under the tree which they usually met up at, her port in her lap. The old, perfectly trimmed oak tree, he dared to muse, was going to become quite a memorable place.   Jiaying shifted uncomfortably and fidgeted with the hem of her sleeves. Her eyes nervously darted around everywhere. Her eyes landed on the patrolling palace guards near the buildings a few times.
 "You owe me big," she told him as he sat down next to her.   He cocked his head. "For what reasons?"
 She inched closer and lowered her voice. "I've got codes that would allow you to access anything in the palace database."
 A grin almost broke out on his face as he tried to smother his excitement and ignore the leap of his heartbeat. "How?" he asked.
 She scrunched up her nose and shuddered. "I managed to 'persuade' the head of surveillance for the code and I hope I never have to lower myself to such standards again. And before you get the wrong idea, no, I didn't do anything demoralising."
 Turning her attention onto the port in her lap, she unfolded the quadrants and pressed her palm on the screen. The port blinked to life.
 "I'm sorry," he apologised as he switched on his own port. "But if he touched you-"
 "No, he didn't. Don't worry. I can take care of myself. Now here is the beta access code." Her finger pointed at a yellow note made in the corner of her screen. "You can go into any file that's shared among the database, even if they're restricted."
 She pointed at the one below. "This one is the alpha. This is for confidential files only in the premium database used by officials like research scientists. I think Rovina's files might be in it. But be careful when you use them. These codes are tracked and even the best hackers can't get away. Believe me; a few people have been executed because they got caught."
 Obviously Jill hadn't messed with the palace network system yet. Orion quickly copied the codes down into his port in a locked document just in time for a palace guard, a man in his mid forties, to come strolling towards them, a gun in his arms.
 He barked something at them in Chinese and Jiaying bowed her head, mumbling an apology – one of the few words he understood. She turned off her port and bid Orion goodnight, giving him a peck on his cheek before rushing off. Orion apologised in his best pronunciation, quickly turning off his port before the guard could see the screen.
 "Wait," he said, in English this time. Orion held his breath and turned around, plastering on an innocent smile.
 "Yes, sir?"
 "You're from the delivery room, aren't you?"
 "Yes, sir."
 "Did you receive a parcel today addressed from Beijing Institute of Medicine?"   "I do recall seeing a parcel from Beijing today, sir."
 "Drop it off at room 64 in the guards' quarters first thing tomorrow," the guard said.   Orion hid the huge ball of relief behind a smile. "Of course, sir. Have a good night."   As soon as he was back in his room, he sent the locked document through the secure network, along with the password to unlock it. He held back his naive optimism to believe that Jill would succeed in hacking into the palace mainframe. Until Rovina was exposed of her crimes, none of them were safe and hacking the most well-protected system on Earth would increase risks of exposure.
 The fact that Jiaying had obtained this information had increased risks of exposure. Soldiers could be storming in right at this moment and shooting him on the spot. Or worse, someone had spotted his friends and ratted on them for handsome reward money. If you liked this chapter, don't forget to vote and comment! Your feedback is highly appreciated.
 


 

Chapter 27

                  Chapter 27
 Athena jumped as Jill swore again, thumping the port against her knee and groaning in frustration.   "Those fracking auto-trackers just keep jumping at everything!" she growled, her shoulders heaving up and down as fast as Athena's heart raced. "I can't even get – thump – to – thump – the – thump – firewall!"
 Four long days had passed since Orion had sent the codes and countless times Jill had come dangerously close to being tracked. Each time there was an unhealthy amount of profanities coming out of her mouth, like now, and Athena worried she'd either break the port at some point soon or cause her baby some sort of injuries.
 The coronation was in less than ten days and there was no knowing whether the mainframe would even have Rovina's files at all. Athena knew how secretive she was of the neuropium transmitter designs. Even she had to lie to a lot of people to know as much as she did.   She would like to tell Jill that it was okay if she couldn't do it but neither she nor Darren said anything along those lines because it definitely was not. They huddled in the corner as rain drizzled outside. The only thing lighting the cold, damp ground floor room was the screen of the port and a little green light from M, the only indication that she was on at all.
 "Look, Jill, take a break," Darren said, handing her a piece of stale bread they'd stolen that morning. "Eat something."
 Jill continued to tap away furiously. "I'm not hungry."
 "Well, that's okay because I didn't ask whether you're hungry or not. I told you to eat something because you haven't eaten all day." The rare tone of frustration was creeping into Darren's voice now.
 Jill snatched the bread from his hand without looking up and stuffed it into her mouth, only to be back at the port again in less than five seconds.
 Athena glanced at the port and all she could see were numbers and characters flashing across the screen. After a few minutes, Jill paused and looked up. With narrowed eyes she glared at the wall beside Darren's head, a million thoughts rushing behind those gray eyes.
 "I have dangerous plan," she finally announced. "And stupid. Athena, how long does it take to get here from the palace?"
 "In hovers, half an hour at most."
 Jill nodded and stared at the spot on the wall again. "Half an hour. Alright then. I can't hack it without giving our position away so here's the plan; I hack the mainframe and get the information. I'll have to debug it so that it can't be tracked anymore and then I'll send all of it to M. We'll leave the port after that and get as far away from here as possible."
 "That's too risky," Darren argued.
 "Let's hear your plan then, sunshine," Jill retorted. Darren pressed his lips together. "Yeah, that's what I thought. Either we risk this or we lose it all because I can't fracking get past that security without setting alarms off."
 "Where do we go?" M asked.
 "Good question. Athena?"
 "Huh? Oh." Where else was there to go? Moving to another part of this sector was risking too much. They were sure to sweep the area again. Unless... "The sewers."
 M gasped. "You want us to live in filthy underground tunnels with rivers of defecated stuff?"
 Darren smiled. "You are certainly very human for an android."
 M's eyes narrowed into semicircles as she glared at Darren. "I have standards, thank you."
 "You do not get a say in this," Jill said, pointing her finger at M. "Sewers are fine. Where's the nearest entry?" she continued to ask as M indignantly cried something about artificial intelligence rights.

  Athena tried to remember the map she'd memorised months ago. If they were where she thought they were then there should be an opening about a kilometre away.   "How long will it take to debug the files?" she asked.
 "Depends on how big the files are. It should take about twenty minutes but it's hard to say."
 Twenty minutes gave them ten minutes to run. That should be fine, she calculated. "I think it's about a kilometre down south. I'll go and check."
 "We all should see where it is tonight," Darren suggested, "and tomorrow morning, we can hack."
 "I'm coming too," M said.
 Jill nodded, folding the port and putting it inside the pocket of her too-short khaki pants. Athena led them down a dark narrow street, rain still drizzling and their footstep sloshing in puddles of mud. The buildings on either side had once been lively shops with sweet aroma of food wafting around the street, maybe some even lit by neon signs. But now they were no more than skeletons of empty homes, signs fallen, walls cracked and windows shattered.
 The entry to the sewers was directly behind what had been a fabric store. It was an early twenty-first century style opening with a round flat sheet of metal in the pavement and not the wheel-turned hatch.
 Darren stuck his fingers in the edges around the sheet and grunted as he brought the sheet up and rested an edge on the pavement, revealing a sliver of pitch black tunnels underneath.
 "Well, we got to the right one," he panted. "But we should leave this open tonight."
 Athena nodded, her heart racing already. Jill was right; the plan was dangerous. If the timing was even a few seconds out, they were all doomed. But there was no other way. If Jill couldn't hack without sounding alarms then maybe no one could. This was the only way, she repeated to herself as they returned to the sanctuary which they would soon leave behind.  
 The rain had ceased but the skies were still gray and mud covered every inch of ground outside when Athena woke up. She shared the last piece of bread left with Darren and Jill.   He and M patrolled outside as Jill sat leaning against a wall, port ready in her lap. Her lips rolled between her teeth in and out as her tense shoulder heaved rapidly. She looked up at Athena.
 "When you're ready," Athena whispered in response, clenching her fingers tighter on the gun. Every vein buzzed beneath her skin and she was ready to run for her life. The rush of blood was almost audible in her ears.
 Jill laid a hand on her stomach and exhaled a long steady breath. "Darren, get ready to run and M, as soon as you get these, back up several copies," she called, then began tapping the port.
 Jill's fingers moved across the screen like lightning in almost a blur. Athena gripped the gun tighter. They would be okay. They would make it. If she had to shoot then she would; there wasn't another choice. The thought brought sour bile into her mouth and she swallowed hard.
 "I found a weak spot," Jill said, eyes focused and intense as they flitted across the screen. "Maybe I can buy more – Frack, I got it! Athena, hurry the frack up and come here!"
 Darren whooped a sound of success as Athena threw herself down next to Jill. Rows of files and documents filled the screen and Jill scrolled down quickly. A message popped in red capitalized text.
 UNAUTHORISED PERSONNEL DETECTED
 Jill closed the boxed and yelled, "They've found us, Darren," before continuing to scroll down and down until she came to the N section. 

  Athena's heart leaped and she gasped, pointing. "There!" The file said, 'Neuropium Research'. Jill pressed it to reveal a library of documents, images and reports.
 "Now the debugging," Jill mumbled and did something that Athena couldn't begin to understand.   Athena clenched and unclenched her fists. Her ribs and sternum throbbed from the pound of her heart. Jill's fingers moved faster now but it didn't seem fast enough. Hovers were being sent out this very instant, probably carrying dozens of soldiers and maybe they'd take less than half an hour. They were getting closer and closer with every single heartbeat.
 Jill swore. Athena glanced at the screen which said; Time remaining: 43 minutes 49 seconds. Oh, stars. That wasn't nearly fast enough!
 "Darren, come here!" Jill shouted, burying her fingers in her hair.
 Darren raced over to the other side of Jill in three long strides, face pale and ashen, and M whirred in after him.
 "What do we need to reverse the process in the earpieces?"
 "Blueprints."   "Don't forget the report," M added.
 "That's it?"
 "Yeah."
 "Thank frack," Jill breathed as she pressed something to make the message box blink away.
 Swearing incessantly, she tapped away again before selecting two files. A message popped: Time remaining: 3 minutes 28 seconds.
 Athena let out a breath she was holding. Apart from M's soft whirs and deep breaths, the room was ghostly-silent. She almost expected the drones of shuttles roaring closer but none yet. The gun's safety was still on. Her trembling finger pressed the button and slid it into the L-shaped wedge, turning the safety off. She would shoot if she had to.
 Bing! The port signalled the end of 3 minutes and 28 seconds. But there was a new sound. A continuous sound that was becoming louder. The sound of-
 Darren swore and shot up. Athena was up on her feet too. Her heart thundered as she watched Jill furiously flick her wrist and tap at the screen.
 "Jill," Athena whispered.  "Fracking hell, give me a second!" she snapped back. The groan of engines was becoming louder, closer and closer and closer-
 "I got it!" M yelled in her LOUD voice.
 "Shut it!" Darren barked. "We need to move now."
 Jill stood and rushed towards an open window. She flung the port out and it flew straight into the window of the building next door, only a few feet apart.
 Darren led, stalking out of the back door of the apartment into an alleyway. The engines were coming from all different directions; from ground and air. Athena raced in front of Darren, gun gripped like vice. She knew this place better than Darren; it was her job to get them to safety.
 She ran. She needed to get to the sewer entrance before the whole sector was surrounded – because that was what they would do to block off any routes of escape. Feet squelching in mud, she turned right, into an alley. Then stopped. Urgent voices were just around the corner of that bakery. Oh, stars. She had to find another way.
 Left was the only option. Her legs pumped faster than they ever had as she darted in between two buildings and pressed her back against the wall. M, Jill and Darren followed right after, eyes wide and panting. The entrance wasn't far now. Five hundred meters at most. Hopefully it hadn't been found by the soldiers.

  A chopper groaned overhead and she held her breath, pressing even closer to the wall. Move it, Athena.  She peeked around the corner. No one there yet. The voices were still behind the bakery. She counted to three beneath her breath and sprinted across the street. Just as she ducked into an alley, gunshot rang and someone shouted, "They're here!" Footsteps were running towards them.
 Darren swore and poked half his body out around the corner and opened fired, bullets flying past him too. He came back around and the footsteps ceased. She didn't wait for him to tell her to keep moving. She sprinted in the direction of the sewer. Clamour of voices rose behind and she ran into a building and out the back door. Perfect. The entrance was only one alley over.
 She rammed into the door of another building but it didn't budge.   "Athena!" Jill whispered, holding a window open for M to pass through. Darren hoisted her inside and he waved for Athena to hurry.
 He lifted her up by the waist and she swang her legs inside the dark home, clutching the gun. Darren chucked his gun in when she was inside and Jill picked it up, already making her way through the dark, mouldy room to the door on the other side. Athena helped Darren in then rushed to follow Jill.
 Just as she reached for the door, footstep splashed outside. All dropped to the floor.
 Escape lay just behind that door. A fuzzy gray shadow of someone with a gun was projected on the floor through the window. Athena made herself as flat on the wall as possible.
 "This one is clear," a female voice said.   "Give me a moment," another closer female replied. The shadow became larger.
 Next to Athena, Jill's body tensed.   "Can't see anyone in here either," the woman said, shadow becoming smaller until it was nothing at all.
 "Mother of frack," Jill breathed out almost inaudibly.   Athena dared to peel herself off the wall and peek out the window. The two women were walking away from the house they were in, gun positioned and ready to shoot. They slowly walked further down, checking inside houses, until they turned at a dead end.   "We can go," she whispered, checking the other direction one last time.
 Darren carefully pulled the door open and thankfully it didn't creak. The sewer opening was in the alley just between those two buildings. They ran for it.
 Darren pulled the lid away with all his strength and sent M down first. Her eyes and mouth did a poor job at lighting the dark tunnel. A gun in hand, Jill blindly climbed the steps. Athena left her gun next to Darren before climbing after.   The tunnel was dark without algae flowing in the rivers. These parts of the sewers had been blocked off for years since the sector was cleared, but the smell was still the same. Blackness stretched in both directions, promising a twisted sense of hope. But it would only be a matter of time before people were sent to search down here.   Darren closed the lid, leaving them in almost pitch black. A slap echoed as he jumped down from the steps. Then a beam of light flashed on from the tip of the gun, almost blinding her but the relief that ran through her was heavenly.   He shone the light on the gun in Jill's hands "You can turn the flashlight on from that too."
 Jill fiddled with the gun, turning it left to right and running her fingers along it. "Got it," she muttered as she pressed something and light poured out.

  "Should we try to get above ground?" Athena asked.
 "We should," Darren replied. "Is there another place?"   "Only the junkyard," she answered. But going there now was not the best idea. At most, it was only three kilometres from the abandoned sector.
 "Is there anywhere we can go on the other side of Shanghai?"
 The other side of Shanghai was the upper-class sector, guarded almost twenty-four seven. That was a worse idea.
 "No."
 "We can find somewhere to hide in all that crap," Jill said. "We can make a shelter under the rubbish and they probably won't be able to find us unless they pull the whole mountain down."
 "Maybe at the junkyard, we can find an electromagnet," M said.
 "Electromagnet?" Darren said.
 M's eyes blinked. "Yeah, you know, for the neuropium in the earpiece. Well, that's what the schematics and report say – I'm reading through them now. The substance has magnetic field. The receiver can be made into a transmitter by reversing the flow of the neuropium with an electromagnet."
 "Okay, the junkyard sounds... good," Darren said reluctantly. "But first, can we go somewhere to steal food first? I'm starving. Maybe by the time we get to the junkyard, they wouldn't be on such high alert anymore."
 They could surface near the agricultural sector, where farmers would be out on fields and factories by this time. It was about six or seven kilometres outside Shanghai but it was a good place to be for the first couple of hours.
 "Athena?" Jill said.
 "I know somewhere."   Taking the gun from Darren, she led them through the dark tunnels under the abandoned sector, glancing over her shoulder constantly and anticipating footsteps chasing after. The tunnels gradually became lit with algae as they made their way into occupied areas of the city and they turned off the lights from the guns. Their stomachs growled almost in rhythm with each others'.   Thankfully she managed to surface just on the outskirt of the sector, without people nearby. They broke into the nearest empty house, stuffing everything they could into their pockets. While Athena felt guilty to be stealing so much food, the hunger was also far greater. None had had a decent meal in days, only eating enough to not pass out. Her stomach growled as she stared at the mouth watering cheesecake. Too bad it was far too big to take with them.
 Through the tunnels, they returned to the junkyard in cautious steps. There was no knowing where soldiers would appear from in the darkness. She shone the lights on walls for the crevice where the steps would be to go up. It should be just here, unless...
 "There! I found it!" she whispered.   "I'll open the door," Darren offered.
 She moved out of the way for him to climb up. Darren grunted as he twisted the wheel and pushed up.
 "Crap, I think there's stuff piled up on top," he said. "It won't budge."
 "Is there another opening around here?" Jill asked.
 "Only near the houses."
 "If that's the only choice we have, then we better go," Darren said.  Athena nodded and led the way. It was most likely around noon by now. Hopefully people were at work. Unless it was Sunday. She'd completely lost track of the days and there was no knowing if people would be in the houses. Still, this was the safest choice.
 As they neared the occupied areas again, the sewers became lit with algae. She stopped at the crevice in the wall and Darren marched up the steps, carefully turning the wheel of the lid. It had rusted to a reddish copper colour and creaked and moaned as Darren turned. Athena bit her lip.   "Wait," M said. "Should we wait till nightfall?"   Jill's eyebrows knitted together and lips pressed in a thin line. "We'd be wasting an entire day."
 "No, M is right," Darren argued. "We've already risked too much. Going out there again in broad daylight is not a good idea. We have enough food for the day anyway. If we hear soldiers coming then we can go up."
 Athena nodded in silent agreement but Jill wasn't pleased, though she didn't argue anymore.   M projected a hologram of the schematics and Darren and Jill spent the day reading the reports and figuring out the design. Athena had no clue what anything did even if she tried so she stepped back and let them do their work, mentally thanking her friends and listening for any sounds of other people.
 Night fell faster than anticipated. M's internal clock was saying 9:23 p.m. before they realised how much time had passed. Darren looked at Athena and she nodded in response.
 He turned the wheel again, this time with less groaning. He eased the lid up slowly and poked his head out. He motioned for her and Jill to give him a gun and Athena released her grip and handed hers to him. Darren turned the safety off and fully opened the lid.
 "Clear," he whispered as he stepped out.
 "You and M go, I'll cover you," Jill said, holding the other gun in position.
 She nodded and let M fly up before climbing up. Fresh air washed over her, clean and sweet compared to the smell of the sewers. She inhaled a deep breath, stepping out. They faced the junkyard in the distance and behind them was a tall building, most lights already turned off.
 Jill came up and Darren slowly closed the lid, sealing the lock shut.   They sneaked to the junkyard but this time, Orion was not unconscious on Darren. He wasn't here at all. Athena wasn't sure if she considered that a good thing or not but she shoved that thought away before she did something careless which would get them caught.   "Athena, do you know where the opening of the other tunnel would be?" Darren asked as they came to face the mountain of junk again.
 She shook her head. "I'm sorry, I don't remember the exact position."
 "That's okay," Jill said. "We don't have to build the shelter on top of the tunnel. If we hide it well enough in this mess, we're fine. Come on, I'm tired and I want to sleep."
 With that Jill walked further into the junkyard and behind a small mound of rubber car tyres.
 They dragged a mangled mattress to the side of a mountain of broken things and placed tables, refrigerators and cars around it. They dug easy-access hiding spots into the mountain – between broken bookshelves, exercise machines and couches – just in case anyway. Athena found a torn, fur-covered blanket that she threw over the table and side-turned fridge that flanked the mattress in an attempt at making a roof.
 If she could have her way, she wouldn't have bothered with the roof at all. Sleeping under the stars had always been one of her dreams, though not in these certain circumstances. But if an aerial search was carried out during the night, something needed to hide them.
 Jill was first to dive onto the mattress and was snoring softly within minutes. Darren smiled, curling up next to her. Athena turned away from the scene, sitting on the edge of the mattress and looking up at the stars instead.
 Not too long, now. And when the time came, she would be brave.  I have mixed feelings about this chapter. :/

 

Chapter 28

                  Chapter 28
   Darren was half buried under the belly of a car which looked as if it had been disintegrating for at least a century, searching for a magnet to reverse the flow of neuropium.   "I can see if the magnet is still operable," his muffled voice said.
 Jill hummed in response. Athena pulled a thick blue wire out of the broken server droid, dislodging the cover on its power cell. The coil of thin metal wires around a magnet was uncovered but was only the size of her palm.   Jill scrunched her nose. "It's too small, Darren," she called. "How's that one coming?"
 "Give me a moment," he grunted. "I'm working without proper tools."
 The sun was high in the sky now and so far Darren had been unable to find a decent magnet in cars. Jill and Athena had had no luck whatsoever trying to find one in the graveyard of technology skeletons. M wasn't allowed to waste her power and was ordered to stay put, which she had profusely revolted against.
 Athena left the server droid and approached an exercise bike that looked fairly intact, except for the missing pedals, seat and handlebars. The box that held its mechanisms was half open. She grunted as she pulled the lid fully open so that its organs were on show. She had no clue how this machine worked or whether if it even had a magnet.   "I got it!" Darren cried.   He sat against the car, holding up cylindrical coil of black with a triumphant grin spread across his grease stained face.   Suddenly a voice cut through the air and on instinct, Athena ducked behind a nearby mangled sofa, Jill diving behind a fridge without doors. Another voice joined in and although the words were incoherent, she could tell the voices belonged to children.   Darren, still pressed against the car, looked around for the gun he'd left somewhere and Athena spotted it just beside the sofa. She held her breath and peeked above the seat slowly, her heart racing even though she knew they were only children.
 Two young skinny boys in torn dirty clothes, mousy hair and bare feet, were running around near the entrance of the junkyard. They couldn't have been older than eight. One threw a piece of rag tied into a ball at the other and hit him square in his stomach. They both laughed as the victim now tried to chase the other boy out of the junkyard.
 Athena slinked back down the back of the seat and lost the will to do anything. She'd been into the world many times before but never had she seen anything so heartbreaking. They were so thin that she could've scooped them both up in one arm and their flimsy clothes would do little to protect them from the weather. But yet, they seemed content because they were just children and they would grow up believing that this was life, not knowing anything better.
 Where were their parents? What did they eat? How many more children like them were there? Why had neither of her parents done anything to address this issue?
 "Let's go back," Jill said, dragging Athena up by her elbow.
 They returned to the mattress shelter and soon, Darren and M were busy with the newly obtained magnet and the earpieces. Athena and Jill set out for another round of food-scavenging before work hour ended.   "I think you should tell Darren, Jill," Athena began, cautiously treading on dangerous ground. Jill never liked it when Athena brought up her baby. She'd snap and tell her that she'd think about 'it'.
 "No," Jill said firmly, turning to her usual retort.
 She was opening a pantry, looking for long lasting food. They were in an empty house in a different sector to any other they'd been to before. Athena took a handful of tangerine sweets from a jar and shoved it into the pocket of her stolen, too-large pants before she approached Jill and put a hand on her shoulder.

  "Why?" she asked softly.
 Jill brushed her hand off her shoulder and continued to dig deeper into the pantry. "Just leave it alone, Athena."
 Athena sighed. "I'm worried for you, Jill. Darren is too. Tell me why you won't talk about it."
 Jill didn't say anything for a long while. Athena didn't think she'd answer and she was about to turn back to looking for more food when Jill's sigh stopped her.   "I can't handle it," Jill murmured. She put her arms on the wall beside the pantry door and laid her head on it. "I still miss him. I see Darren and all I think of is him. I think about telling Darren and then I'd see his face and be reminded that Darren isn't him. It fracking hurts, Athena. You'd understand that."
 "But you can't pretend this doesn't exist."
 "I don't. I wouldn't in a million years because this kid is Ander's and I will never pretend it isn't real. It's just... I don't know what to do."
 "I know what we're going to do," Athena said firmly and for once, she was stronger than Jill. "We're going to take the throne back from Rovina and free our people. We are going to stop this war. And whatever comes after that, we're going to make it okay."
 She was stunned by her own conviction. Only once the words had been spoken that she'd realised how determined she was to make this work. She had to; for the Empress, for Lifen and Chen; for Jill; for Cade; for her people; for Rovina; for everyone who died in her name. For freedom. She would sacrifice everything she had, her life if necessary.
 Jill wrapped her arms around Athena and for a moment Athena stood frozen in surprise before she hugged her friend back.   "You'd be a great Empress," Jill said. "Just make sure you get to that stage, okay?"
 Athena smiled and said, "We'll get there, Jill. We'll get there."  
 Walk backwards.
 Darren just stood there and stared at Athena.
 Clap your hands.
 "This isn't working either, is it?" Darren asked.
 Athena shook her head. There was a transmitter plugged into one ear with the octagonal sensor patch placed on the back of her neck and the receiver was wrapped around Darren's head. Darren had reversed the flow of neuropium using the repulsive forces of the two magnetic substances. It had been easy considering everything else, only taking three tries.
 Figuring out how the transmission signal worked without the neuropium directly inserted into the brain was another obstacle that had already taken them two days without any signs of success.
 Rovina's coronation was the day after tomorrow.
 According to Rovina's notes, controlling brain waves without the substance ejected inside the brain wasn't very effective and control was easily lost after a minute or so. They had yet to find out what 'control' Rovina was talking about.
 "Alright," Darren sighed and it was becoming apparent that he was beginning to lose hope. "I'll try it again. I could try to... Maybe the link didn't work."
 "Maybe they aren't connected properly. Let me try," M said and even her robotic voice couldn't hide the desperation.
 M took the earpieces and opened the small metal caps of the transmitter where tiny wires wove around each other. She took out her mini, built-in screwdriver and tweezers and began working on the earpieces.

  Athena and Darren returned to the mattress where Jill laid on the blanket with her eyes closed, eyebrows furrowed.
 "If this doesn't work, what are we going to do?" Darren asked.
 "We have evidence of her crimes," Athena said. "We can find a way to use this against her."
 "Why aren't we already releasing this information now? Why don't we release it in the media?" Jill said.
 "No one would believe this," Athena said. "Every citizen believes Rovina is a saint. Releasing this would only put ourselves and Orion in more danger than we are in now. It's our last option. We have to start with conspiracies for now."
 Jill opened her eyes and stared straight at Athena. "Why are you so convinced Plan A will work?"
 "It will," Athena said firmly. It had to work. Rovina would never let the public see her cruelty and Athena was going to use this to her advantage.   "Okay, try this now," M said, hanging the earpieces on the screwdriver.
 Athena tried to put up a hopeful face as she put the earpiece on but Darren didn't bother to hide his defeat.   Stand up, she ordered half-heartedly.
 Darren's legs twitched and her heart leaped. But then he didn't stand up. Did it really work or was that just hallucination caused by her desperation?   It's probably just your imagination, Athena. Try again.   Stand up, Darren, she thought again, this time with more determination than her last half-hearted attempt.
 Darren sighed and he stood up, saying, "We should try it while we're standing up. This is how it's going to be on the day."
 Athena sat frozen in her spot as she watched Darren lift himself up onto his feet and walk out into more open ground among the junk. Did he... No, that couldn't be right. He stood on his own accord, she told herself but her heart was beginning to drum faster against her ribcage.
 Jill, seeing Athena's reaction, sat up quickly and looked at her, eyes wide.
 "Princess?" M said uncertainly, rolling over to her. "Your heart is speeding up. Are you okay?"
 Darren, walk backwards, she thought.
 The small machine hummed at the back of her neck and vibration tickled her skin. She gripped her knees with trembling hands as Darren's feet began to shuffle back slowly. Darren swore and his eyes widened but he kept on walking back and back until he hit a car.   It worked.   It worked!   Athena gasped for breath out of sheer happiness, tears pooling in her eyes as her heartbeat echoed in her ears so loudly she couldn't hear Jill's cry of celebration or M's yelling in her LOUD volume. Her vision blurred and suddenly she was lightheaded, the junkyard fuzzing in and out of proportion, eardrums pounding to the beat of her heart.
 She pressed a hand to her chest, the other on the cold floor to steady herself, and she laughed and cried and laughed again. She hadn't realised that she was beginning to lose hope too until the success made her so, so happy beyond description. Tears rolled down her face into her lap but she didn't care! Someone came to hug and she hugged them back tightly, laughing on their shoulder.
 "We need to tell Orion!" she gasped, pulling back to see Jill's face bearing the biggest smile Jill she had ever seen.
 "Done it!" M said, the line of her mouth curved into a magnificent grin.   Darren said, "Okay, we need to start practicing before we have to send this to him."   Athena nodded in agreement and she tried to compose herself, wiping tears off her face, but she couldn't hide her euphoria as she continued to beam. For the next two hours, Athena and Darren practiced giving orders and Darren trying to fight back against its holds. Each command only held control for less than a minute when Darren fought back against the device's clutches with every ounce he could muster but one minute was enough.   One minute was enough to get her people on her side.
 After practising to maximum satisfaction, M took the receiver earpiece across the city and smuggled it to Orion through a sewer entrance Athena had directed her to. Athena held her breath and refused to close her eyes until her medi-bot returned at three in the morning with large beaming eyes, informing them of the successful transaction.   Athena dreamed of Chang'e Nightingale again that night. The beautiful woman stood on a hill under a sky full of stars. Her silk white hanfu danced to the rhythm of the wind as she stood with her arms outstretched, cherry red lips spread in a proud smile across her face. Athena ran up and threw herself into the woman's arms.   Chang'e's soft touch cascaded down Athena's hair as she held her and whispered, "Keep on shining, my little star. You're almost there."  
 The Empress' crown stood in a glass case next to the two magnificent peacock thrones in the throne room, where cameras were hidden in every crevice and corner. Or at least, Jiaying assumed it would be. The crown was made of pure gold, diamonds, pearls and rubies, crafted into red and yellow flowers with strings of gold and rubies dangling down the sides.   It had been in the imperial family since the end of the Resources War when the Northern Kingdom had formed – almost a hundred years old – but it was still beautiful, glistening under the ever-shining bright lights of the room. Rubies and diamonds still shone and glinted.
 Jiaying walked in further into the room, clutching the object hidden in her shirt tightly. It took her one smile at the guards outside the throne room and they didn't even question why she needed to come in here.   The door closed behind her and she waited a moment, just in case anyone else decided they had business in here too. One second, two seconds, three. Then she was running towards the glass case that held the crown.
 She took out the wreath of wires and a tube of blue liquid from her shirt and lifted the glass case off the crown, setting it down carefully on the marble floor. Her fingers were fumbling with nerves, barely able to place the earpiece inside the crown and attach it there without dropping anything.   So many things could be going wrong right at that moment. Maybe someone from the security team didn't eat dinner and wasn't out cold like she'd planned with the sleeping powder she put in staff food. Maybe someone might come and do a last check on the crown before the coronation tomorrow.   Despite everything that could go wrong, a thrill in defying her mistress shivered up her spine. The Satanic bitch deserved whatever she was going to get. Jiaying certainly had her moments of regretting her meeting with 'Wayan Lin' for becoming tangled up in this mess but now was not one of those moments. Now, she was very much grateful towards him for giving her this opportunity to finally stand up against Rovina.
 She made sure the device was one hundred percent concealed before quickly placing the case back over the crown.
 She strolled out the throne room as casually as possible, looking confused.   "Have you seen Lady Rovina's port anywhere?" she asked the guards with a slight pout. "She'd been looking for it all evening."
 They hadn't seen it (probably because the port hadn't left Rovina's chambers all day, ignored due to the excitement of the coronation) and Jiaying thanked them with a sweet smile before she turned and left.
 She continued to smile as she made her way down to her quarter. She could almost taste the freedom now.

 

Chapter 29

                  Chapter 29
 Palace guards were everywhere; at every gate, every door, on every turret, on every wall that surrounded the palace. From a distance, they were like ants in their red ceremonial uniform with crest of the Empire, a dragon snaked around a sword, embroidered on their backs. The road leading to the gate was filled with citizens pouring into the giant open gates of the palace, all dressed in finery and their best clothes to see the coronation of the Northern Empire's fourth Empress since the Resource War.   At the gate were at least ten guards, scanning everyone's ID's. Just as they thought, getting inside those gates was not going to be easy. Rovina would be expecting them to make their appearance and they were going to knowingly walk straight into her trap.
 The east and west towers stood tall on the palace grounds, flanking the left and right wings of the main palace. Many ships and hovers descended behind the right wing, carrying officials, nobility and VIP guests. The landing space was inconveniently just across the servants' quarters in the east tower. The good, Athena supposed, was that a sewage tunnel led straight into the palace grounds, resurfacing just next to the gardens, even though that meant they still had to travel a good distance to the east tower.
 "Okay, so remember the plan," Darren said. "And don't get shot."
 Athena slowly inhaled and exhaled. Her body shook from the nervousness wrecking through her. She was in a stolen, pale yellow hanfu in an attempt to not be too recognisable. Jill fixed the blue, gem-adorned hijab she wearing to hide her too-distinct curly hair but not much could've been done about her dark skin.    "You got the transmitter, right?" M asked.
 Athena patted the pocket of her inner skirt to make sure she could still feel it in there. She wanted to wish her friends good luck but every time she attempted to open her mouth, no words came out. The fact that this was happening right now was just beginning to settle in and reality was finally catching up.
 "It's okay, Princess," Darren reassured her but it felt more like he was trying to convince himself. "We can do this."
 She nodded and quickly said, "Let's go," unable to handle the wait any longer.
 Darren emerged from the bush on the bank of the river they had sought refuge in for the afternoon and Athena and Jill peeked through the leaves of the bush. Athena said a short prayer for Darren as he casually joined the stream of citizens, donning traditional Chinese attire. When he reached the mouth of the road that led to the gates of the palace, Athena, Jill and M took their cues to move out.
 Athena picked up her dress in her arms as they hobbled along the steep rocky slope of the bank, hiding behind shrubs and bushes. The soles of the worn-out sneakers she'd stolen threatened to succumb to the slippiness of smooth rocks beneath her feet and she had to grip nearby branches to prevent slipping into the river.
 The guards on the walls scanned every direction and they were doing a lot better job of guarding now than Athena had ever seen them do. She only hoped that they hadn't spotted either of them or that the cars zooming on the road on top of the slope had spotted them. She was assuming they hadn't been spotted because if they had, they'd probably be dead by now.
 They approached the mouth of the entrance and loud chatter of excited people on the road overhead dimmed out the sound of her racing heartbeat. Jill crouched under a thick bush and Athena squeezed herself in, M following after. Even Jill's eyes were coated with worry, her lips pressed into a thin line.   "What's taking Darren so long?" she muttered, eyebrows knotting.
 "Maybe the bomb isn't working?" M said but her voice was too loud.

  "Don't talk," Jill snapped quietly. "And be ready to get the camera rolling."
 Athena peered out of the leaves and branches towards the strip of land upon which the road was built, leading to the island the palace was built on. It was about two hundred meters long and cherry trees were planted evenly along the small bank of land, branches hanging above the water, and along the rectangular palace walls on the island.
 Even though it was only October, the pink flowers were in full bloom thanks to gardeners who were expert plant genetic engineers. If they were quick enough, maybe the guards' attention would still be on Darren when they've made their way to the palace.
 A deafening shrill screech erupted, immediately followed by a loud boom and shaking ground. Athena and Jill were up and running before screams of frightened people began, racing from tree to tree. On the road, people were running in every which direction, screaming and yelling. Athena looked ahead. The guards on the walls were looking at the gate.   She pumped her legs faster, catching up to Jill's long legs. Almost there. Just a few more meters.   "Frack!" Jill swore as she tripped and thumping into a tree. Athena turned in time to see Jill pushing herself off the tree and hobbling almost as fast as Athena was running, her irises bright with panic.
 Athena looked back up at the guards and thankfully they were occupied with whatever was going on up on the road. They were going to make it. Just a few steps...
 As she and Jill whooshed past the entrance and pressed themselves against the tall red wall, she caught sight of Darren, surrounded by a swarm of golden dragons. Gunshot filled the air and she forced herself to turn away and keep running as close to the wall as possible. Darren is fine. They wouldn't kill him in front of all these people.   Muscles in her leg ached as they raced from tree to tree, hiding under thick canopy of pink flowers. Every two seconds she looked up at the wall to check if they'd been spotted but the guards were busy listening to their communication links and she could breathe just a tiny bit easier.
 Her chest was tightening as they rounded the corner, panting hard. They'd reached the back of the palace looking out at the river and the city on the other side. Athena's eyes immediately darted to the giant drain-pipe protruding out of the ground: their way in. But it was out in the open where there were no more trees to hide them.   "There!" she whispered to Jill who followed her line of sight. They glanced up the wall to the guard standing in the turret. There were no other guards that they could see; just him. And he was looking out to the front of the palace. Athena's heart galloped in her chest so hard it was about to leap out. It was now or never.
 As soon as Athena started sprinting towards the pipe so did Jill. She dared a glance back. The guard was turning around! Jill was ahead of her despite the limp of her leg and she'd already reached the pipe. Athena threw all her instincts out and dove, rolling down the mound of earth the pipe was jutting out of.   Her shoulder landed on a rock with a painful jab but Jill didn't give her time to recover, pulling her into the pipe on her hands and knees just in time for the guard to fully face in their direction.   Athena sat against the curve of the dark pipe, the bottom slightly damp. She heaved in huge breaths of air to make up for the ones she lost, even if it stank a hundred times worse than that fishing boat she was smuggled aboard. It assaulted her nostrils so badly her eyes began to tear up.   She glanced up at Jill, who was panting hard too. The blue of Jill's hijab was hardly visible beneath dirt and her clothes were stained with mud and moss. Athena must've looked like that, too. They smiled at each other, laughing a little.

  This was by far the craziest thing they'd ever done. They were breaking into the palace!
 They didn't let their amusement linger long and kept moving, crawling along the pipe. Light began to fade as they moved in further until it was pitch black. The darkness, however, didn't last long. At the end of the pipe was a sewer like the ones they'd been in when they escaped. In a crevice in a wall was a ladder leading up to the opening at the top.
 Athena checked her pocket again before she climbed up the ladder and twisted the hatch open with a loud groan. She froze, her heart thudding faster again. No voices could be heard above, which was probably a good thing. She glanced at Jill and she gave Athena a nod to encourage her to keep opening.   She slowly pushed the hatch up and poked her head out. A green hedge surrounded her and it was impossible to see anything. As quietly as possible, she heaved herself out of the hatch and pressed herself against the hedge, allowing Jill to exit. Holding her breath, she rose to her knees.   On one side of the hedge was the palace wall about twenty meters away, on another side was the back of the palace and there, about two hundred meters away was the east tower. Between their current position and the east tower was a shoal of five guards. All the way across the garden was the landing pad with VIPs being escorted from their shuttles to the ceremonial courtyard at the front of the palace. The west side of the palace was flooded with people; special guests, pilots, guards, servants.
 "Where do you have to go?" Jill asked.
 She pointed to the east tower. And at that exact moment, a girl came out of the building and her eyes immediately landed on Athena. They widened and shot to the guards. Athena froze in her spot and Jill scrambled to return to the safety of the underground sewer. Athena couldn't move. Her muscles refused to obey her orders to retreat and she remained rigid, watching in horror as the girl approached the guards.   Oh, stars! She was talking to them. At any moment, they were going to turn around and – walk towards the landing pad... The girl smiled as she chattered to the guards, leading them away. Athena stared, not comprehending what just happened. The girl glanced back at her again and subtly nodded in the direction of the east tower before she returned to her chirpy conversation.
 Whatever had just happened, Athena wasn't about to lose this chance. She crouched down on her feet, ready to run. Then two more guards appeared around the side of the tower.   "Great," Jill muttered, crouching beside her. "I'll distract them. You run, okay?"
 Jill didn't wait for her reply, already crawling along the hedge towards the landing pad. When Jill took out the lighter from her pocket, she was too far away for Athena to stop her. Athena wanted to yell at Jill to not do it; she had too much to risk – her baby. But she was already disappearing around the corner of the hedge.
 Jill knew what she was doing, she told herself again just to give a small sense of reassurance. Biting her lips, she kept herself in a crouch until her legs were beginning to numb, until a deafening boom shook the garden, flames and smoke emerging from the western side of the palace. Saying a final prayer, she shot out from her spot as soon as the two guards had run off in the direction of the explosion.
 Chaos took over the gardens. Using the panicked people yelling and running to her advantage, she dashed to the east tower. She desperately prayed that no one paid attention to the muddy, reeking girl running across the garden, even when she almost ran into a guard coming out of the east tower. She ducked her head and shielded her face with her hair, slipping inside the door before the woman could see.
 Servants shouted across the large room as they tried to crowd around the windows of the octagonal shaped building to see what was happening. Her eyes frantically searched for Orion, barely able to remember what he looked like now. He said he'd be inside the east tower common room, the one she was in now. 

  Where was he? There were uniformed staff from the delivery centre but none were Orion. Had something happened to him? Was he at the site of the explosion? The thought had her gasping in sheer terror and she spun around – straight into the girl from outside.
 She didn't let Athena go back outside and dragged her by her elbow, glancing back repeatedly at the people crowded around the windows and rushing in and out of the door. The girl pulled her inside the glass elevator and punched the number to floor 5 in before anyone else could come in.
 Athena stared. Orion must've told her about them otherwise she would've already told on her to the guards. The elevator stopped before Athena could ask who she was and she was pulling Athena along the balcony built around the floorless centre. The whole floor was empty as the girl led her down into a corridor and pulled her into a room.
 It was a decent sized bedroom, big enough to fit a single bed, a dressing table, a wardrobe and conjoined bathroom. But Athena's eyes were on the man who paced around the room, fingers tangled in his short black hair. He looked up when the girl slammed the door shut and Athena hardly recognised him but her heart exhaled in relief to find him unscathed.   "Forgive me if I hurt you, Princess," the girl apologised as she opened her wardrobe and pulled out a pale blue hanfu hanging from a wire hanger. She laid it on the bed, saying, "We don't have much time."
 She quickly disappeared into the bathroom and sound of running water followed after.
 Athena looked at Orion with a cocked head in confusion. His eyes roamed her face and then fell on the rest of her, looking like a sewer rat. And despite everything, she found herself heating up under his intense gaze. He took two long strides towards her before engulfing her in a hug.
 "You lost weight," he whispered.
 Right now, her weight was the least of her worries. "Who is she?" she asked and she couldn't hide the slither of jealousy in her voice. Who in their right minds would not be jealous? The girl had a pretty face and a voluptuous body. Athena, compared to that girl, was as plain as wood.
 Orion stepped back and took a long look at her. "That's Jiaying, Rovina's maid. She helped us get the codes and put the neuropium in Rovina's crown." He must've heard the jealousy in her voice because he was smiling a little.
 The girl came out of the bathroom and Athena, for once, was a little bit glad she and Orion were standing so close.   Jiaying's eyes flickered from Orion to Athena but only said, "Your bath is ready, Princess."
 Athena lifted herself onto the balls of her feet and pressed a short kiss on Orion's lips, staking her claim, before she went into the bathroom and mentally apologising to Orion for kissing him when she probably stank more than he was letting on.
 Orion went down to the common room while Jiaying helped her wash her hair, massaging the mud from her scalp. She quietly said, "Don't worry, Princess. I knew from the moment he asked me to help you that he was never mine to begin with."
 She flushed but the amount of relief that washed over her was unexpected. She was a bit ashamed of her childish action now.
 The water had turned brown by the time she'd finished. Orion returned and informed them that he'd heard Jill and Darren were being held in the prisons. They were both alive, according to his sources, but Darren's leg had been shot.
 As Jiaying placed the transmitter wreath on Athena's forehead and began to curl her hair around it with a million pins to hold it in place, music began to play. The ceremony was starting and Jiaying wasn't finished with her hair.
 "It's fine," she said to no one in particular. "Rovina will still have to recite her mandate to rule."
 Orion's knees bobbed up and down as he sat on the bed in front of Athena and she held her breath, praying to every god and goddess she could think of. The crowning would not be for at least another half an hour, she tried to reassure herself.
 She wasn't sure how much of her nervousness showed but she was shaking enough to cause an earthquake. Her heart thundered and blood rushed through her veins, buzzing beneath her skin. Her fingers gripped onto each other to stop the shaking.
 "Done," Jiaying announced. "I don't have very good quality makeup but we can make do with-"
 "No, this is enough," Athena cut her off. "Thank you very much, Jiaying-jiĕ. We should be going now."
 Athena and Orion hurried out the door and into the elevator. Just as the door was closing, Jiaying came out from the corridor and ran towards them, just making it inside before the glass doors shut on her. She smiled.
 "I've come this far," she said in Chinese. "I might as well go all the way."
 They made their way to the large courtyard in front of the palace where the ceremony was held. Thousands of citizens stood around the back of the large space while officials and leaders of the Northern Empire sat in velvet-cushioned chairs with a wide, red-carpeted walkway down the middle. Camera droids circled above them and Athena spotted M's small red body flying near the mob of real camera droids.   Dusk was beginning to paint the sky of beautiful hues of orange, pink and purple. They slipped into the crowd of citizens, who barely acknowledged the presence of three more bodies among the thousands.   On the steps in front of the main palace, Rovina stood in a beautiful gold ceremonial hanfu, her face coloured in traditional makeup. She was still saying the prayers and when she was done, everyone said, "May the Gods bless you," in unison.
 The crown sat on the velvet cushion on a gold stand behind the priest. Her chest squeezed tighter and tighter as seconds to the crowning ticked down. An ambassador from the Russian Federation was called upon to crown the new Empress. The man took the steps up the stairs.   Get ready, Athena.
 He bowed to the Princess.   She had to do this.
 He lifted the crown from its cushion.   For Empress Chang'e.
 The ambassador slowly, slowly, slowly raised the crown over Rovina's bowed head.   For her people.
 He placed the crown on her head.
 For everyone she loved.
 Rovina lifted her head, a triumphant smile spread across her face. The courtyard roared to life, filled with "Long live Empress Rovina!"
 For everyone who loved her.   The roar died down and Empress Rovina stood before her people, ready to give her first speech as Empress.
 For freedom.
 Without a second thought, Athena pushed past everyone who blocked her path to the walkway and ran up the carpet to the stairs. Rovina's eyes widened the moment she saw her and she ordered nearby guards to seize her.   Athena made it to the bottom of the stairs before six guards had surrounded her and two held her by her arms.   Not giving Rovina time for another command, she yelled on top of her lungs, "Citizens of the Northern Empire! Empress Rovina has a confession to make!"

 

Chapter 30

                  Chapter 30
 "Guards-" Rovina began but-
 "Tell them the truth, Rovina!" Athena yelled, fighting against the hands that were pulling her away. With every ounce of will-power she had, she sent that thought to Rovina, hoping and praying that the signal receiver worked.
 Words fell away in Rovina's mouth and her eyes became glazed. Her mouth moved on its own accord as it said, "Five years ago a substance called neuropium was discovered, which had properties that could manipulate brainwaves. I devised it into communication links that would allow me to control minds of people and these devices have been used on soldiers to improve obedience."
 Horrified gasps echoed through the crowd and murmurs filled the air. Camera droids flew closer to the Empress and by now the whole world would've heard her confession, maybe even the colonies on Mars. Rovina snapped out of Athena's hold on her and her kohl-lined eyes widened in shock of her mouth's betrayal.   "Tell them everything!" Athena ordered again, not waiting for Rovina's response.
 Once again Rovina's mouth betrayed her, though this time her eyes were not as clouded as they'd been before. "A few weeks ago, I discovered a way to add the substance to water without losing its ability to manipulate brainwaves."
 Even more gasps. Good; people were beginning to doubt Rovina.
 Athena refused to let her stop, not allowing this new information to take her by surprise. Tell them everything, Rovina.
 "But the substance has become scarce and it can only be obtained in Australian soils. Because Australia refused to swear alliance to the Empire, my father and I had ordered unprovoked attacks on Australia in order to force them to declare war."   The murmurs rose louder.   "Tell them about the soldiers!" Athena cried but she was being dragged away now, going further and further away from Rovina. She struggled against the hands, planted her feet firmly on the ground, trying to send the thought. But Rovina was fighting back. Electricity sizzled on the back of her neck where the metal plate was placed.
 "There is nothing to say of the soldiers!" Rovina yelled, face red with anger. "I will not have you rudely interrupt our short while of happiness in this war torn world. Take her away!"
 "Our people deserve the truth, Rovina!"   "And the truth is that I have never manipulated anyone!" she retorted back. "It's Princess Athena who now had control of my mind and forced me to say such absurdity."
 Murmurs increased but now people were being swayed back to Rovina's side. Beads of sweat rolled down Athena's temple and her neck. This wasn't how she planned it.
 "That is not true!" another voice pierced the tension thick air.   Athena looked back. Jiaying pushed out of the crowd and onto the carpet. Frowning, Rovina pressed her lips together and her fingers balled into fists but there was nothing she could do. If she ordered them to be taken away like animals, she would ruin her reputation as the Empire's angel.
 "Empress Rovina is a cruel woman!" Jiaying cried, louder than Athena could. "She murdered Empress Chang'e by poisoning her. She conducts tests on innocent people in the name of advancement in science. She had threatened to kill my family, and many of the servants' if we ever stepped out of line."
 "Stop lying!" someone from the crowd shouted and there were a few mumbles of agreements.
 Jiaying glared into the crowd. "It is your Empress who lies. Proof is in the research labs."
 "How dare you accuse me of such things! Killing my own mother, indeed!" Rovina screeched and she was too well and truly outraged to care what people thought of her now. Her beautiful face contorted into an ugly glare of a demon and she was ready to set the world on fire.
 Then someone from the honourable guests stood up. It was her father's advisor Gui-dàrén.   He glared at Rovina as he said, "The former Emperor and Empress Rovina had also threatened my family's lives and mine on several occasions."
 Another guest stood and said, "Mine too."
 Then another stood up and another and another. Rovina watched with wide-eyed panic, a deer caught in headlights as half of her court stood up against her. Confused chatters erupted from the crowd. Some believed Athena and Jiaying while others doubted them, thinking this a scheme Athena had tempted the nobility into. Rovina looked around her frantically, the golden strings of her crown swinging.
 Just confess, Rovina. I don't want anyone to get hurt.
 Rovina only glared at Athena harder and grounded her jaws, resisting the weakened signal of the transmission.   Advisor Gui trudged up the stairs slowly and murmurs seized, awaiting his next words. He commanded, "Guards, arrest the Empress."
 Rovina gasped and so did Athena. Guards posted on the stairs near the Empress looked at each other in hesitation before they held their guns in position and moved to the Empress to surround her. Hands gripping Athena's arm loosened and fell away when it became apparent that she wasn't going to do anything, though guns were still trained on her too. But the guns she worried about were not the ones on her but the ones on Rovina.
 Her sister continued to glare her hatred down upon her and for the first time, Athena was not afraid. She straightened her back, squared her shoulders and she looked back at Rovina. She was not pathetic. She was not weak. She didn't run away. For the first time in her life, she was living up to the name of the warrior goddess she was named after. Maybe when she died, she might become a star too.
 Just as the Advisor reached the top of the stairs, Rovina fished out something hidden in the billowing sleeves of her gown. Before Athena could make out the shape of a gun, a bang echoed through the air and an excruciating pain sliced through the synthetic tissues of her heart. I should not have enjoyed writing this chapter as much as I did. So satisfying. :)

 

Chapter 31


 Chapter 31
 Athena's eyes would not open.
 It had been three weeks since the coronation but she was still unconscious, wires, tubes and IV drips attached to her. Her skin was pale and her lips were cracked and blue from under-oxygenation. Her cheek bones protruded her skin and her closed eyes were hollow. She looked half dead.
 The doctors had reassured Orion repeatedly that she was alive and she was due to wake up any time, though it was not possible to give an estimate. He was so utterly desperate. He just wanted her to open her eyes. Was that too much to ask for? Why couldn't she just wake up?
 Every day he had to hold back the urge to snap Rovina's neck, only because when Athena woke up she'd hate him for it. Every day and night, he sat beside her, slept beside her in that too small chair and ate every meal brought to him by Jill, Darren or Jiaying.
 When Chen and Lifen's wounds from being whipped had healed, they were allowed to come see Athena. Lifen broke down in tears and Chen had to hold her back from trying to envelop Athena in her arms.
 After the first week, Jill and Darren's visits became less frequent, only coming to bring him food that would go mostly untouched and to inform him of any news. Darren's kneecap and bones had been replaced with metal as he had been shot directly at his knee, which was shattered beyond repair.
 They'd found the fallen soldiers from Hill Creek in labs, brains replaced by processors and bones with steel. Orion couldn't bring himself to hate himself then, his mind too wrapped up in Athena. But with each passing day, it became harder to push to the back of his mind. Even though he'd succeeded in saving the rest of his men, there were so many that he had failed to protect.
 When Jill had found Ander she confessed to them that she was pregnant with his child. Darren had rolled his fingers into fists and hobbled out of the room.
 A ceasefire had been called between the Northern Empire and the Southern Union and a peace treaty was to be signed when Athena woke up and was in good health again. Prisoners had been released and transported back to Australia. Captain Joyce came to see him before she was taken back.
 She'd stopped dead in her tracks when she saw Orion. He was well aware of how much he looked like his brother, her fiancé. She'd managed to give him a hug and told him that things will get better before she rushed out again.
 His parents called and he provided automated answers for them. Yes, he was fine. No, he wasn't hurt. No, Athena wasn't awake yet. Yes, he was eating. That last one was a lie that rolled off his tongue.
 Twenty-four torturous days after the coronation, Orion's prayers were answered.  
 Before Athena even opened her eyes, the musty smell of chemicals hit her hard and she could hear the machines hum around her. She slowly peeled her eyelids open. The world was fuzzy and white and two black shapes appeared. Little by little, her eyes focused, vision clearing like pixilation. Two people stood on either side, looking down at her. One was a middle aged woman with tears in her eyes and another was a young man looking at her with wide eyes; Lifen and Orion.
 "Athena. You're...awake," Orion breathed, eyes glinting. Stubble lined his jaw and above his lips, his hair was dishevelled and his white shirt was crinkled and dirty as if it hadn't been changed in days.
 "How are you?" Lifen asked.
 She looked down at herself to see that she was wearing a white gown that opened at the front. Disappearing into that gap was a clear plastic tube and two wires. A sense of de javu washed over her. This was exactly how she'd woken up twelve years ago, surrounded by humming machines and hollow-eyed people. She couldn't be unhooked for days.

  "I'm fine," she rasped, trying to smile. Her desert dry throat was like sandpaper, burning with every breath. Bitter taste of chemical filled her mouth and she ended up cringing instead.
 Orion reached over to a hover-cart beside the bed and grabbed the glass of water, holding it to her mouth. She graciously drank, cool water like paradise against the hot walls of her throat and washing away the bitterness a little.   "I'll call Dr. Ling," Lifen said and rushed to the Vid-comm on the wall.   Orion's squeeze on her hand, pulling her attention back to him.
 "How is your heart?" he asked.
 She paid her new heart extra attention. It felt better than her old one. It fit better and the beating didn't echo throughout her body, though she did feel a dull pain on the organs around it.   "Good," she managed. "How long have I been..."
 "Twenty-four days. Don't scare us like that again, Athena."
 Athena's lips curved up, then the smile slipped off. "Rovina..."
 Orion's eyes darkened. "She's at her trial now."
 Dr. Ling entered the room with her port unfolded in her hands, glasses perched on nose.   "Your highness," she said, a warm smile on her face. "I'm glad to see that you're awake. How are you feeling? Anything sore?"
 "My chest hurts a little."
 She came and stood next to the bed, subtly pushing Orion out of his spot. "I suspect it would. The implant was successful from what I can see so far but you have two fractured ribs and tore the left lobe of your lungs. We've had to implant synthetic tissues for the lung but we have to let your bones heal by themselves. Also, you were submerged in a suspension tank while the heart was being engineered so that would leave your muscles feeling like jelly for a few days."
 That was not good. She bit her lip. "When would I be able to get out of bed?"
 Lifen cocked her head at her question but Orion remained clueless of the conversation held in Chinese.
 Dr. Ling stared at Athena. "Where do you need to go?"
 "Rovina. I'd like to go to her trial."   "I certainly don't suggest it," the doctor began.   "Please, Dr. Ling."
 She sighed and shook her head. "Always so stubborn. I'll run a test and we'll see, okay?"
 Athena tried to not move as much as possible as the doctor ran tests and unhooked her from the machines. Without the aid of the machines, breathing was not quite as easy and her heartbeat was unstable, becoming faster and slowing down again quite often. But she could sit up well enough and Dr. Ling reluctantly complied to her request, warning her that her heart still needed time to adjust to her body's functions and pushing its limits could cause pain or a complete shutdown.
 Orion profusely objected to Athena going to Rovina's trial but when she tried to stand up, he'd ended up scooping her into the wheelchair. Lifen was not happy but she didn't object too much except for an 'I don't think this is a good idea'.
 As they made their way to the courtroom, Lifen and Orion filled her in on what had happened while she'd been unconscious. When Lifen mentioned her coronation she regretted what she did, even though it was the right thing to do.
 The courtroom was full, packed with reporters, journalists, audience of palace staff and political leaders who hadn't left yet, camera-droids hovering around the room. At the front of the room, Rovina stood at the podium in white prison clothes with her back turned to the audience. Orion wheeled her to the back of the room, unable to find empty seats. When the bailiff saw her, he bowed down until he was parallel to the floor. 

  She blinked. No one had ever shown her such respect on their own accord before. She nodded back politely.
 The judge had finished sifting through sheets of evidence provided and she looked up to the audience.
 Through hidden speakers around the room, her voice boomed out, "Until further notice, I now conclude this trial of Rovina Nightingale, convicted of violation of International Humanitarian Laws, Human Subject Research Laws, murder of Empress Chang'e Nightingale and attempted murder of Princess Athena Nightingale."
 The room erupted into chaos, insults yelled across the room. "Cunning devil incarnate!" some yelled. "Execute her!"   The voices pierced her eardrums and she squeezed her eyes shut, holding Orion's hand on her shoulder. She did this. This was the fate she'd bestowed upon her own sister. For someone with pride like Rovina's, maybe death would be a mercy.
 Athena opened her eyes slowly and a wave of dizziness passed over her, the room spinning before it came back into focus. Rovina was facing the audience now and her glare was glued on Athena. She stood tall with squared shoulders and head held high but somewhere behind the anger in her eyes, there was also sadness.
 "I have a confession to make," she announced and the room fell into silence, like a snake ready to hiss again at whatever she was going to say.
 "Emperor Alvah Nightingale was assassinated by royal guard Cade O'Connor," she said. Then she lowered her head and added, "On my command."
 The room erupted again but all Athena could think of was, "...assassinated...on my command," again and again.
 Rovina had their father killed. Why? What reason did she have that she'd have to kill their father? He loved her! Rovina might've been the only person he truly loved and yet Rovina killed her.
 The room was spinning again and she shut her eyes. Her chest ached and she couldn't decide whether it was from Rovina's actions or it was her heart beating faster than it should. She felt herself being pushed and soon the voices faded.   When she opened her eyes again, Orion and Lifen sat in front of her with worried eyes.
 "You okay?" Orion asked.
 "No," she breathed. "I... I did this to her."
 "Worry about yourself, love," Lifen said, glancing to her right at the door of the courtroom. "We should leave before the reporters come out."
 Athena nodded. She didn't want to see her sister being escorted to the cells anyway. Orion pushed her to the elevator and the door opened to reveal Jill inside. Her eyes were void of emotion and her face was blank. If she was surprised to see that she was finally awake, she didn't show it.
 Without a word, they went inside. Lifen and Orion didn't say anything to Jill. Athena looked up at him, confused, and he shook his head at her.   "Athena," Jill said. "Can you come with me? There's something I have to do."
 "Of course," Athena replied.
 Jill stopped at the eighth floor where the Research Centre was. She pushed her past rows and rows of doors and then inside a room with vertically tilted bed lined up on either side of the room, a monitor with big green buttons above each bed. All were empty except for one. Athena gasped.
 Ander's body lay on it, strapped down. Wires from the monitor were buried into his skin and displayed on the screen was a map of a human body with metal bones and a thing inside the head.   Jill dragged herself up to him with teary eyes, cupping his jaws with her hands.   "I'm sorry, Ander," she whispered. "I'm sorry that I never told you. I was just so scared of... of everything. I'm sorry you'll never get to see your child. I... I promise I'll look after it with my life."

  A tear rolled down Jill's cheek and Athena felt like she was intruding a private moment.   "I love you. God, I love you. And... I-I have to let you go."
 Jill pushed the green button with trembling fingers and the screen faded black. She buried her face in Ander's chest, clutching onto him, unable to let go. Loud sobs wrecked through her, shuddering with every breath she took.   "I'm sorry. I'm so sorry, Ander."
 Tears stung Athena's eyes and she couldn't watch her friend be so broken anymore. Slowly she lifted herself on her wobbly legs and shuffled to Jill. She hugged Jill and she returned it, her tears soaking into Athena's hospital robe.   "You did the right thing," she whispered, smoothing Jill's hair down. "Ander would be proud of you."  
 At dinner that night, Athena told them about the hovercraft accident and about her being a clone. Lifen was the only one who didn't spit their food out and watched her in shock, waiting for the moment she'd yelled 'Gotcha!' or something along those lines. She never did.
 She returned to her old room that night and Orion had been reluctantly to leave her alone. But she insisted she needed some space to herself. The room was exactly the way she'd left it. Those history books she'd gotten from the palace library were still stacked on her table. Her telescope was still out on the balcony. The only thing missing was the note she'd left on her bed.   "Rovina ordered it to be left like this," Jiaying said from the doorway. "I guess she knew in the back of her mind."
 Athena patted the space next to her on the bed and Jiaying hesitantly came in, sitting down. "I heard you were awake so I came to see if you needed anything."
 Athena smiled through her fatigue. "I'm fine. Thank you very much for everything, Jiaying-jiĕ."
 She nodded. "It was my greatest pleasure. But... I don't exactly have a job anymore. I was hoping maybe you could assign me as a scullery maid."
 Athena looked at Jiaying's slender, elegant hands, neatly folded on her lap. They weren't made to be burnt by hot pots and pans, hardened with calluses.
 "Would you like to work with me?" She asked.
 Jiaying beamed, her face lighting up and her grin stretching from ear to ear. "That would be fantastic, your majesty." Then her smile slid off. "There's also something else. I heard that you were quite close to that Irish boy."
 Athena's fatigue simmered away. "Cade? Is he alright? Can I see him?"
 Jiaying hesitated before she slowly said, "He's alive. Rovina ordered to save him, probably to use him against you. But you should rest tonight, my lady. I'll take you to him tomorrow."   Athena fell asleep as soon as Jiaying left, not bothering to change out of the gown. When she woke up, it was almost eleven and no one had come to wake her up. She didn't bother to comm Lifen or Jiaying and got herself ready, walking around her chambers slowly with hands on her hips like a heavily pregnant woman.
 Lifen was utterly appalled when she came in and saw her walking across her bedroom in her bathrobe. Scolding her, she helped Athena get dressed in something that wouldn't make her inability to wear a bra too obvious and brushed her hair. Athena didn't mind the scolding and savoured the moment instead. Lifen may not have been her mother but she had raised her for more than half of the life she could remember.
 Jiaying came with her breakfast and Athena gobbled it down with the grace of a pig, impatient to see Cade. Jiaying smiled though she didn't say anything. As she was wheeled to the guards' quarters, Athena couldn't calm the butterflies in her stomach. Her heart sped up and banged against her fractured ribs.
 Jiaying hesitated last night when she was talking about Cade. Throughout the whole journey, all Athena could think about was whether her little brother was fine or not because alive wasn't the same as fine.
 Guards bowed to Athena as she passed, some in uniform and some off duty. She nodded back in vague acknowledgement but her mind was on Cade.
 Jiaying stopped in front of room number 118. She knocked on the door and it opened before Athena was ready, knocking the wind out of her lungs. Cade stood there with his bright blue eyes and a small smile on his face. The earpiece was gone but he just stared and stared at Athena and Jiaying.
 "Cade," Jiaying said slowly. "This is Princess Athena Nightingale."
 Cade bowed in one swift movement. His next words ripped her heart out.
 "It is a great honour to meet you, your Highness. May I ask how you are feeling?"
 Cade didn't remember her.   Her Cade didn't remember her. Her vision swam and tears prickled her eyes. This hurt more than anything she'd gone through. Cade couldn't remember what he'd meant to her, the times they'd shared or that he'd helped save her life. He didn't remember telling her to be the rose that grew from concrete.
 "I-I'm fine. It is my greatest honour to see you, too, Cade," she managed a reply. "I... I'll see you soon."
 Jiaying wheeled her away and Athena was too lost in her own despair to notice that Jiaying had taken to her the garden. She sat on the bench beside her chair. The koi pond in front of them was beautiful and Athena used to come here all the time for peace and quiet. But she couldn't bring herself to appreciate the beauty or the peace.
 "What happened to him?" she asked.
 "The earpiece damaged his brain. Dr. Campbell said he'd lost all his memories and there is no way to recover them. His long term and short term memory been damaged too and he has a hard time remembering. You saw him on his good day, Princess. Usually he takes a while to be able to open doors or do anything at all really. He even struggles to talk coherently sometimes. He's dropped more than a few plates and the doctor said it might get worse."
 A tear rolled down her cheek. She should've tried harder to get him out. No, she should never have left. Maybe then, Rovina wouldn't have put him into the army. If he really was having such trouble now...
 She wanted to look after him. But she could barely look after herself and even when she became well again, she doubted she'd have much time on her hands.   "Jiaying- jiĕ, Cade needs you more than I do," she said. "Please look after him. He means the world to me."
 Jiaying nodded with a small smile. "Of course, your majesty."      

 

Chapter 32

                  Please ignore the picture above. I don't know how to take it off. Chapter 32
 After a few minutes in the garden, Orion joined Athena and Jiaying. He was looking much better than he did the day before, his stubble shaved and his hair brushed; wearing a shirt that didn't look like it had been worn for days. Jiaying unsubtly made an excuse that she had to go look after Cade and left.   "Lifen told me you were feeling brave this morning," Orion said as he sat where Jiaying had. "Don't do that."
 She gulped at his captain voice, whispering, "I just wanted to see Cade."
 His eyes softened. "I know but... just don't do it again, okay?"
 "Orion, my legs are not broken," she insisted. Being stuck in this chair, dependent on someone to push her everywhere, was not very appealing. Dr. Ling had given her one that she couldn't roll herself.
 He gave her a long hard look and she sighed. "Okay. I won't do it if it isn't necessary. By the way, how are your parents?"
 Orion shook his head at her obvious change of subjects, smiling. "They're both fine. Mum wants me back there."
 Back there. Her heart tugged. She'd forgotten that Orion wasn't a part of her world. What if he went back to Australia to his family? What was she going to do then? She wanted him here. It hadn't occurred to her before but now, with the very strong possibility of her becoming Empress, she began to wonder: what if Orion didn't want the responsibility of becoming Emperor?
 His hand on hers brought her out of her thoughts.   "Are you going back?" she dared to ask.
 "I'd have to, at least for a little while." Her heart sank, her stomach ready to heave its contents out. "I need to get an ID," Orion continued, "and reverse the surgery."
 "A-Are you coming back?" she asked, her voice cracking.
 "Yes," he said and air finally returned to her lungs. "I'll file for immigration so that I can live here."
 "Live in China? In Shanghai?" she asked, unable to hide the hope in her voice.
 He smiled at her but it abruptly left his face and he stared with intense eyes, his gaze heavy on hers. "You're going to be the Empress, Athena," he reminded.   "Then become my Emperor." The words had left her mouth in desperation before she could even register it as a thought. Her face burned from the embarrassment from sort-of proposing to Orion. And her emperor? Oh, great stars.
 "It's not that easy, Athena," Orion said. "After Emperor Alvah, your people won't want a foreigner on the throne again, no offense. Have you seen the tabloids? They're already talking about you and me. They really don't like me."
 "Please, Orion," she begged. "Even if you won't be my Emperor... I'll knight you. Become Captain of the Guards or... Or something. Just, please... I can't lose you too."
 He took both of her hands in his and held them tightly; his rough palms warm around her cold ones. His eyes glittered with stars and they held her eyes captive, refusing to let go.
 "Trust me, Athena," he whispered lowly. "Losing you is the last thing I'd ever do. We just need to think this through. We can make it out of this."
 A warm fuzzy feeling grew in her chest at his words. The side of Orion he only showed her had a tendency to do that, leaving her dazed and bubbly for hours afterwards. 

  "I actually came to tell you that Advisor Gui wanted you to talk to Rovina. I told him that I won't allow you anywhere near her but he said that you didn't need my permission for anything. That's when I realised that you're you and I'm me."
 "And we're us, right?"
 "Right. Are you going to see her? Rovina, I mean."
 Of course. She'd wanted to go see Rovina since yesterday but she didn't want her sister to think she was only trying to rub it in her face.
 "I will."
 He pressed his lips together but didn't say anything as he pushed her back into the palace. His distaste was clear in his furrowed eyebrows and lips set in a frown.
 When they were inside the elevator, Athena couldn't stand it anymore.
 "Orion, please don't think that I'm superior," she said. "You have every right to tell me what to do or not to do."
 "Yeah, but you never listen anyway. Even if I locked you in a room you still would've found a way to Rovina if you wanted to," he said and there was a smile in his voice.
 They descended to the cells underground. She was mildly glad that this wasn't like the last time she'd been here, breaking out and Cade being hurt. But the pain of having to see Rovina in one of these cells, behind a layer of plasma, overpowered any relief she felt.   All the cells were empty now, with the exception of Rovina's. Her cell was down the first row, immediately in front of the elevator. A guard stood in front of the cell and she bowed when as they emerge from the elevator. She bowed back as far as she could and the guard looked mildly surprised.
 "How are you, your highness?" she asked.
 "I'm fine, thank you."
 She wasn't fine at all. Orion pushed her directly in front of Rovina's cell. Her heart shattered at the sight of her sister sitting on the blanket in white from head to toe. She didn't belong in there. She raised one eyebrow at Athena, eyes stone cold as always.
 "I see you're still alive."
 "I'm sorry, Rovina," she apologised, not for being alive but for ruining her life. She turned to the guard. "Open the door, please."
 "What?" Orion snapped.   "Go away, Athena. I don't want your pity," Rovina sneered.
 "Rovina, we need to talk and I don't want to do it with a prison door between us." She repeated to the guard, "Please. Open the door."
 "Athena, I don't trust her," Orion said, glaring at her sister who smiled at him sweetly. "She's a psychopath. She tried to kill you."
 "Then come in with me," Athena retorted, not giving up. She couldn't possibly talk to Rovina like this. The guilt would've eaten her up and made her help Rovina escape from this place regardless of what her sentence would be.
 "Athena," Orion warned but upon seeing the determination in her eyes with no sign of faltering, he sighed, rubbing his face with his hands. "You never listen."
 The guard opened the door and she trained her gun on Rovina while Orion helped Athena up from the chair to step over the raised platform and inside the cell. Rovina stood and squared her shoulders as she looked at Athena, half supported by his arm at her waist.   "Why did you do these things, Rovina? Father, why did you have to... He loved you."
 Something like regret formed in Rovina's eyes and they softened a little. "He was interfering with my plans."

  "You're a monster," Orion spat.
 Rovina only smiled. "It takes a monster to destroy a monster. If I am one, then so is your beloved princess."
 The words stung like salt on fresh wound. "I never meant for this to happen, Rovina."
 "Then what did you mean!" Rovina snapped. "Did you think everything would fine and everyone would be happy after your little stunt? That people would just forgive me? The world doesn't work that way, Athena! Stop being so naive."   "I wasn't blinded by jealousy because of a prophecy," Athena replied calmly. "I have never in my life wanted to be empress. If you didn't do what you did, you'd still be crowned Empress and no one would have to die."
 "As if I'd ever be jealous of you," Rovina spat, face red with anger. "Daughter of a peasant, with no right to the throne. And you took everything away from me!"
 Eyes crazed, Rovina lunged for her neck before anyone could blink; a tigress going for her prey. Her sharp claws pierced Athena's skin and sliced it open. Athena cried and pressed her hand to her neck, warm blood drenching her palm. Orion grabbed Rovina's throat and pinned her up against the wall, and a laser bullet flew past Rovina's head. His fingers constricted around her neck and Rovina tried to peel his hands away, gasping for breath desperately.
 "Orion, no!" Athena cried, pulling him with her free hand. "Stop!"
 Rovina's face was turning blue and Orion was glaring murderously at her, not letting go.   She screeched, "Please, Orion! You're going to kill her!" She placed her bloodied hand on his arm and only then did Orion look down at it. "Please let go, Orion," she begged, uselessly tugging his arm, ignoring the fire in her chest.
 His fingers slowly loosened. Rovina collapsed to the floor, coughing and gasping, finger-shaped bruises already forming around her pale neck.
 "Monsters," she rasped. "Both of you."
 Orion led her out of the cell and the guard immediately closed the cell. Blood was still oozing out the torn skin on Athena's neck and he quickly pushed her to the medical ward. All the while, Rovina's words echoed in her mind.
 Monster.  
 "What the fracking hell?" one of the medic-droid said as she pushed in. "How-What... Why on earth did no one tell me Athena was awake?"
 Dr. Ling came out a door on the other side of the room, looking at Athena over the frame of her glasses. "I thought you knew. I did tell you I was going to check up on her yesterday."
 "You didn't say she was awake!" the droid exclaimed.
 Dr. Ling rolled her eyes as she kept coming towards Athena, who was still looking at the pale blue medic-droid in confusion. She didn't remember that droid being quite so dramatic. She was certain it was not new because the same scratch on its round head was in the exact same spot she remembered it. But that personality...
 "What have you done to yourself now?" Dr. Ling asked in exasperation as she looked at Athena's bloodied neck.
 "Rovina," Orion answered for her, his voice like gravel.
 "Ah," the doctor said as if this made perfect sense. "You need to learn to stop playing with snakes, Athena."
 "Excuse me?" the droid said, coming over as Dr. Ling began to examine the wound. "How long have you been awake, Athena?"
 Athena? Droids in the palace never called her Athena. They were all programmed to address her as Your Highness or something along those lines.
 "Um, since yesterday?" she replied. "Do I know you?"

  The droid gasped and placed its hands on its chest. "Do you-what-that's-" it spluttered. She didn't know droids could even do that. "I'm M. I just got an upgrade, see? I don't look like a tuna can anymore. Dr. Ling gave me a job here. She says my programming is more advanced than newer models, right, Doc?"
 Dr. Ling sighed. "Yes, M. Stop bragging; other droids have personality chips too. Can you prepare my room? Athena is going to need stitches."
 "Stitches?"   "Yes. Some parts of the wounds are quite deep and I also need to disinfect them. And Harriet, can you get someone to cut that girl's nails, please?"
 A female voice in another room replied with a faint yes.   Athena needed six stiches in total for the three lines of torn skin. Dr. Ling also scolded her for being reckless and set Orion the task of keeping her confined in that chair. Athena sighed in defeat because the look Orion gave her said that there was no way he was letting her walk around. Or even stand.   She spent the rest of the day being polite to people who visited her to ask how she was doing now. They mostly consisted of her father's council. When she wasn't doing that, she was making Orion push her around everywhere aimlessly just to see when he'd get tired and let her walk.
 Her plan only backfired; Orion was more than happy to comply with her wishes even though he knew she was testing him. He, unfortunately, aced that test with flying colours.
 At dinner that night, he asked, "What did Rovina mean by daughter of peasant?" By the hesitant tone of his voice, he must've been waiting to ask that for a while.
 She looked up from her bowl of rice at the faces of her friends, including Chen and Lifen. They all watched her in confusion, eyebrows furrowed. All except Lifen. Colour had drained from her face and she casted her eyes down to her food when Athena looked at her.
 She looked back at Orion, who stared expectantly. He deserved to know the truth, after all he'd done for her. They all did.
 She sighed. "Empress Chang'e wasn't... my real mother. At least, Rovina tells me she wasn't. I never knew about it until we were imprisoned here. She says... She says that my father had an affair with a scullery maid and had me."
 "Rovina was telling the truth," Lifen said quietly, not looking up. "My sister was the scullery maid."
 She dropped her fork. Rovina... was telling the truth. This was... She gulped.
 This was the confirmation that her whole life had been a lie. This was the moment she would lose everything she had ever known. She thought it was impossible for her life to fall apart further than it had but how could it, when it had never been her true life at all? She couldn't even be happy to know that she had a mother.
 "I'm confused," Darren said. "What is going on?"
 "The Emperor betrayed his wife," Lifen said, "and slept with my sister Yilin who was only seventeen. She fell pregnant and because of the law, she would've had to abort the baby and if the emperor was identified as the father, she would've been executed. The Empress was kind enough to save her from that fate by lying to the world about another pregnancy and later adopted Athena as her daughter."
 "But you..." Jill trailed. "Where do you come in?"
  "Alvah refused to let Yilin work at the palace but because at the time she supported most of our family's income, Empress allowed me to work at the palace instead."
 Athena leaned back in her chair, unable to comprehend. Her chest hurt. Her mind spun.   "You okay?" Orion murmured, taking her hand in his.

  She shook her head.
 "Athena," Lifen said, "you might not remember but you've seen her before. When you were younger, I used to V-comm her with you just so she could see you grow up."
 She didn't remember.
 "Where is she now?" she dared to ask.
 "She's in Beijing. She became a dancer with the Imperial Beijing Dance Company."
 Athena blinked in surprise. Her mother, a dancer.
 "W-Would she want to see me?"
 Lifen smiled. "Athena, she would give up her life to call you ling'ài."  
 Dr. Ling had scolded her many times for this but Athena had to do it. She had to go to the Yunnan peacock dance performance in Nanjing. The seats were all sold out but that was okay. She wasn't here for the dance anyway, although it would've been nice to see her mother's talent that had not been bestowed upon her.
 As she sat in the car, her knees bopped up and down, her fingers fiddled with Orion's as she wove them in between his. The Empress had once taken her to see the troupe perform The Nutcracker when she was around twelve but she couldn't remember what the snowflakes' faces looked like. There were so many and her mother had been one of them.   "Athena, relax," Orion said, smiling. "She'll love you."
 She glanced out the window again. The cars around them were leaving the parking, the performance over. She bit her lip. "I'm scared," she breathed.
 "What for?" Lifen asked.
 Athena shook her head. Her mother didn't know she was here; only that Lifen was. How would she react? Would she be disappointed in whom her daughter had grown up to be?   Orion pressed a kiss to her temple, brushing away her hair. "You saved the world, Athena. If your mum isn't proud of that then I don't know who is," he said as if he could hear her thoughts.
 The parking was clearing quickly and more cars filed out the gates but theirs remained parked. Lifen's new port rang and she answered the call with a grin flashed at Athena.
 "Hello," she said in Mandarin. "Yes, I am in the black limousine... Yilin, I did not steal the – No, Chen didn't steal the car either. Just come outside... Come in costume. That's perfect."
 She ended the call and said, "She was looking out the window. She's coming now."
 Oh, stars.
 Lifen got out of the car and Athena waited, squeezing Orion's hand. Soon a woman came out of the pyramid-shaped building in a white dress with peacock eyes on the flowing skirt, glittering under the lights of the building. Her hair was piled into a bun at the top of her head and her face was coloured with make-up. She wasn't as short as Athena had imagined and not as curvy either. Her physique was very much like her own, slender and long-limbed.   "She looks just like you," Orion said.   "And she's coming this way."
 "Athena, relax. It's impossible for anyone to not love you, especially your mum."
 She pressed her lips together and nodded, watching her mum. She stopped right in front of the car, next to Lifen. She tried to fish out her memories of those V-comms but couldn't even begin to form a spark. Maybe she never experienced those times; just the other Athena, the dead one.   "Okay, I want to know where you got a limo," her mum said to Lifen straightaway.
 "I didn't steal it," Lifen insisted with a smile.   "You're trying to tell me you bought it?" She gestured at the car and Athena smiled a little too. Her mum was sassier than she imagined.
 "I didn't say that. I wanted to show you something." Lifen grabbed her mum's hand and dragged her to the passenger door on Orion's side.
 Her mum tried to peer in but the tinted windows would've made it impossible for her see in. Athena froze. She was there. She was right there! She was almost looking right into her eyes without knowing it.
 Lifen tapped her fingers on the window.
 Athena looked to Orion and he nodded with a smile, squeezing her hand. "I'll be right with you. Ready?"
 She inhaled. Then exhaled. And nodded. "I'm ready." She really wasn't.
 Orion opened the door and stepped out slowly, not letting her hand go and forcing her out with him. He helped her up as she stood carefully to not reinjure her lungs and ribs. But what good would that do when her heart was pounding so hard against them anyway?
 As Lifen shut the door, her mum gasped.
 Her wide brown eyes stared as her mouth hang agape. Close up, she could see where she had inherited her facial features from; the eyes, the brows, the nose and the oval shape of her face. Athena bowed her head, wanting to bow lower but unable to.
 "Your highness!" her mum squeaked, hands covering her mouth. "I-I should bow before you! I'm so sorry. Please forgive my insolence."
 And she bent forward, her back almost parallel to the ground.   "No, no, please don't." Athena tried to stop her, reaching out a hand but a pang in her chest brought it back and Orion stiffened.
 Lifen put a hand on mum's bare shoulder. "Yilin, she knows now."
 Her mum looked up, slowly straightening her back. Tears pooled in her eyes as she stared at Athena, shoulders heaving rapidly. She didn't say anything and Athena didn't know what to either. So she stared at her mum, soaking in the happiness she hadn't felt in a long, long while. Her real mother, right in front of her.
 "I'm sorry," her mum burst in a sob, tears spilling. "I'm so, so sorry. Eighteen years, I did nothing to get you back. I'm sorry, ling'ài."   Ling'ài. Beloved. Even Empress Chang'e had never called her that.
 Gently brushing Orion's hand off her waist, she stepped forward to her mum, who blamed herself for something she couldn't help. She was so very wrong in thinking her mum wouldn't love her. Even after eighteen years, after never having talked to her own daughter, she still loved her enough to call her ling'ài.   She wrapped her arms around her mum's shoulders, burying her face in her shoulder. Her mum embraced her back, pressing her lips against her temple. And Athena let her tears fall.
 "My beautiful girl," her mum said through a beam, face wet with tears. "I thought I lost you forever." She squeezed her tighter. "I hope you can forgive me for what I did. I loved you since the moment I knew you were in me and that man could've screwed himself if he thought I was going to give you up. I never thought," she sniffed, "this day would come true. I thought I would die without my daughter knowing I existed."
 Athena's face streamed with tears, plopping onto her clothes. It was in this moment that she realised her life was perfect. It had always been.   Then she understood why Rovina had been jealous of her. She had taken away the feeling of completion. She had taken away her mother's love; the one thing that would always be more beautiful than anything in the universe.
 "I love you, mama," she sniffled between sobs.   She had a mother again. And that made her luckier than Rovina – and a monster.

 

Chapter 33

                  Chapter 33
   Weeks passed and Athena's wounds healed. Dr. Ling had begun to allow her to walk a few miles each day and she couldn't have been gladder. There were times, though, when she walked too fast and her heart fought to catch up to her pace. She had to stop and lean on the nearest thing available.
 She offered her mum a life with her in the palace but her contract still had two years left. She came to stay on the days she was not performing or practicing – no matter where she was. She was very proud of her and that made Athena giddy with happiness to hear it.   She was scouted into the company when she had danced in the streets of Shanghai for money after she left the palace. She had learned to dance from videos of performances on the net and dancing had been a passion since she was young. She promised to teach Athena a few steps when she was in good health again.
 The peace treaty had been signed and war reparations had been paid back by both parties. The tabloids were still talking about Rovina's betrayal and Athena didn't pay her visits anymore. Mostly, she'd been too busy to.
 Orion still stood around the halls or stared out windows with guilt painted in his eyes. He never missed a chance to watch the stars at night with her, staring sadly at the constellation of Hunter.
 Danika, her daughter and her wife's bodies could not be found and Rovina insisted that she didn't know. Every time she saw M around the palace, she remembered Danika giving that little red can to her. Danika, who hid her, risking everything she loved. Danika who believed in her until the very end.
 She ordered a plaque made for her and her family and placed it in the royal columbarium. That was the least she could do for her best friend.
 She travelled to Australia (against Dr. Ling's advice) with Jill, Darren and Orion, to personally apologise to Prime Minister Michael Belfore and to thank the Xing family and Dr. Marvin, who had saved her life.
 Marci's eyes grew as wide as saucers when she showed up at their front door. She dropped into a bow, gasping.
 "Oh, my God," Marci muttered. "Your highness, I-I'm so sorry about what I said about you before. And thank you very, very much for the dress!"
 "Marci, stop. It's alright," Athena cut in before she went on, putting a hand on Marci's shoulder to stop her. "Call me Athena, or Teri."
 "Marci, who is it?" Nina called and appeared from the kitchen, wiping wet hands with a cloth. Then she dropped the cloth. "Your highness," she breathed. "Please, come in."
 A few pieces of furniture were missing now, like the bookshelf in the corner and a one-seater couch that had accompanied the two-seater. She offered financial aid for the family as a thank you. Ben was hesitant in accepting but she didn't leave them any room for argument.   Orion invited Athena to meet his family and against her better judgement, she said yes. Then immediately regretted it. She liked to think she only agreed because she was under the influence of heavy dose of medicine – as Dr Ling had instructed. Going to Orion's house was like going to meet her mum; nerve-wrecking and exciting at the same time.
 Orion's mother, Adeline Kesswell stopped and stared when Orion knocked on the door of the medium sized house. She had jet black hair and tanned skin and was not very gifted at height, unlike Orion.
 "Yes, can I help you?" she said.
 "Mum, it's me; Orion. I had to have surgery for a mission to... you know, take down Princess Rovina."
 Adeline gasped and she attacked him, wrapping her arms around him with a beam on her face. Then she let him and told him off for scaring her near death. Orion's face became tinted with red as he stole a glance in Athena's direction.
 Adeline finally took notice of her, standing a few steps behind him. Her jaw dropped. Athena uncertainly smiled and waved.
 "Why didn't you tell me you're bringing the princess?" she barked at Orion again. "Your cousins just came over and the house is a complete mess! I haven't even made lunch. Oh, God, I don't even have anything to make lunch! Sorry, your highness. Please come in. I'm just going to go speed clean the house."
 She rushed back inside the house and yelled at her husband that Orion was back. Smiling, Orion looked at Athena.
 "She did that when Hunter invited Alison over, too. I'll tell her to not fuss over you but it's not a promise I can make."
 Their house was filled with memories of Commander Hunter Kesswell. They let their eyes linger on photographs of him hung around the place with remorse.   Adeline and Peter both fussed over her, repeatedly asking if they could get her anything and running around the kitchen, trying to make lunch with 'whatever is edible'. Athena couldn't stop them. When she looked at Orion for help, he only shrugged. Even their dog Jess ran around her after jumping onto Orion.
 "Hunter found her after a storm," Orion said as Athena patted her head. With a smile he added, "Alison says he loves Jess more than her."
 She left a short while after lunch of ready-made chicken nuggets, baked potatoes and profuse apologies for the lack of anything better, giving Orion privacy to catch up with his parents. He promised he'd be back as soon as his immigration visa had been granted and kissed her right in front of his parents. Their eyes were bulging out of their sockets and when Orion pulled away, so were Athena's.
 A few days after Athena's return to Shanghai, Rovina's second trial was held but she didn't go. Later that evening, Rovina summoned her and Advisor Gui. The wounds on her neck had turned to scars. Gui-dàrén ordered three guards to come with them and ordered that if Rovina showed any signs of violence, they could shoot her. Athena wanted to fix that command but didn't. Death would be the easy way out for Rovina.
  Rovina stood at the front of the cell, just behind the green plasma door. Even after eight weeks in prison, she was still as pretty as ever. She was smiling and for once, it was genuine.
 "I only really wanted Athena," she said. "But your boyfriend might not have let you come so I asked Gui-dàrén to come with you."
 "What did you want to say to me?" Athena asked, suspicion seeping in.
 "I heard that you found your mother. Good for you, I guess. Does she love you?"
 She looked down at her feet. "Yes, she does. And... I'm sorry for taking mother away from you. I never realised how you would've felt."
 "A little late for that apology," Rovina retorted. "But I'm sorry too; for killing our parents and for not being a good sister. All those people who call me a bitch – is that what it's like to have people call you crazy?"
 This wasn't Rovina. Rovina never apologised to her. Ever.   Cautiously she asked. "Do you want me to make your sentence lighter?"
 Rovina barked a laugh. "Please, Athena. I'm not that pathetic. I'd rather die than ask you for help. I only wanted one last chance to be a good sister for once and say I'm sorry."
 "Rovina, you're scaring me. What are you doing?"
 Rovina smiled. Athena had forgotten how beautiful her sister was when she smiled like she meant it. Which was exactly why her suspicion grew. Rovina smiling like this...
 "I'm saying goodbye... Mèimei."
 As soon as the words left her mouth, Rovina fell through the laser plasma. Did anyone see this coming?

 

Chapter 34

Chapter 34 The nightmares would not go away. Athena still woke up in the middle of the night in cold sweat, screaming the palace down. Memory of her sister plunging through the plasma, shredded to smithereens flashed in her mind every time she closed her eyes. That smile Rovina wore just before she killed herself haunted her every waking moment. She didn't know a human body could have that much blood or that it could be so red. Orion returned with the plastic surgery reversed. He and her mum took turns sleeping in her room, even three months after. Before, it used to be Cade who looked after her and held her back to sleep every night. Rovina's death destroyed her. It was an easy way out for Rovina but it was simply cruel for Athena. She tried to convince herself everyday that Rovina was not suffering anymore but a part of her always argued that Rovina would've gone to hell for her sins. She found the heirloom in Rovina's room and let it burn with what was left of Rovina; a final apology. When the mourning period was over, it was almost spring. During the three months, she had tried everything she could to not have to become Empress. She tried suggesting a democratic government to the court but they disagreed, saying the people wanted her. Unintentionally, she'd become a hero and her people thought she was selfless, brave and courageous. So she had to attend her coronation. The Xings were invited and Marci came wearing the pale pink dress she had bought her. Jill and Darren came too, engaged and Jill's belly already visibly protruding in a bump with twins. Athena spent the warm spring day greeting her ambassadors and leaders of countries from all over the world, her mother beside her. Every time she tried to slip away, Gui- dàrén caught her and towed her back to the ballroom. The celebration was far too grand. Even grander than Rovina's coronation had been. And it was far too long. Everyone was busy feasting and celebrating. Gui- dàrén was talking to Michael Belfore. Jill and Darren were dancing and Chen and Lifen were talking to Nina and Ben. Orion was talking with his parents. Everyone else seemed to be minding their own business, forgetting her for a moment. "Go now," her mum whispered, seeing her desperation to get out. Athena smiled at her mum and took the opportunity to slink away in the shadows. She put a finger on her lips at the guards standing outside the room and they nodded. She speed-walked to a place she had never dared to go before; the cryopreservation chambers. The cold dark room was filled with the sound of low mechanical humming and for her footsteps echoed off the walls. She had been so afraid to come here, so afraid of what she would see that every time she decided to come, she ended up busying herself with something else. She was selfless in not running away when her people needed her. And now she'd be brave. She'd have courage. She walked past rows and rows of long dead people, frozen forever in ice. All these people, preserved for what? Why? She couldn't fathom the point of all this. But she did wonder; if Rovina's body could be saved, if she knew about this when her mother died, would she have preserved them? No, she decided. She would not because what was the point of clinging on so desperately to the past, failing to see the future? She found the little girl she was looking for. A chill slithered up her spine. The little girl looked exactly like she did when she was younger. This was the real princess and she was the clone, the imposter. If the princess was allowed a chance at life, would she have grown up the way Athena did? Would she have to face things Athena had? Probably yes. In ways that Athena was not, this little girl was lucky. This girl didn't have to face such horrors, her innocence preserved. She'd never have to face her sister's hatred, the pain of losing people she loved, and the nightmares dragging her mind into the abyss. Athena's hand lightly pressed on the cold glass, just over the girl's heart. The little girl was frozen in a half smile, as if in encouragement to the girl who would grow from her last living cells. "You finally came," Orion's voice came from the elevators. Her hand slowly slipped off the glass and fell beside her. "Yes," she breathed, still looking at the girl. "Well?" She looked at him. He was gorgeous in a black suit and pale blue tie that matched the lining of her hanfu. His hair was neatly styled, bangs hanging over his forehead. "Is she who you thought she'd be?" "I didn't know who she'd be. I didn't let myself think that far." "The party is over," he said quietly, coming to stand beside her. "You can come back up if you want." He began to pull out the golden pins of lilies that secured curls of her hair in place. He dropped them on the ground – as if they were not made of pure gold – until her hair uncurled upon her shoulders. "What are you thinking about?" he murmured, gently running his fingers through her hair. His voice was like a lullaby, soft and alluring. She leaned into him, resting her head on his shoulder. "Being brave. And being lost." He hummed in response. "Asteri Verloren: lost star. Are you found now?" "We're all lost, Orion. We're all trying to light up the dark. I know now that there is no such thing as being found. We only get closer to lighting up the darkness. So, no, I'm not found. But I am shining brighter."       ~THE END~      

 There. Done. Finished. Oh, my God. My babies... I want to thank every single one of you who has stuck with me until the very end. You have given me so much happiness over the course of Lost Star and there is so many of you to mention names, so I'm afraid this is as much as I can do to show my gratitude.  I am currently writing an original Sci-fi/Fantasy with space pirates, mysterious maps that pop into existence every few hundred years, gossipy aliens and other space creatures. It's called A Million Shattered Stars and I hope you'll check it out. (
                     

 

Bonus: Epilogue


 Epilogue
 Athena had never felt comfortable roaming the halls that she grew up in and to this day, the discomfort never faded. If anything, it had only become stronger with the guilt she held on her shoulders, the ghosts of people she'd loved always in the corner of her vision.   It was many, many months after her father's death that she could bear to step inside his office – that she could bear to imagine where he once sat with his eyebrows furrowed as he stared at the hologram of things she didn't understand then. She found a letter, a proper hand-written one, in his drawer addressed to her. He apologised for never being there for her. She'd sat against the table, weeping for hours until her mum had to coax her back to her room.   She forgave him. Even after eighteen years of emotional damage, she forgave him with every bit of her soul.
 It had taken her even longer to dare to step inside Rovina's room. To this day, three years later, her sister's room had remained untouched except to clean. She made sure it was kept pristine and proper, just the way Rovina would've liked.   "Your Highness," Orion's voice called, much closer than any of the other guards had dared to come near her. But then again, he was not just a guard; he was a Captain of the Guards and he was hers.   She backed out of Rovina's room, gently closing the door behind her. Orion stood in his red uniform, the Empire's insignia embroidered on his chest and an ornate gun at his belt, more for decoration than practical use. She let her eyes run over her husband's body and tried to hide an appreciative smile. But of course, Orion saw. He always saw through her.
 He smiled too and took a step closer, his toes touching the bottom of her hanfu. "You look beautiful," he whispered.
 "You do, too," she whispered back, stepping onto the balls of her feet to press a kiss against his lips.   Orion groaned, his hands coming to her waist. "How long is this conference going to last?"
 "Until eleven at the latest," she answered.   Rovina's clone armies had resulted in millions of displaced soldiers without homes. The relocation programs still had to be constantly monitored and Athena had ended with a major part of that job. There was also the matter of granting citizenship to these soldiers which was still under a lot of international debate. The way Athena saw it, these people were human beings. They deserved to be treated as such. But there were others who have expressed concerns for future over-population issues from the next generation.
 Her head ached just by the anticipation of another night of all-out debate among the world leaders.
 Orion, noticing the scrunch of her nose, said, "I hope it goes well today. And that it finishes early enough to celebrate later tonight. Jill and Darren are already here with their kids."
 Athena smiled. This was probably the only thing that would keep her sane through this conference.   She slipped out of Orion's hold and composed herself before marching down the hall, Orion in tow like a good bodyguard.  
 It was ten-thirty when she ended the conference. A decision was still not made but right at that moment, she didn't care. All she wanted to do was see Jill and Darren, who were visiting with their son and daughter for one night only before travelling to Singapore the next day.
 She rushed out, trying to remain as elegant and mature as possible. Orion led her to the spare room that the Towers were staying in. She heard children's laughter before she even knocked on the door. And when she did, it flew open without a moment's pause.

  Jill stood on the other side in singlets and shorts, little Isabella clung on her back. On the bed inside the room, Darren was tickling Benji who was rolling around in fits of laughter, fending off his dad's fingers with his tiny hands. The two kids were very much like Ander, both with eyes as blue as his were and with rounds jaws. Benji's curls were lighter than Isabella's but her skin was lighter than his. They were both adorable without any competition and they managed to capture Athena's heart immediately.
 "Princess!" Isabella cried, almost leaping into Athena's hands.
 She laughed and scooped the two-year-old into her arms. Izzy straightaway began to play with the pearl-studded pin in Athena's hair, tugging it off. She was well aware of Orion staring at her in the corner of her eyes.
 "Hi, Athena," Darren called. "Hey, O."
 Orion waved and went inside the room.   "Hello," Athena said in response to Darren's greeting before she turned to Jill. "How was the flight?"
 Jill ran her fingers through her hair and twisted it into a bun before she scrunched up her face. "Sh- I mean bad. So many kids screaming the plane out of the sky. Izzy and Ben never cry like that, thank god. How's life lately?"
 Izzy tugged at the pin again, yanking her whole head. She hissed and pulled it out for the little girl whose face lit up like a light. "Busy, as always."
 Jill glanced at Darren and Orion, who was now taking a turn at tickling Ben as he talked to Darren about his job as a Commander in the Australian Army.   Jill had learned to care for Darren, she admitted so. Sometimes she had called Athena to talk about Ander, because she was never going to stop loving him. It was more frequent in the early days of her motherhood when her children reminded her so much of their father, her true love. Nowadays, the calls became less frequent.   And Darren? Athena didn't think he'd ever stop loving Jill, and he accepted that she was never going to love him as much as she loved Ander. Not only that, he loved Ander's children as if they were his own.    Jill cleared her throat. "What about you two?" she asked Athena. "When are you planning to have kids?"
 Orion glanced at Athena and she froze in her spot. She'd had this talk with Orion. He wanted children but she wanted to wait. She was only twenty-one anyway. They had plenty of time and having a child now, when she was so busy, was not a good idea.
 She managed to shrug. "Not soon."
 Darren said, "Hey, isn't this your anniversary today?"
 It was. It had now officially been a year since Orion became her husband and she became his wife. The wedding was nothing extravagant like her coronation had been. Only the absolutely necessary people were invited. Needless to say her people were unsatisfied.
 "It is," Orion answered for both of them. "Actually, we should leave you guys to rest. You're off on your Eurasia trip again tomorrow."
 Darren sniggered. "Please, Orion. We all know what you guys are going to do."
 Athena heated like a furnace at Jill's knowing look. In moments like these, it hurt to remember that Danika couldn't be here. Neither could Hunter. They would love to have been a part of this.   "I'm not denying anything," Orion said, pushing off the bed and strolling back towards Athena with a smirk directed at her.   She glared at him as she gave Isabella back to Jill. Jill tried to take the pin off her daughter but she stopped her and let her goddaughter keep it. 

  Orion ushered her out of the room and Jill slammed it shut behind them but not before she smirked and winked, much like Darren who yelled something inappropriate that Benji questioned.   Orion laughed, staring at the door as if he could still see the family.   "I'm sorry we didn't get to do anything for our first anniversary," she apologised. It was more for her own sake than his. She wanted to do something special – something outside of things they would normally do anyway.
 Orion stared down at her. "Who said we aren't doing anything?"
 Her heart skipped. "Are we?"   Orion grinned. "Jiaying and Cade should be finished by now."
 "Finished what?"
 "Uh uh. It's a surprise. Come on."
 He took her hand in his and took off towards the elevator. She scrambled after, lifting up her hanfu with one hand. Thankfully, the sleeping quarters of the palace were not occupied by important people who would criticise her for being improper, running around the palace like a child. Those who did live here – mostly high ranking staff – had gotten used to her and Orion's presence and did not judge.   Inside the elevator, Athena tried to make him tell her but Orion would not budge. He only pulled her in and wrapped his arms around her from the back, rocking from side to side. She stopped pestering him and melted into his chest until the door opened on the floor where their bedroom was.
 Orion was a romantic at heart. Athena quickly learnt that in the early days of their relationship. He bought her flowers whenever he had a chance to go into the city, never forgetting her birthday and religiously ensured all of the dates they could sneak in were perfect. He had once tried to make her breakfast in bed the day after a late-night conference. He "would've whipped up a five-course banquet if the Chief Cook hadn't beaten him out of the kitchen with his spatula".
 She loved this side of Orion that he only showed her.
 Just as they stepped out of the elevator into the hallway, Jiaying and Cade emerged from their bedroom, both beaming. Jiaying was holding a basket in one hand and in the other was Cade's hand. When they saw Athena and Orion, their beams widened.
 Jiaying giggled as she dragged Cade away, saying a hesitant 'hello' as she went. Cade fought hard to keep up with her, his feet sometimes dragging along the carpet.   His and Athena's stolen relationship had rekindled over the years but not without extreme effort on both ends – and Jiaying's. His short term memory made everything difficult for him to remember. Sometimes he'd remember something about an explosion and a princess but he couldn't remember more. Just flashes here and there that he'd forget again soon. Most meals he couldn't be trusted with cutlery. But Jiaying never gave up on him, helping him the way a mother would help her toddler.   Athena could never thank her enough for that.
 "Hey," Orion said softly, tugging her towards the closed door.   "Am I going to be embarrassed?" she asked.
 Orion laughed, the stars in his eyes twinkling. "No. You'd like this."
 He threw the door open to reveal their bedroom lit with candles, white rose petals (her favourite) covering all the furniture in the room. There was a new table in the corner of the room, circular in shape and draped with a satin red tablecloth. On it were two glasses and a bottle of grape wine that Athena loved. Soft music played in the background from speakers hidden around the room.   "I've actually been planning this to be at a restaurant somewhere for a long time now," Orion confessed. "But the conference happened and my plans changed. I hope it's alright. I would've done all of this myself but you know, I was on duty at the conference too."
 His mouth was still moving but Athena couldn't hear what he was saying anymore. All she cared about was the man standing in front of her and the lengths he'd go to make everything perfect for her. He'd always been there when she needed her and never once let her down.   "What did I do to deserve you?" she whispered, cutting off whatever he was saying before.
 Orion stared. "You're you. That's what you did to deserve me, and more."
 She crashed her lips to his and he kissed back with the same hunger, clutching her to him. His kisses were always certain and firm. It made her think things she couldn't bring herself to.
 In such moments, she could accept that, maybe, what she did three years ago was the right thing to do. She could accept the darkness within because she knew she could light it up. If anyone is interested in a character quiz for Lost Star, you can find it in the external link. Have a go! I'd love to hear your results. :)

 

Bonus 1: The Cursed Moon

This story was originally posted in Lost Star: A Compilation but I've decided to transfer this here because I'd like to take the compilation of stories down but keep the bonus stories up. Enjoy. :) This is about the Empress and the secrets she kept before her passing. WARNING: DO NOT READ IF YOU HAVE NOT FINISHED THE BOOK AS THIS CONTAINS SPOILERS. The Cursed Moon Emperor Shi was in a particularly foul mood that day. Chang'e assumed that the conference with the king of Russia didn't go so well. Her father had come into her music class, sat down and listened to her play guqin and left without uttering a word.
 After her teacher left, Chang'e kept on playing, her fingers fluttering above the strings. Mei came in and joined her on the lute in silence, seeing Chang'e's misery. Russia had been talking of declaring independence for a long time now. The Northern Empire could not afford to lose an ally like Russia, whose weaponry production could only be competed by America. Emperor Shi would do what he must to keep this alliance. Chang'e's fingers were numb and a few seconds away from bleeding when the audio interface informed them that Lei Fang requested entrance. It was Mei who granted the permission. A servant boy stood behind the doors, holding a tray of food. He was in waiter's uniform, a little too large for his frame, and his bangs covered his eyes. He was quite cute, actually. Chang'e had never been waited on by him before. Lei Feng inched his way into the room, shoulders hunched. He looked like a mouse caught in a trap. Chang'e giggled. "You may come in, we don't bite." "Speak for yourself," Mei said with a grin, teasing the poor boy who blushed a deep shade of red. He walked a little faster than before, approaching the girls. "Y-Your lunch, your highness." Mei gasped. "Where's my lunch?" she teased, her big brown eyes gleaming. "Tsk, tsk, tsk. There will be punishment for that, my dear." Fang stopped midstride and beneath the mob of hair, Chang'e spied a pair of wide, frightened eyes. Chang'e sighed, smiling at her boisterous best friend. One of kind, Mei was. There were no other girls of nobility who was as outgoing and open as Mei and Chang'e loved her for it. But sometimes her tendency to tease males went a tad overboard. "My friend is kidding," she reassured Fang. "Thank you, Lei Fang." He kneeled in front of her, passed the tray of food with bowed head. "My pleasure, y-your highness." Chang'e opened her mouth to tell him he did not need to be so nervous when he abruptly stood and rushed out of the room, mumbling, "Pardon me, my ladies." His polished black shoes caught on the plush maroon carpet and stumbled out the door. A giggle burst from Chang'e's lips and she quickly pressed the back of her hand against her mouth to stifle it. Fang's blush returned and he quickly walked away. "Poor little lamb," Mei said, shaking her head as she looked at the closing screen-doors. "I heard he's got quite a big crush on you. But then again, who doesn't?" "Is he new?" "Goodness, no! He's been here since last year but he was a scullery maid before. I always saw him when I snuck down there to steal food." "So he isn't one of your midnight snacks?" Chang'e teased. "Him!" Mei cried incredulously as if Chang'e had suggested she'd slept with a tramp. "I have standards, Chang'e!"

The princess shrugged. "He's cute." "So? I only bed men who aren't trying to get into your bed." Chang'e nodded mindlessly, picking at her rice with her chopsticks. "But you do admit that he's cute." Out of the corner of her eyes, she saw Mei staring at her. "Why do you keep coming back to that? Do you not have standards?" Chang'e laughed. "My standards are different from yours." "What, your standards are small, low-classed and jittery?" "No, my standards are honest, kind and selfless." Mei muttered, "Unbelievable. People like you don't marry for love, you do realise that, right, Chang'e?" Chang'e frowned and let caviar drop off her chopsticks. She looked at Mei. "People like me?" "Valuable ones, yes. You have to bring honour to the family and to the country. People like Lei Fang over there will not help you do that." Chang'e set the chopsticks back on the tray, suddenly not hungry. One thing about Mei was that she was blind. Mei couldn't see Chang'e's worry. She couldn't connect that Chang'e's hand in marriage could be sold off to the Russian heir Alvah Nightingale for the alliance to continue. "That's enough, Mei," she murmured. "I understand what you mean but... please don't talk about that." Mei apologised and left, leaving Chang'e in the room of instruments. For the rest of that day Chang'e sat at the piano and let her fingers thread a melody. She drowned herself in the music, finding her only escape from the world she didn't have a say in. She had to be perfect. She had to be the Empire's golden child. She had to marry a nobleman who would bring honour to the family. Of course, her parents would never force her to marry someone she didn't love without absolute necessity but they would not approve of the life she longed for; a life where her husband was not a rich snob, only marrying her for the power she would come with, and her children would not grow up being judged by society and they would have a choice in what they wanted to become. She joined her mother and father for dinner that night and faked a smile on her face, asking the right questions and giving the right responses. She looked at the waiters to see if Lei Fang was among them but he wasn't. She didn't see much of him after that, too involved in her studies and when she was free, she spent most of her times at the observatory and the music room. Mei didn't bring up her marriage anymore but Chang'e knew the possibility hung in the air. Every time the family were in the same room together, the tension sizzled. A few weeks later, rumours of Russian independence and possibility of war flooded the tabloids. Neither the Emperor nor Empress said anything to Chang'e but she knew it was coming and she hated it. She had to act. Mei had left to visit her mother in Beijing with minister Gui-daren, her father, and that had left Chang'e with more time to dread and hate her life more than ever. Incidentally, Lei Fang found her in the observatory again to serve dinner. Her maidservant was not feeling well, which – for Chang'e – happened to be quite fortunate. When Fang came in this time, he was less shaky and his hair was sleeked back. He set the food tray on the table, next to her personal star-chart. He bowed. "Please enjoy your dinner, your highness," he said before he turned around. "Fang," she said. He stopped and looked back at her. Chang'e gave one last thought about what she was about to do and her brain was ringing with warning bells but she didn't listen to them.

"Would you accompany me for dinner?" she asked. Fang's eyes bulged. "Uh, I-I'm sorry, your highness. I-I shouldn't." Chang'e sighed and nodded. "That's fine, Fang." It was a stupid, rash idea anyway. She crossed the dark room towards the telescope, looking up at the glass dome above. It was just her and the stars again tonight. She was peering through the telescope in search of Jupiter when she heard the sound of cutlery behind her. She spun on her heels in surprise to see that Fang was cutting the meat into small pieces. "Fang," she said and let herself trail, unsure what to say. "It...It is my priority to please my princess." A stupid, rash idea... The alliance and the marriage... In the end, she decided a distraction would do her well. Besides, she didn't have the heart to make this boy leave. "I-Is there anything you wish me to do, your highness?" Chang'e smiled. "Thank you very much, Fang. All you have to do is listen to me telling you about the stars and seem like you're interest." Fang hesitated for a second before she said, "Of course, milady." Chang'e beckoned him over to her star chart and told him about the constellations. Fang visibly squirmed every time she got too close to her as if she was toxic but it was strangely adorable. He seemed to cling to her every word as if they were sacred and she knew that he was not pretending to be interested. Chang'e smiled to herself because she found satisfaction in someone actually enjoying her stories. For a few days, Chang'e didn't see Fang around and she tried to deliberately make excuses to visit the kitchens. The scullery maids didn't let her get inside because 'it was dirty' and 'a princess should not be seen in the kitchens'. Then she couldn't take it anymore. She summoned him to her chambers one night. Her personal guard posted outside her door was hesitant in letting him inside and Fang didn't seem to want to come in either. But Chang'e insisted. She dragged him to her drawing room where she'd sketched and painted creatures from mythologies around the room and she was bubbling with joy in telling Fang about them. He wouldn't touch anything, though he listened with great interest. Chang'e slept better that night, memorising the way his face lit up when he smiled. Every Wednesday, she would summon Fang and by the third week, he was comfortable enough to share his own stories, too. Chang'e quickly learned that Fang was an amazing storyteller. He painted pictures with his words, more beautiful than any paintbrush could ever construct. When he told stories, he became the story, burying himself at the heart of it. Sometimes Chang'e would play a song; Fang would listen, his face changing to the rise and fall of the music. When Chang'e was not with Fang, she would still see him in her mind. Sometimes she imagined he was there with her. She told Mei and Mei was livid. She ranted and lectured her about how this was a terrible idea until her mouth had ran dry. Even then, she still had much more to say. She made sure to come back and continue her lecture when she was rehydrated. Mei had called it love. Chang'e wasn't sure what she was feeling but she couldn't imagine life without Fang. She had come to miss him when she didn't see him for a few days. She had come to admire the way he always had others' best interests at heart. She had come to care for him, maybe a little too much. The next thing was the scariest of all; she often found herself imagining his lips on hers. Days later the rant, Mei told her that she'd tried to sleep with Fang in hope that Chang'e would just give up. Fang wouldn't. Chang'e took particular pride in being an understandable person but even she couldn't forgive Mei for this. By then, she knew that Mei was right. Chang'e loved Fang.

At the night of the realisation, Empress Zhan broke the dreaded news to her; an offering of her hand in marriage to the Russian heir was in debate. When Fang came that night, Chang'e was still a sobbing mess on her bed. Fang, who had never dared to near her bed, climbed on and held her until her tears ran out. His embrace was new but familiar, as if they'd shared this warmth a thousand times before. "I love you," Chang'e told him. "Please don't say that," Fang begged, his voice hoarse. "It would hurt us both less if we don't." "No, Fang. I want you to know. I love you and if I could, I would marry you in less than a heartbeat." "Princess." "Fang." They stopped. She looked in his eyes and she saw the same hurt reflected in them. His arm tightened around her. He leaned forward, closed his eyes and pressed a short kiss to her lips. When he pulled away, his arm had loosened and he looked away. Chang'e threw all her instincts out the window. She dove after him, falling back onto the bed. She kissed him fiercely and Fang kissed back with the same intensity, loosing themselves in each other. They were a mess of tangled limbs and sheets, clothes discarded on the carpet and the headboard. Morning came and Chang'e was not surprised to find her bed missing one other person and her floor missing Fang's clothes. There was no need to say it. She knew it was never going to happen again. Two painful days later, it was confirmed Chang'e would be sold off – like an object without a voice. The Nightingale family arrived at the palace that evening for official meetings. The wedding would be held in four weeks. Prince Alvah Nightingale was twenty-one years old, four years older than Chang'e herself. He was an averaging looking man who could've smiled more. Fang was always smiling and Chang'e loved that about him. Alvah was serious, whereas Fang was relaxed. Alvah held himself in high regards and treated her as if she was just a random girl, not his fiancée. She couldn't even fake a smile. All she wanted to do was lock herself away and never come out. She wanted Fang and Alvah was not Fang. She'd made a terrible mistake. The month passed by quickly and she spent it mindlessly signing contracts, posing for cameras with Alvah, getting her wedding dress fitted and attending dinners that Fang was not serving. She hardly saw him anymore. She stopped coming to her room on Wednesdays. But on rare occasions they passed each other without anyone else, Fang would give a broken smile and tell her to hold on and that she was a brave girl. On those days, she'd cry herself to sleep. This life was not worth living. The day of the wedding approached and it passed by far too slowly. Fang was serving the guests and every beating second ripped her heart thread by thread. After the marriage vows were said, Fang was no longer in the room and Chang'e was left with this statue of a man she now called her husband. She told herself; it is my duty as the princess to serve my kingdom in any way I can. I have brought honour to our family. In doing so, she had brought shame to her heart. She was expected to share a bed with Alvah on the first night. She slept on the floor and Alvah had no complaints. She sobbed into her pillow the whole night. In the morning, Alvah asked her why she was crying. She told him she loved another man. Alvah glowered and said, "Forget him, Chang'e. I'm your husband now. You belong to me." Over the next weeks, she tried very hard to understand him. She tried hard to be a good wife and a good princess. She tried to help Alvah in any way she could but more often than not, he brushed her off like she was incapable of understanding anything.

Mei was gone too. Her mother had called her back to Beijing to train to become Countess. She hadn't been able to talk to Fang since the wedding and Chang'e had no one anymore. She had long stopped talking to her parents about her life. While she understood that her parents only did what they did because they had no other choice, she was still bitter that the fate of her life was in their hands. Then came the dreadful news. She was gifted with a child. She had never shared a bed with Alvah and that had meant the baby was Fang's. Fang was the first person she told. She sought him out and told him that she held their child. Fang fell to his knees and cried into Chang'e's hanfu. "What do I do, Fang?" she whispered. "Raise him as the prince's. Please, Princess. I beg of you, please don't hurt my child." "Fang, he is ours and I would never dream of..." she trailed because the thought was too absurd and horrific to even speak of. It was settled then. Chang'e approached Alvah a few days later, after she'd built up the courage to confess. The prince remained rigid and composed, emotions and thoughts concealed behind a face incapable of expressions. She told him everything and she had not a clue what was going on in Alvah's mind. There was a naive hope that Alvah would not mind because he did not love her anyway and he had made it clear enough that he would only ever sleep with her to bear an heir. After she was done with the confession, Alvah nodded and he went to sleep without saying a single word to Chang'e. She stared at him, confused, before she went back to her own chambers, where she now slept. The next day, Alvah requested a dinner with Chang'e, which was strange because Alvah tried to have little to do with her unless they were in front of cameras. Nevertheless, Chang'e went. They ate in silence. As Chang'e brought the glass of wine to her lips, her stomach cramped and she dropped the glass to the carpeted ground. The fabric beneath her became wet and she stood up, only to see a patch of red on the cushion of the seat. Another burst of cramp sent her curling to the floor, crying in pain. All she could think about was her baby, her child whom she'd already begun to think of names for. Something was happening to her baby. Through the pain and tears, she saw Alvah trudge to the comm-screen in a wall and call a doctor. She looked at the deep red wine-stain beside her on the grey carpet. Days later, when she refused to leave her bed and eat, she thought back to these two things. Then she knew, she just knew that Alvah was responsible murdering her and Fang's child.   Years passed and Fang no longer worked at the palace. After her forced miscarriage, Chang'e no longer talked to Fang for fear that Alvah would bring harm his way, too. She didn't know when he stopped working there. She told him that she had a miscarriage and Fang had once again, broken down, a crying mess in a closet. That was the last time she ever spoke to Fang, the man she loved with all her heart. He probably had a family of his own now. Sometimes she'd let herself wonder about him; whether or not he still thought of her like she still thought of him. Chang'e had bore Alvah a beautiful daughter named Rovina. Sometimes, when Chang'e looked at her daughter, she remembered the child she never had and it was heart-wrenchingly painful. She didn't even know whether her baby was a beautiful girl or a handsome boy. She didn't even get to decide whether she like Athena better than Asteri for a girl or whether she liked Leo better than Rigel. Over the years, Chang'e faded into the background and Alvah took over the ruling of the Empire, even though he was only technically king consort. As always, Chang'e had little say in matters that concerned her kingdom. But she learnt to tolerate her power-hungry husband and she even tried to love him as a husband, though she was still not managing that quite yet. The one thing Chang'e never learnt was to forgive him for murdering her first child. Chang'e again and again tried to share her passion for astronomy with her daughter but she took after her father. Chang'e tried everything to please Rovina, to make her daughter see her as more than just an uneducated nanny but Rovina took too much after her father. Alvah did not believe in 'nonsensical astrology' but Chang'e relied heavily on the family soothsayer. She predicted Rovina would follow in Alvah's footsteps. She had also said that the name Rovina was not a good name. It meant 'ruin' in Italian. One night, Chang'e returned to her chambers to see her maid with tears falling down her cheeks as she fixed a bath. Chang'e asked what's wrong and her tears turned into a waterfall and sobs shook her. Chang'e scooped the girl into her arms and sat at the edge of the tub. "I've made a terrible mistake, your majesty," she said. "What did you do?" "I've become conceived..." she trailed. "With the emperor's child." Chang'e should've been surprised but she wasn't. She knew her husband had different women in his bed every night; Alvah had said so himself. Something like this was bound to happen. The girl was profusely apologising for her mistakes again and again and saying that she deserved to be executed for her sins. Chang'e smoothed the girl's hair down and rested her cheek on her head. She was almost the same age as her when she was first pregnant too. She had been in the same situation. But for this girl, her baby would be taken from her because of the international conception law and gods knew what would happen to it. No one would ever hear of the clandestine love she once shared with Fang, whom she no longer knew where he was. Fang was never a mistake. Their child was never a mistake. Alvah was the only mistake Chang'e had ever made. And now, she would correct the mistake Alvah had made. Not for him, and not even for her maid. But for herself. She would raise this child as her own. It would be the child she never had. guqin: a seven-stringed zether without bridges (music can be heard in the video above) I hope this gave a better idea of why Chang'e raised Athena as her own child and her life before she died.

 

Bonus 2: Hacking Hearts

This is another story from the compilation. Hacking Hearts Jill's parents were yelling again. Something to do with the milk this time. Jill rolled her eyes; of course milk was as good to argue about as unpaid bills. "Why can't they just file a fracking divorce?" her younger brother Mitchell mumbled under his breath, falling face first onto the port on the table. "Every time I try to fracking study, they just have to start ripping the neighbourhood apart." From where she sat on the floor, leaning against the foot of the bunk bed, Jill watched her brother. Mitchell could do so much. He was the youngest and the only one out of the four siblings who actually had potential for anything and he was being dragged down. "Wanna hit the cafe, Mitch?" Jill offered. "Anywhere is better than this hellhole." And it was times like these that made Jill feel upset, not because it wasn't the truth but because Mitch deserved better. Their house was nothing more than a running down cottage that always smelled of smoke and filled with never-ceasing screams of their parents. Hamish always came home stoned and Patrick was... Heck, she didn't even know where Patrick was. He hadn't come home in days and when he did come banging through the front door at midnight, he always had a girl hanging on his arms. And the house had thin walls. "Come on, grab everything you need." Their parents didn't even notice them leave. "You could rob a bank, you know," Mitchell said as they walked down Central Road of Nyiup. "Or maybe, you could teach me how to hack so I can rob and you won't get in trouble." Jill scowled at him. Even at the age of fifteen, Mitchell almost towered over her 5'11" frame. "Nice try but not happening. Besides, I don't do it to commit crimes. Just for fun. Focus on studying instead of my business." Mitchell shut up. Jill had told him countless times that education was his only way out of this 'hellhole' and he understood that because it came from his sister who was averaging an epic F in every subject. Jill dropped Mitchell off at the cafe on the corner of Central Road and Campbell street. "Where are you going?" he asked when she tried to walk out of the cafe. "A friend's house." Mitch's face dropped. "I know what you're doing," he whispered. "Aisha told me her dad saw you working behind the bar the other day." "I'm doing this for you and Mum, Mitch. One day, we're going to leave this hellhole, just me, you and mum." "Jill, you're underage." Jill gave him a mischievous smile and winked. "That's not what my birth certificate says." Jill was still smiling as she walked out the cafe but as soon as he was out of sight, it slipped right off her face. She'd been working at a bar in town for a few weeks now and she hated it but it earned her enough money to get out of this place in a couple of years. She had a program calculate for her. If she had to put up with drunken men trying to hit on her then so be it. She signed in and put an apron on. It was only four-thirty so it wasn't too crowded in the bar yet. Lola, the other barmaid, was arguing with a regular who was so indebt that the bar owner had blacklisted him. Lola was just as feisty as Jill and more experienced so she let her handle the man. The door slid open and in strolled the trio whom Jill knew well from school. She knew one of them was not yet eighteen and so did Lola but he was a generously tipping customer so they both turned a blind eye to it.

Logan, Ian and Ander sat at the bar and Ian whistled for a server. Jill glanced at Lola who was still busy arguing. Hank was late for his shift again. Oh, fracking great. She had to serve them. She wiped the glass in her hand with the cloth a few more times just to stall before she slowly set it down and walked over. "What do you want?" she asked briskly, avoiding Ander's eyes. "A pint of beer each, on me today," Logan said. "Two," Ander said. "I'm not drinking." It was precisely at that moment Jill made the mistake of looking at him. Go out with me? His eyes were still asking. "Two shots, coming up," she said. She could feel his eyes on her back as she filled up the mugs with beer. Suddenly the whole room was so fracking hot. Suffocatingly hot. She was boiling in her shirt and apron. She quickly pushed the mugs towards the boys and excused herself into the store room and out the back door into the alley. Ander was still looking at her. The narrow dark alley stank of rubbish and weed but it was better out here than being stuck in there with him. She leaned against the door and exhaled a huge sigh. He had to slip that note in her locker, didn't he? It said: I love you, Jill. – Ander That was the first one. Her friend Bianca had claimed that it was the 'cutest thing ever' but Jill didn't have time for that. Which was why she still hadn't a clue to this day why she kept that note. Another note came the next day. I meant what I said, Jill. Do you not believe me? I love you. – Ander. Then the day after that. You're the most beautiful person I have ever had the pleasure of meeting. The notes continued every day for the next three weeks and Jill realised that it had been an essay. "I fell in love with the way you put the need of others before your own. I love that you are not afraid to stand up for yourself or for others. I've always admired how smart and witty you are. I can understand if you think I'm a total coward for not telling you this in person but believe me, Jill, I want to. It's just so hard to be even in the same room as you, much less talk to you. When you walk in, I forget my own name and every bit of courage I build up to talk to you goes out the window. You don't know the effects you have on me. There isn't a time when I haven't loved you and I love more and more every day. And I know that I will love you forever. You are the beautiful flower that I know I shouldn't pick but I can't help myself anymore. I love you, Jill. Will you please go out with me?" Why did he have to swoop in like a knight in armour and make her fall for him too? He was never a part of her plans. He should never be a part of her messed up life. He was too perfect, too pure for someone like her. He was rich, smart, nice and so fracking perfect. He had everything; a scholarship to a prestigious college, a great family, the money, the status, the looks. Jill; she had nothing. No goddamned thing; no money, shitty grades and she was probably going to be stuck as a barmaid for the foreseeable future, no matter what the calculations said. How was she supposed to let him in her life? It was a complete utter embarrassment. Imagine what his parents would think of a fracking barmaid. Jill screamed and kicked a nearby metal bin, the clang echoing in the quiet alley. And then her foot hurt. "Fracking hell," she cussed, followed by a few vulgar words directed at the bin. "Has the bin done something to you?" someone at the entrance of the alley asked. Of course it was him. "None of your goddamned business," she snapped at Ander because being mean was easier than showing her emotions. God, his gorgeous hair and his gorgeous face and his gorgeous everything...

She should leave. But she didn't want to. So she stood there, glaring at the bin, painfully aware of Ander's eyes on her. Her dark skin wouldn't allow her to blush but she could feel the heat in her cheeks. Goddammit. "I meant everything I wrote, Jill," Ander whispered. "I... I really do love you. Would you please go out with me?" "No," she said before her brain went into overdrive and started saying something stupid like, 'yes'. "I don't like you, Ander. I don't want you in my life and quite frankly I think you're pathetic and cowardly." His eyes flashed with hurt before he quickly covered it up. You bitch. How could you do this to him? For flying frack's sake, you love the guy! So what? Loving him meant nothing. "That's alright," he said. "You don't have to love me now. But I do want you to know that I'm not giving up on you, Jill," he told her. "I will not stop fighting for your heart til the day I day." "Leave me the hell alone," she spat before she threw the door open and went in, slamming it after her. Leaving the hell alone was not something he did. He was not in any of her classes at school because he was in all the Advanced Classes but every break, at any chance he got, he'd try to talk to her. He'd try to buy her food or anything at all. Then there was the birthday presents! He knew when her birthday was and then he dared to come to school with a huge bouquet of roses. It broke her heart to put them in the bin right in front of him, watching his heart shatter in his eyes. "Accept the guy, sis," Mitchell finally said to her one day, near the end of the year. "He's gone through so much trouble and embarrassment for you. I wouldn't say this to any other guy but Ander is a fracking keeper." "God's sake, Mitch! Mind your own business. I hate him anyway." Mitchell laughed. "You can lie to anyone, Jill, but you can't lie to me. You basically raised me for my entire life and I know when my mother-figure is lying." Jill retched and said, "Don't ever call me your mother again," because Mitchell was right. It was always him who saw through her.   The dress Mitchell bought her for graduation was not going to get worn. The second-hand satin blue dress hung on the foot of the bunk bed and Jill just kept staring at it. She was going to cry. She wasn't going to graduate high school. She failed all of her subjects except one. Ander had aced them all. Jill knew that because he was ranked seventh in the whole of Queensland. He was at the graduation now. And she still loved him. She loved him more now than ever and she was so proud of him. Her port chimed over the sound of her yelling parents. It was Bianca. Bianca: Where the hell r u, woman! I need my wingman! Jillian: clearly not there. Not coming. Failed remember? Bianca: ander wants you here. He told me to say taht. Jillian: come and do what? be a laughing stock? "You should still go to the party," Mitchell said as he came in. "I heard Kerrigan is holding one at his house. I still want you to wear the dress I spent my life's savings on." "Alcohol?" "It's Kerrigan. What do you think?" "I'm there." "Can I co-" "No." "Killjoy." Jill didn't like alcohol because that happened to be the main reason their parents fought. But she had known what it tasted like since she was twelve years old when she accidently drank the 'water' in a mug. She didn't like the tangy taste of it either but just for tonight she needed to drown her feelings.

She sat on the veranda of the second story of the building with a glass of something in her hands. She wasn't entirely sure what was in it but she'd had two glassfuls of it. Bianca wasn't here because she didn't do parties. Her other friends were here but they weren't Bianca so she decided to not socialise with them. "You look beautiful," someone said as he came and sat next to her on the cold concrete. He looked beautiful too. He was wearing a long-sleeved grey shirt with sleeves rolled up to his elbow and a pair of jeans. His blonde hair was ruffled up in an out-of-bed look that made her drool and his blue eyes shone from the disco light. Five months. He hadn't given up yet. He really did love her. Jill took another two gulps of her drink and it burned her throat. She could feel the effect it was having on her but she could hold her alcohol. This much was nothing. "What are you thinking about?" he asked. "My screwed up life." Ander seemed surprised that she answered at all. He looked at the glass in her hands and coaxed it out, setting it down on the other side. "Would you like to talk about it? I'll listen." "Your perfect ass wouldn't understand." "My perfect..." he trailed, his beautiful face stuck between wanting to smile and being surprised. Holy lord. Did she actually just say 'his perfect ass'? She couldn't help but laugh a little in embarrassment. Okay, maybe she was a little bit tipsy. "I've had a couple of drink. Is that obvious?" Ander hesitated. "Not at all." "Liar." As she smiled and leaned her head on his shoulder, she caught a glimpse of his widening eyes. No, she was pretty drunk. "Yeah, it's a bit obvious," he muttered. "Should... Should I drive you home?" Jill laughed bitterly. "So that I could hear my parents screaming at each other? No, thanks." Any other time, she would've been embarrassed that she'd said it. Now, with the alcohol in her system, it didn't seem as embarrassing as it should be. Ander stayed quiet and she couldn't see his face to know what he could've been thinking. "You wouldn't understand, Ander," she repeated softly. "Do you ever wish that you were someone else?" "Of course. Why do you?" Jill smiled. "Because being me is fracking tiring. I study my ass off for everything and the only thing I didn't fail is IT but even that I didn't do well enough to get a certificate. My family is in ruins. I work six days a week and still don't earn enough to support myself, much less Mitchell and my mum. I have no future." Ander didn't say anything for a long time, so long that she thought probably was not going to say anything. But then he said, "So what are you going to do now?" "What choice do I have? I'll keep working at the bar and maybe try to apply for a decent job somewhere." They both knew she was getting nowhere without a graduation certificate. But she wasn't going to waste more money on herself. All she wanted to do now was make sure Mitchell had good education. "Jill, tell me the real reason you won't go out with me." She scoffed bitterly. "Isn't it obvious? I am out of your league. You're not supposed to be with me."

"What do you mean you're 'not supposed to'? I didn't realise love was forbidden because of differences in backgrounds." "I feel so useless around you, Ander! I am dumb! I have nothing I can give you! I don't deserve someone like you." She hadn't realised tears were flowing until Ander's hand came to wipe her wet cheeks. Then she was aware of her blurring vision and her hiccups. Every feeling of dissatisfaction she had pent up was bursting out and it was ugly. "Jill, don't cry. The only thing I would ever ask of you is your love, which you clearly do. You are not dumb. Just because you're not cut out academically doesn't make you any less intelligent than someone who is. It just means you're better at other things. Jill, please. You should never cry because of what you don't have." "I have to go. I want to go home now." "Who did you come with?" "I walked." "Then I'll drive you home." She had only begun to shake her head and unfold her legs when his hand on her wrist stopped her. "Please, Jill. Let me treat you the way you deserve to be treated, like a queen." She let out a bark of laughter. "I'm no queen, Ander. Especially not your queen so don't pretend this means something. Tonight doesn't change anything." He stared at her long and hard and she refused to shift under his hooded gaze. His blue eyes shone with words he was holding back and his lips were pressed in a thin line. He finally sighed and said, "Alright. It doesn't change anything. But let me drive you home. You're drunk and while I know you're perfectly capable of looking after yourself, give me this one opportunity. Please." She did. He led her to his car through grinding bodies and the familiar stench of alcohol. His car was an older model of Imperio, older than she thought. But the body was still sleek with shiny metallic blue and the interior was in mint condition. Sitting in the passenger seat made her feel as if she was soiling it. "Where do you live?" "35 Blackwell Street." Only when those words escaped her lips that she realised he was going to see the state of her home and neighbourhood. She sighed. Who cared anyway? The drive was long and slow and Ander had tuned to a radio station playing classical music. By half way through the journey, her eyelids had resorted to closing themselves and she let them, too tired to care. Ander kept quiet throughout the drive. Soon, the car slowed to a stop and she opened her eyes. The light in the living room was still on. The car's clock said 12:45 a.m. Her dad was probably watching football and she really was not in the mood for his drunken questions. She sighed again. "Thanks," she mumbled. "Jill," Ander said. She looked up at him to see that he was looking at her cautiously. She glanced at his lips, the ones she'd fantasized about kissing more times than she could count. It was the perfect time to kiss. The music playing softly, staring into each other's eyes and her subconsciously licking her lips. She cleared her throat and looked away. "Jill," Ander said again. "If you don't want to acknowledge your feelings or mine, then it's fine. But don't ever feel like you're not good enough. Don't ever think you don't deserve something. If someone like me can believe that I could ever be good enough for you, then you can believe that you're good enough for anything. You can rattle the stars, but only if you believe you can." "Sure," she said. "But tonight never happened." With that she opened the door and stepped into the cold air, rushing to the front door of her house. Ander didn't leave until she went inside. And she ignored her dad's call, rushing straight to her and Mitch's room.   That was the last conversation she had with Ander for the next four years. He went off to university and she only saw him around town when he returned for breaks. Even those times, she never dared to talk to him. A few months after he left, she learned to suppress her feelings for him, burying them so deep down that she couldn't even remember a time she ever loved him. She was still a barmaid but also worked as a freelance web-designer. From those two jobs, she could send Mitchell to university. He was now in his second year of majoring in physics to become a teacher. But the fees were so great that she was still stuck in that old cottage that would collapse any second. But at least her parents were divorced now and her dad was somewhere out there, probably doing something illegal. It was one fateful day that her life changed. There was no particular reason she hacked into the military system. It had been a midnight spar-of-the-moment thing that had sparked from that night's live political conference on the VidScreen. Plus, she had been craving for something more challenging than banks for more than a few months now. For the first time in her hacking career, she was caught. Well, what was she expecting? She was hacking a military system after all. What she definitely was not expecting was appraisal from General Moore. It had been more than a surprise when she was taken to the base in handcuffs, later to be taken into a luxury office and treated to tea and biscuits. "I don't get it," she said, eyeing the delicious jam-filled biscuits like they were snakes. "You're... congratulating me?" "Yes," the general simply said. "No one had ever managed to break into our defence completely as you have." "So what happens now? Do I go to jail?" The general leaned back in his seat. "Well, no. Your skills are much too valuable to go to waste. I've done a background check on you-" "You've invaded my life," she interrupted. The general glowered and she waved her hand, taking a bite out of a biscuit. "Go on." "We're recruiting you into that military." "I can't do that. I have to support my mother and brother." "I'm getting to that," general said impatiently. "A volunteer recruiting campaign is going to be put into action due to, as you may know, the current political status between the Empire and the Union. We're offering you twice the amount of money than other recruits, which I understand is around thrice your current salary." She thought about it. With that amount of money, she would finally be able to rent an apartment in town for her mother, better than that place they called home. And Mitch would be able to spend more on his textbooks and maybe even do extracurricular courses. "What would I have to do once in the military?" she asked. "You'll undergo military training and serve the first six months at a base. Because you'd be considered a 'volunteer recruit' I highly doubt you'd ever be required to on the battlefields. After the six months as a soldier, you'd undergo tech training – which I'm sure you'd ace easily – and work in our security quarters." "But if something that happen to me, what would become of my family?" "They're to remain supported by the government until another member of your family is employed with salary higher than or equal to yours would be." She agreed, the offer far too tempting to refuse. She was not to share this news with anyone except immediate family members but she had told Lola she was volunteering. And on the day of the signups she had been very surprised to find Ander, too, had signed up, giving up his second degree and his internship at a law firm. On that very day, as he walked down the street of Nyiup with his family, the feelings she'd smothered began to resurface because she knew. She knew that he volunteered because of her. She was almost promised she wouldn't be on the battlefields. But Ander? Who knew what would happen to him? And if anything happened to Ander, Jill would never forgive herself for as long as she lived. 