Parallel Vol. 4
by Renoe_K

Still reeling from the Adjudicators' punishment, Kashi turns his attention to the promised appointment at a certain mountaintop. What awaits him atop the mountain? And will he finally find the answers to the questions he seeks?
Meanwhile, spurred on by their show of solidarity, the Hopeful Maggots up their tempo in order to firmly establish and promote their position in all of Rosendun.
The blossoming of romance, the union of Marriage, the explosion of Spring-Time Youth! Eh... What is this Shadow that looms over these joyous events? 
Meanwhile, Suzuki focuses on his upcoming tournament, as well as coming to terms with all the new emotions flooding his heart. 

...Yes, even those he would rather have never learned.



 

Parallel Vol.4

Grief.
 What is Grief? How do we measure grief? What is it's importance in our lives?
 I remember a friend once told me that grief is the heavy feeling you get in the pit of your stomach, or in the depths of your heart when you lose someone you love. It is that crushing depression which comes when denial fails to comfort our pain. I often wondered why humans possessed such an emotion. Was there any particular reason it persisted past the ages? Does it serve a particular purpose? Well, let's not get ahead of ourselves yet.
 Measuring grief, according to several books turned out to be the easiest part actually. Grief, like hate, is entirely dependent on Love. The amount of grief and hatred we feel is directly proportional to the amount of Love we felt for something or someone taken away from us. To put it in simpler terms, the more love we have for something/someone, the greater the grief we experience over its loss, and the greater the hatred we feel for whoever was responsible for taking it away from us. Of course, this brings up the question of whether the world would be a better without an emotion like love. It makes one wonder what society would be like if we were all fiercely logical creatures, without any reason to hate each other. Well, that's a discussion for another day.
 Now onto the importance of grief, a concept I can't just wrap my head around. Some people liken the loss of a person to a heavy load clogging up space in our heart. They say if we do not grieve, we would not be able to free up that space in our heart, and in some cases, can lead to us not having enough space for other people. Well, I don't know how true that is, and quite frankly I don't give a damn. I'm more interested in why that emotion still persists in the human system. 
 Is it like a family thing? Since we evolved to be pseudo pack-animals that lived in small units, did we need an emotion like grief so we could better appreciate the limited workforce we had at the time and better increase our chance of populating the earth? But then again, even animals who are supposed to supposedly follow the law of "Survival of the Fittest," also experience grief when their mates or children pass away. 
 Ah, whatever, I don't care. The real question I want to ask is this: If there is a human who does not feel grief; does not feel pain when someone close to him dies; can look on at the corpse of his parents without a ripple in his heart. If there is such a person, can he still be considered human? Even beasts feel something when family members pass on. If there was a human who felt nothing, what would he be?
 ...What would I be?
 ...What exactly am I supposed to be?

 

Prologue

Boom! Boom! Boom!
 Up above the clouds of Rosendun, numerous explosions burst out as a figure tore through the speed barrier without care for the unfortunate beasts which collapsed to the earth, blood leaking out of busted eardrums.
 Upon closer look, one could roughly make out the figure of a man with dark hair, and an equally dark cloak. A pair of night-colored, bat-like wings manipulated the wind around the man, shooting his speed beyond human comprehension.
 If Kashi was here, he would have recognized this dark-haired man whose hardened expression leaked cold fury, the grotesque image worsened by visibly pulsing veins on his arms and neck; all of which was further evidence of how heavily the man was currently restraining himself from doing something he would doubtlessly regret.
 Rider's eyes grew even colder as he recalled the Adjudicators' smug faces as they proclaimed their superiority over the Maggots. Once again, those bastards had shown their faces before him. It wasn't enough that they attempted to kill her all those years ago. Now, they even dared to threaten his only hope of getting her back.
 Gritting his teeth, Rider came to a hard stop over a familiar stretch of trees. Ever since Fladnag unlocked Nama Woods, the easiest way to access it was through the sky. Unfortunately for most people, a formidable illusion spell formation covered both the sky and earth. Unwelcome guests would find themselves trapped for eternity if they tried to force their way in. Only those with the formation master's permission seal were permitted entry.
 Naturally, Rider possessed Fladnag's seal, allowing him smooth access to the closed forest. The Hybrid Lord stretched his hand over the forest, solemn gaze searching for something within. If a mage was nearby, they would have recognized the low-frequency mana pulses escaping his outstretched palm to be the tell-tale signs of [Detect Life], a beginner level spell which allowed a mage to detect living beings in their surroundings.
 What would have left them shell-shocked, however, was the impossible distance the mana pulses covered. From Rider's position, the pulses stretched over several kilometers, blanketing the entire forest. They even dug beneath the earth, reverberating through those hidden passageways, leaving no living being unscanned. Most mages would be very pleased with themselves if their detection managed to reach a two hundred meter radius, yet, there was someone here pushing it for several kilometers. This was a true example of no skill is useless if trained to the utmost.
 A myriad of scattered information gushed into Rider's brain, as he became aware of every living thing currently in the forest. A lesser man would have lost his sanity to the torrential overload, but to the Hybrid Lord, this was a piece of cake. Sifting through the mana signatures, he finally settled on a particularly bright but chaotic signal.
 "Found you," Rider muttered, a ghost of a smile finally warming that unbearably stoic face. Rider's wings burst into mana particles, then with a single step, his body shifted through space, appearing over two kilometers away. His expression softened, even more, when he saw the little daeben perched at the top of a hundred meter tall tree, her attention razor-focused on something ahead of her.
 Weeks in the forest had dug up the beast-like ferocity within Zuri. To the extent that looking at her, Rider could not help but liken her posture to that of a prowling beast, waiting for the perfect opportunity to rip its prey to shreds. The pants and shirt Kashi had casually given her back at Aygorzi had held on surprisingly well in the harsh environment, although the trousers had been cut down up to her knees. You didn't have to look far to find out the location of the torn pieces. Wrapped around both arms were pieces of cloth which had long since turned red from absorbing too much blood.

Even the stoic Rider felt a pang of guilt in his heart. In his quest to prepare his heir, had he sacrificed her innocence? Recalling the little girl who called him gray ojii-san, he could not help but feel he had failed Kashi. He was about to take a step forward when Zuri suddenly shot to her feet, an unmistakeably childish excitement glittering in her eyes.
 Rider's eyes went wide with shock as a massive shadow shot up from with the forest and landed next to Zuri on the tree's peak. Black beak and feathers, save for stretches of silver at the tips of its wings which spanned six meters. All the characteristics of a Silverwing Eagle. Rider's shock was understandable. The Silverwing Eagle was a high existence among the beasts in the forest. Even if it wasn't at the peak, it wasn't too far off. Judging by the standard metric, an adult Silverwing Eagle was somewhere around Lv. 250-300. It was not an existence a childlike Zuri could handle.
 Just as Rider was about to intervene, he was forced to come to a halt as an even more shocking scene played out before him. The Silverwing Eagle, an apex beast with little to no predators bowed its head before the little girl who patted it like it was her pet.
 "Hehe, Mommy Silver did you have fun?" Zuri cheered with a wide grin as she ruffled the beast's neck feathers. "Did you see Little Black and Little Gray."
 Mommy Silver let out a few cries as it fondly nudged Zuri with its beak, drawing a giggle from the little girl's lips. It then bent over, letting out a couple of hurried cries as its eyes darted to the north.
 A rare bout of anger sprouted in Zuri's furrowed brows as she clambered onto Little Silver's back with practiced movements. "Hmph, those Smelly Baboons still haven't learned their lesson," Zuri muttered as she patted the Silverwing Eagle's back. "Mommy Silver, don't worry. Zuri'll beat up those Smelly Baboons."
 The Silverwing Eagle let out an appreciative cry as it spread its wings. With a heavy flap, it took to the sky, zipping through the forest at speeds that would shock modern day pilots. Although the Silverwing Eagle was a top existence, there were still a few areas of the forest its influence could not reach.
 For example, the dense cluster of trees in the northeast which served as a home for the Rockbiter Baboons. These monsters, averaging at about Lv.100-200 were quite numerous and enjoyed this section of the forest because of the tight cluster of trees which prevented avian predators from diving in to take them as prey. Furthermore, they could set up ambush points for low flying avian creatures, sniping them with rocks shot from their mouths.
 This tactic had proven near fatal for Mommy Silver's chicks, who, while engrossed in playing had strayed a little too far from their designated territory. Fortunately, through the innate connection shared by blood kin, Mommy Silver could tell its children, although frightened and heavily distressed were still alive.
 Whoosh!
 The Silverwing Eagle let out an anger-filled shrill cry as it dodged a massive a pebble that zipped passed at speeds approaching a bullet. Mommy Silver let out a crazed cry as it glared at the dense canopy of trees beneath it. How Hateful! Although these baboons were definitely not its opponent, it could not reach them because of the natural defenses. However, wasn't this exactly why she requested the human's help?
 Understanding the panicked cries, Zuri patted the Silverwinged Eagle's back. "Don't worry. Zuri will get back Little Black and Little Gray." She then stood upright on the beast's back, peering into the dense forest below with an unusually sharp gleam in her eyes.
 Watching from afar, Rider, who at this point felt he had nothing more to be shocked about, was suddenly forced to re-evaluate his thoughts as he watched the little daeben, without any protection whatsoever, jump off the Eagle's back. Rider's heart clenched, his palm suddenly turning unusually sweaty.

Just as the Hybrid Lord feared, the Rockbiter Baboons spotted the intruder falling towards their home unannounced. Dozens of Rockbiter Baboons rushed to the zenith of their trees, heavy crunches akin to crushed stone reverberating across the forest. All beasts knew this sound and had come to fear it. This was the precursor to the terrifying ability for which the baboons were named.
 As expected, as soon as the baboons were aligned atop the trees, their cheeks puffed up, turning a purplish red. Then with several thunderous bangs, a heavy shadow was cast over the forest as several hundreds of rocks shot towards the falling daeben with the ferocity of speeding bullets. If she was hit, it could be imagined there wouldn't be anything left for even the best healer to recover.
 For the umpteenth time that day, Rider was compelled to take action, but once again he forced himself to hold on. It wasn't that he thought this was a particularly effective training method. He wasn't as Spartan as his father to ignore his student's death throes for the sake of training. Rider could not bring himself to act because of the innocent look in the little daeben's eyes. Eyes displaying an endless excitement mixed with a touch of arrogance.
 Surely enough, just when it seemed Zuri would be turned into a pincushion, the little daeben pulled a sudden reversal. The very elements of the earth seemed to shift as torrents of mana suddenly exploded out of the little daeben. In the first place, this much mana should never have appeared in the body of a daeben who were known to be shunned by mana due to their sins against their own bodies, but there it was in the body of a little girl.
 Rider could not be sure, but it seemed her mana pool vastly exceeded that of the mages in Hopeful Maggots even though her actual level was on the lower end. Rider's gaze stilled as a massive silhouette emerged behind her, taking a rough shape of a lion's head. However, Rider could not attribute the glory and pride exuding from the lion's gaze to that of any low-level creature he knew.
 Unfortunately, before he could uncover more, the silhouette merged into Zuri's back as she sucked in a deep breath, then...
 ROOOAAARRRRRRRRRRRRR!
 The baboons let out panicked shouts and screams as a pressure capable of suppressing the earth itself crashed down on them without mercy. The sturdy tree tops cracked under the pressure, causing many of the baboons to fall several meters below. Those who remained could not afford to spare their brethren another glance as an even more terrifying sight greeting them above.
 All the rocks they had fired off earlier; the rocks which had blotted out the sky; the projectiles which even a Silverwing Eagle would not dare take head-on. All these rocks had been directly crushed to dust. No tricks or fancy techniques! This was a pure suppression of power! The baboons understanding this, wore panicked, frantic cries as they finally realized the true terror of the approaching being.
 Unfortunately, it was too late for regrets.
 Zuri's cute, animated laughter drew a direct contrast to the bloody scene that emerged once she landed among the trees. The little daeben, clad in a dense yellow cloak from densely concentrated mana dashed tore through the mass of baboons, sharp claws making short work of all enemies. Blood, dirt, and grime caked the daeben's features as she manoeuvered through the tree networks, swinging from branch to branch and sliding down large branches with movements that left the baboon feeling equal parts shame and despair. With Zuri's superior movements, there was no chance for them to escape.
 Luckily for them, Zuri's purpose today was not to slaughter, but rescue. Then again, if they were any smarter, they would have noticed that after that initial roar, Zuri had not managed any other great technique. This was not because she was being proficient, but rather, that initial move had already emptied most of her mana reserves. The dense mana cloak she had on was as a result of [Beast Soul Possession] but even that would not last forever.

However, if one was to ask whether Zuri had done all this on purpose, the answer would be a resounding NO. Indeed, when faced with all those rocks, a more experienced warrior would have chosen to destroy the few rocks out of the hundreds that actually posed a threat. Zuri, on the other hand just wanted to let out her strongest move to provoke the baboons. After that, she simply took on the soul which allowed her to fight the easiest, and the one she was most used to, the Desert Tiger.
 A smile spread on Rider's lips as he watched the little girl weave, tear, and rip her way through the dense forest, before managing to rescue the two chicks. Indeed, although she was immensely powerful, he could still see her glaring weak points. The little daeben called Zuri was a true unpolished gem. Indeed Zuri was very much like her.
 *******
 Over a Millennia Ago,
 NetherRealm.
 The Nether realm was a chaotic world of death and hate. Baleful auras colored the sky black, the darkness broken only by momentary flashes of multicolored lightning, each accompanied by ferocious thunderclaps akin to the roars of a world-destroyer. The "Land without a Sun" was home to millions of immortal, nefarious beings ranging from demons to savage beasts, each with only one purpose in life: To destroy everything in existence. These chaotic desires lead to a land infamous for its literal rivers of blood, centuries of immortal blood become nourishment for the never-ending flow.
 Despite the rampant violence, hostility, and hatred every denizen of this realm shared for each other, there was one place they hated even more. That was the Free Realm, a land of bliss and plenty, where the sun never dipped, the fruits ever ripe, and the waters ever clean. Even more than that, the Free Realm possessed the only gate which could directly link to the mortal plane without the help of summoners from that plane.
 The citizens of the FreeRealm enjoyed the land of plenty, with a sole duty of protecting the gate from all invaders. On the other hand, the denizens of the NetherRealm, languishing in the harsh climates of their world, strongly desired to destroy the bountiful Free Realm as well as seize the gate for themselves so they could freely enter the mortal plane whenever they wished.
 Of course, the citizens of the FreeRealm would never allow either of this to happen, which led to the current situation where both realms were locked in an endless battle, with territories seized and reclaimed every day.
 Seated in a certain bar on the outskirts of the FreeRealm, a large, and thirty-something, gruff-looking man with flaming red hair and an impressive beard nursed his drink as he listened to the bitter curses and discussions of the patrons. His appearance evoked memories of the Nordic race in the mortal plane, but the long fangs in his mouth revealed he was anything but human. 
 The land the bar sat on had only been reclaimed by the FreeRealm a few days ago, so most of the patrons were part of those who had participated in the battle. Those who had lost friends and loved ones would typically spend a few days drowning their sorrows in drink before returning to the battlefield. Such was the endless nature of the battles in this realm that three to five days outside the battlefield was beyond every being's bottom-line.
 Naturally, the red-haired man was an exception to the rule. As a being who had crossed over to the FreeRealm after surpassing the limit his growth in the mortal plane, he did not feel the same urgency to battle as these beings who were born and bred in this land. His gaze shifted to two patrons lamenting about their sibling who had perished in the recent battle. These two looked very much like a mortal from the lower planes, and he would have thought as much were it not for the horns protruding from their heads. That was right. There was no hume in this plane. Although most of the beings here assumed a mortal appearance for the sake of convenience, they were all sacred beasts which would be worshipped by tribes in the mortal plane.

The red-haired man finished his drink, mulling over his thoughts. Yes, there was no hume in this plane. No, rather, there should have never been a hume in this plane, let alone one of the lowest of the humes, a mere human. But as reality would have it...
 Clink!
 The red-haired man looked up from his drink, eyes squinting as a tall figure walked into the bar, causing the atmosphere within to drop several degrees. No one dared to look the young man in the eyes, fearful of getting burned by the smoldering embers. His expression was hard and taut, like a bowstring at full strength, seemingly able to explode with unmatched ferocity if lightly provoked. Hair the color of flames and sharp, sword-like brows enhanced the young man's imposing demeanor, forcing all those around him to keep their distance. If there was one blemish, it would be the curious scar that ran diagonally from his right eye to his lower left lip, but even that added an air of mystery to his image. Although the man had a very simple dress code with no signs of armor or weapons, no one dared harbor any thoughts of attacking him. After all, they had all witnessed the end of those Nether demons who had fallen to weapons that appeared from thin air.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 The man seemed to be used to the reactions, as without even a glance at the patrons within the bar, he steadily made his way toward the Nord.
 The red-haired Nord raised a brow as the young man took a seat next to him. Exposing a little smile, he lightly greeted, "All hail Razznik the Destroyer, Conqueror of the NetherRealm." 
 "Shut it Lucius." The young man, revealed to be the infamous Razznik, grumbled as he snagged the pitcher on Lucius' table and forcefully downed its contents.
 The red-haired Nord, Lucius Ludarac, or as he was more commonly known, Rider, chuckled as he examined his only friend in this hellish plane, instantly able to guess the source of his irritation. "You challenged Skyrm again didn't you?" Razznik's instant frown gave away the answer much to Lucius' amusement. "I've told you a thousand times, Skyrm is the top dog in all of FreeRealm. You need to have the ability to take a walk through the deepest parts of the NetherRealm before you can have a chance of narrowly fighting him to a draw." The deepening of Razznik's frown showed his reluctance to accept the truth. 
 Lucius could only shake his head. He knew the stubbornness of this peculiar human once he found a target he wanted to defeat. Wasn't he himself a prime example? Still, the situation was quite different from then, so he had to advise Razznik against this line of action. "You need to understand that you've lost Aileera's blessing. The next time you die will be the end of it. Do you understand? The only reason the immortals here can fight so freely is because even after death, they will be reincarnated after a couple of decades or centuries with their memory intact."
 Razznik stiffened at Lucius' words. Indeed, the hybrid was right. Should he keep being this reckless, he would eventually die. A permanent death. In more ways than one. In some sense, due to his unique situation, he should be resorting to caution, searching for only the easy leveling spots until he reached a high enough level. If he did this, he would still reach the peak, albeit through a roundabout method. He could do this. It was indeed the best choice, but...

"I can't." Indeed, Razznik could not live that way. He was an existence that lived and breathed for battle. The day his blood stopped raging hot would be the day he prepared to lay down his life. For now the broken cheat that was the leader of the FreeRealm was his current goal. He knew that the day he defeated Skyrm would be the end of his life, but like a moth drawn to a flame, he could not cool down the raging blood within his veins which sought tougher and tougher battles.
 Having spent quite some time with the battle maniac, Lucius understood the complex emotions beneath Razznik's words. Knowing he could do nothing to change Razznik's nature, Lucius decided to switch topics. "So, what did you lose to Skyrm this time?" Every time Razznik challenged Skyrm, he would be forced to listen to one demand from the dragon after losing. Razznik's presence in the FreeRealm was as a result of one such demand after his first loss.
 Razznik's lips stiffened, a deathly aura emanating from his body. With a grim tone quite unlike anything Lucius had ever seen, Razznik muttered, "He made me a babysitter."
 Lucius' brow shot up with shock, unable to understand what the hell he just heard. "What!?"
 Razznik shook his head with a heavy groan. "He-"
 Bang! Clatter!
 Attracted by the loud sound, Lucius' gaze traveled to the men whose chairs had toppled over as they rapidly shot to their feet. The vampire hybrid followed their gazes to meet the figure at the door. A figure which made his throat tighten and his heart come to a momentary halt.
 Lucius, like many of the patrons at the bar, stared, mouths agape at the devilish beauty at the door. Violet colored hair fell like night curtains down her back, a lithe graceful figure emphasized by mouthwatering curves which even the strongest of men would find hard to resist. Playful anger lit up the lady's violet eyes, supple, parted lips and reddened cheeks evidence of a hard run. 
 The young woman, clad in a simple purple robe ignored the gazes of the men ogling her and swiftly made her way to the table which held the two strongest monsters in the bar.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Lucius swallowed hard as the woman stopped at their table. He was intoxicated, not by her beauty, but the sheer amount of power she unconsciously leaked. Every step she took seemed to twist the very rules of reality! In his entire life, this was the first time Lucius had met a woman he was not sure he could defeat.
 As if oblivious to the thoughts of his partner, Razznik glanced at the young woman who was glaring at him with a cute pout that would have slaughtered the hearts of most men. "You made it."
 "How could you be so mean!?" The woman complained, her voice carrying a rich austerity that evoked emotions of purity and innocence. "You just left me there! You know I'm not as fast as you."
 Razznik ignored her as he turned to his partner, only now noticing the awestruck look in his eyes. "Yeah, she is quite strong. It would be weirder if she wasn't." At Lucius' questioning gaze, he dryly stated, "Lucius Ludarac, Hybrid son of Dracula, Supreme Ruler of the Vampires, meet Zeno, lone daughter of Skyrm, Lord of all Dragons and Supreme Ruler of the FreeRealm."
 "What!?" "What!?"
 Both individuals stared at each other with no small amount of shock. The Hybrid son of Dracula. Who did not know of this absolute cheat existence? They said he had mastered the paths of Ki and Magic, opening a path no one had thought existed. The lone daughter of Skyrm. That title was enough for the heavens to split apart in shock. Skyrm was an existence that needed no introduction. An existence so close to Godhood, all realms feared his presence. The only consolation his enemies had was that he could not procreate, so there would be no one to carry on his bloodline and threaten them should he perish.
 However, what was this? There was a daughter? An actual Daughter!? Could someone explain what the hell was happening!?
 Sandwiched between these two major celebrities whose identities were enough to shake the entire FreeRealm, the human, Razznik Y'Terlow calmly drank from his pitcher as he mentally pictured the next battleground.
 This chaotic mess marked the beginning of the ill-fated relationship between the duty-bound son of Dracula and the free-spirited daughter of Skyrm. It also marked the formation of the three-way partnership which would run rampant throughout the NetherRealm until they caught the eyes of the Adjudicators.
 ****
 Present Day,
 Scree! Scree! Scrreeee!
 Back at the Silverwinged Eagle's nest, Zuri giggled as she watched two eagles just about her height lower their heads in shame while accepting their mother's harsh scolding. The two chicks shared the same features as their mother, except one had a pair of cold, black eyes, while the other's was light gray. Hence the names Little Black and Little Gray.
 The two knew they had indeed done wrong this time, and didn't bother trying to explain themselves. In fact, they were all too pleased to receive their mother's scoldings. A few minutes ago, they never thought they would get to hear it again. If it hadn't been for big sister...
 They cast Zuri an appreciative glance, before hurriedly lowering their heads once more for fear she would catch them.
 Zuri, pleased with her efforts for the day, said a cheery goodbye to the family then took her leave by jumping off the treetop. Fully aware of the little daeben's ability, none of them were worried as she jumped over. Instead, they sent cries of appreciation to the tiny back as it descended from view.
 As expected, Zuri expertly broke her fall by swinging on tree branches and changing the direction of her motion till she finally hit the ground with light footsteps. She dusted her arms, ready to head over to Mad Rhino's home when a large figure suddenly blocked her path.
 Whoosh!
Zuri's hair stood on end, her eyes swiftly adopting a ferocious glare as she examined the opponent. However, upon seeing the familiar face, a large smile blossomed on her lips. "Hey, Gray Ojii-san! It's been forever! Where've you been!?"
 Rider scratched his chin, slightly embarrassed as he faced that purely innocent gaze. Indeed that gaze was just too similar. "I had something to attend to." With a light cough, he swiftly changed the topic, "How about it? Are you ready to become as strong as Kashi?"
 Zuri's eyes went wide with excitement, her lips parting to reveal a large toothy grin. "Yes! Yes! Gray Ojii-san! Let's start now!"
 Rider's eyelids slightly twitched. Tch, still with the Ojii-san? A slightly sadistic grin curled up his lips as he rolled up his sleeves. "Okay, we can begin immediately as you wish." To Zuri's surprise, his forearm began to morph, turning muscular and furry till what was left could only be described as a beast's arm. Brandishing the knife sized claws, Rider said with a hidden flourish. "I hope you are ready. This is going to hurt quite a bit."
 Zuri's determined gaze was all the affirmation he needed.
 With her permission, Rider grasped her shoulder, his claws digging deep into her flesh. Zuri let out a sharp hiss, but forced herself to remain silent or else she feared Rider would stop. Seeing the pained expression on the little daeben's face, Rider softly consoled, "Don't worry, until you become strong enough, I will not leave your side."
 **********
 Real World,
 Saeko studied the face of the man standing next to her on the balcony, his face so serene you would never believe he just said something so shocking a second earlier. Still, she knew his words were a reality. A reality he had lived through that still haunted him. So, rather than question his attitude, she simply asked, "How did it happen?"
 Taiga's lips curled up into a smile. But to Saeko, it was the saddest smile she had ever seen, one which seemed to mock his very existence. "To explain that I have to start from the beginning..."

 

Chapter 1: Fantasia

10 Years Earlier,
 July 14th, 2014,
 Undisclosed Location.
 At a certain location non-existent in any known maps, a certain number of man-made structures disturbed what should have been a dense forest untainted by man's hand. Several buildings, some reaching seven stories high populated a compound large enough to be considered a town or village of its own.
 The compound was sectioned off from the surrounding forests by perimeter walls which reached up to fifteen feet high, completely discouraging the local wildlife from attempting to scale it. Those few ones who managed to scale the wall would find themselves on a narrow road which split the outer perimeter wall from a much smaller one which only stood at about nine feet tall. This wall, unlike the first, employed a more aggressive defensive approach with electrified barbed wires and smart, A.I controlled guns atop it. The combination of the two was enough to eliminate any external threat from entering the compound.
 Quite unlike the dense forests outside, the town within the walls was much more civilized. There were several paved networking roads, with sections of the compound dedicated to agriculture, recreation and factory production. At the center of the compound stood a towering dome-like structure with large block characters spelling out REBIRTH on its side. It was obvious this was a place whose inhabitants were not expected to leave in the short term, so a lot of thought had gone into ensuring it was not only self-sufficient but was comfortable enough to live in over a long period of time.
 Most days, men and women could be seen walking into the dome early in the morning and not coming out till it way past late into the night. But today was different. Despite the blazing midday sun, a lot of these men and women stood at the heliport with excitement in their eyes as if awaiting a luxurious gift. Who could blame them? Everything they had been working on for the past five years could finally be put to the test! As much as scientists enjoyed delving into theoretical debates, nothing could ever beat seeing their theories pass the test and come to fruition.
 Today, the key ingredients for their theories to become facts would be arriving. Who would not be excited!?
 Dududududu...
 The tell-tale sounds of a helicopter's rotors drew the scientists' attention to the skies where several dots began to appear on the horizon. Within a few dozen seconds, those dots revealed themselves to be five of the latest in VTOL choppers which even the mouths of major governments would water over.
 The scientists shielded their eyes from fierce winds kicked up by the landing VTOLs as the magnificent metal beasts lightly made contact with the landing zone. Several men in military vests hopped out of their bellies before the propellers could come to a halt. Splitting into two, they formed makeshift walls on either side of the helicopter doorway, simultaneously forming a road for whoever was inside.
 The scientists perked up as men in suits alighted from the crafts, followed closely by the true celebrities of the day. A middle-aged man could not hold back his excitement any longer and cheered loudly as the first child stepped down from the aircraft. Infected by his toxicity, some others joined his cheers as more children stepped down from the beast's belly.
 The children, stunned by the reception, had looks of puzzlements and shock plastered over their faces. Some scratched their heads with embarrassment, obviously never expecting to receive such treatment after their 'abduction.' However, it was a pity. If only these children were not blinded by the relief they felt after imagining the worst, they might have noticed something quite odd about the scientists' twisted expressions.
 Ah, no, wait. There was one child who noticed. Hidden from the bustling clamor made by the scientists who ran over to the children to talk and introduce themselves, a silver-haired child alighted from the rearmost VTOL then just stood at the mouth of the beast, paying close attention to the disgusting expressions on the scientists' faces. These bastards were cheering alright! Just not cheering for the children. In fact, they currently did not see these children as 'children'. But rather, valuable research materials that had finally been delivered after a long, torturous wait.

The child, Taiga, was all too familiar with that debased laughter. It was one he often heard from predators and gang bosses in the town. Of course, most of them never laughed again after he was done with them. With his thoughts running in a weird direction, he began to unconsciously leak a dense amount of bloodlust which caused the guards to tighten their grip on their weapons.
 Taiga glared at the guards, silently calculating his chances when-Grab! Taiga nearly fell over when an arm forcefully wrapped round over his shoulder. The young boy turned pale, not from the hand around his shoulder, but the presence he had not felt until it had already got him in his grasp. The child, whose instincts had long since been honed in various blood-soaked battlegrounds could not comprehend what kind of transcended being could invade his personal space so easily without alerting him. He looked to the side, his expression instantly darkening when he understood what had happened.
 There was one blind spot to Taiga's instinctual perception. And that was when a person with no sliver of ill-intent approached him. After all, he would get mentally worn out if his senses flared against every Tom, Dick, and Harry he passed on the street. The blond, blue-eyed girl whose right arm was hooked securely around his neck definitely held no ill-intent, her pure wide smile eradicating all thoughts of violence from all who saw her. Seeing that smile, Taiga could not help but admit she was lucky she was brought here. Otherwise, in at most two years, she would definitely have become a plaything for some gang leader.
 Taiga, however, did not pity her plight. He had long accepted that some people were just destined to suffer, so he only raised his right hand to forcefully grip the girl's wrist. "What do you think you're doing?"
 Seemingly not feeling the increasing pressure on her wrist, the girl simply said with a sweet smile, "Their eyes are disgusting right?"
 Taiga hesitated, slightly stunned by her words. Did she notice too? His interest slightly piqued, he softened the grip on her wrist. "What do you want, er-?"
 "Henri," the girl re-introduced herself, her expression lighting up with a brilliant smile. "I introduced myself back at Hadet."
 "Ah," Taiga muttered as he recalled the little girl he met inside the minivan. The sleeping gas had temporarily blotted out that brief moment. "It's you." Despite confirming her identity, he still did not release his hand from her wrist. The scowl returning to his face as he questioned, "So, Henri, what do you think you are doing?"
 "Just saving your life," Henri gently stated. "Unless you have a death wish, I suggest you simmer down." When Taiga did not respond, she sighed and jerked her chin towards the left. "You are not the only one who noticed the abnormality you know? But they are smart enough not to reveal their hostility. At least not in the open."
 Taiga turned his gaze to the direction she pointed out. Just as Henri said, out of the roughly one hundred children present, about twenty of them stood back, staring at the clamoring scientists with hard or wary gazes.
 Taiga's left hand traveled to the back of his shirt, his fingers stiffening when he did not feel the familiar metal bulge that should have been there. He once again cast a glance at the guards before letting out a deep breath. Although he did not have any particular desire to live, neither did he have any particular desire to die. So, he decided not to force an issue where only he would emerge the loser.
 With a slight nod, Taiga removed Henri's arm from his neck. "I won't attack." With that, he placed his hand in his pocket and walked away, following the flock of sheep who were being guided out of the landing zone.
 Left behind, Henri looked at her right arm, then up at the receding back, a playful smile on her lips. "Like I thought. He's different." Placing the arm behind her back, she lightly skipped after the procession, never once paying attention to the stern looking guards who had attentively monitored the entire exchange.

Taiga and the other children followed the doctors to a convoy of vehicles. The young child feigned an uninterested look as he watched the streets pass by through the window while also memorizing every turn they had taken. Judging from the simplistic route, he could tell the convoy did not purposely meander in an attempt to throw off those who were confident in tracking their route. Taiga's neck stiffened as he was certain this was as a result of their confidence and not something they had overlooked.
 Taiga was not left to his thoughts for long though as the convoy quickly came to a stop before the largest building the child had ever laid eyes on. Despite his self-control, his lips could not help but part in shock and awe at the magnificent dome structure. His expression was quickly fixed, however, when the vehicle's door was pulled open from the outside. Regaining his indifferent attitude, he stepped down from the vehicle and joined the other children at the building's entrance: two large sliding doors.
 A familiar face stood at the entrance, regarding the children with a warm smile, his hands habitually fixing the glasses on the bridge of his nose. Akari Seki gave the gathered children a once-over with conflicting emotions. He knew the following years would be anything but easy for these children considering all they were about to go through, however, at the same time, most of these children would have perished before they ended their teenage years. That was just how low the company had gone to find candidates no one would care about. At least, with this project, although they would suffer hardships, most, if not all of them would live to adulthood, and live much better lives than the average humans.
 Akari grimly shook his head. No. In the end, he was just making excuses and justifications for the horrors they were about to inflict on these children. But it was already too late. The ball had been set rolling, and fate would not care if the human race was ready or not. Some sacrifices had to be made to ensure the species' continued survival. Many would agree that the happiness of some toddlers was a fair price to pay for the safety of the entire race.
 STOP!
 Akari berated himself. Stop justifying it! Just live with the sin and move on. That was the only way he could treat these children with the respect befitting their sacrifice. The second he stopped seeing his actions as 'sin' but instead as 'justified sacrifices,' he would lose what little humanity he had left.
 Having worked out his inner demons, Akari let out a brilliant, if slightly awkward smile at the children. "Hi kids, my name is Akari Seki. On behalf of all of us at Genaco Incorporated, we welcome you to Fantasia. We here at Fantasia are a division of Genaco with the sole mission of making the dreams of humanity into reality." Gaining confidence with each passing sentence, Akari's voice gradually turned firmer. "We are currently working on a project we call Rebirth, and it is for the sake of this project we have brought you all here today." Dark gray eyes turned increasingly solemn as he warned the kids of the upcoming dangers. "I will not lie to you. The task ahead will be difficult and we will have to bear some pain along the way. However, in return for your efforts, I can promise that not only will you be properly fed every day with the highest level of cuisines, but you will have plenty of free time to yourselves to do what you wish. Of course, we have libraries for those who like to read and the latest video games who into gaming. This compound is quite large, and there are hundreds of activities you can participate in during your free time."
 A sharp gleam shot out of Taiga's eyes as he listened to the man's words. Shit! Ninety percent of the kids here most likely bought into his bullshit at the mention of food. Pain? If these kids' lives were anything like his then the last thing they feared was pain. To them, their greatest fear was to not wake up the next morning as a result of an empty stomach. Yet this guy just said he would give them food of the highest cuisine all day! Looking at the wide-eyed kids around him, the child finally understood that story the crazy bat at Drow street kept spewing about the guy who sold his birthright for some soup.

Sorry Old Bat, there are some children selling their 'souls' for some soup over here. Don't think that birthright thing has much weight, does it?
 Shuffling of feet drew Taiga's attention back to Akari just in time to hear him say something about them going to freshen up in their rooms. Unsurprisingly, the guards began to marshal them into the building, leaving the scientists with a forlorn look in their eyes like they had just been forced to give up their favorite possessions.
 Taiga followed the soldier silently as he led them through a series of hallways till they reached a set of elevators. The group was then split into four parties of twenty-six and herded into the elevators. Taiga had to force himself to suppress a groan as a familiar face grinned at him, apparently pretty pleased with herself that she managed to get into the same group as him.
 The young man had to force himself from doing even worse when after they stepped off the elevator and were shown to their rooms, he found out he had one roommate. Who was it? Who else would it be if not the grinning blond-haired beauty opposite?
 "Hehe, looks like we'll be sharing a room from now on," Henri said with a hugely satisfied grin as she sauntered into the room. It wasn't large by any means, with just enough space for two beds, wardrobes and reading desks without it feeling too cramped. The bathroom was large as well, so there was no discomfort there. For all intents and purposes, the room was quite perfect. Well, having a boy and girl in the same room was kinda weird, but at their age, who really gave a shit.
 Taiga massaged his forehead, feeling a headache coming on as he imagined living in the same room as this hyperactive rabbit for God knew how long. Choosing to live in firm denial of reality, he ignored her and turned to examine the wardrobe on the right side of the room. He opened it, looked at the contents within, and then calmly shut it. Turning to Henri, he said, "This is yours."
 "For real?" Henri bounded over excitedly and yanked the doors open. She could not help but squeal in delight as she ogled the multitude of clothes carefully lined in the wardrobe. Having lived in the slums all her life, her only choice of clothes were old T-shirts or torn T-shirtsTo see so many different clothing, with some she recognized from the Madam's magazines laid out before her... Words could not begin to describe her excitement.
 Despite her excitement, Henri still made sure to examine every nook and cranny of the wardrobe for anything she might have missed. She spotted some shoes, socks and... underwear. A leery grin spread on her face as she muttered, "Hehe, did this tickle your fancy?" She looked up from the wardrobe only to see Taiga, with some clothes in his hand, firmly shut the bathroom door behind him. The little girl stamped her feet in anger at the figure, annoyed she didn't get to tease him on time. But more importantly, "What kind of gentleman are you!? Never heard of Ladies First!?"
 Of course, she knew that to someone like Taiga, there was no such concept. No one in Hadet held such lofty concepts.
 Uncaring of the thoughts of the girl outside, Taiga wordlessly stared at his reflection in the mirror. How long had it been since he last studied his own reflection? Ah, it was that mission where he drowned the daughter of a local crime boss. The lake had been especially clear that day. Snorting slightly he turned away from the sunken-cheeked ghoul within the mirror and stripped down.
 Roughly thirty minutes later, a pouting Henri shot off the bed as soon as the bathroom door swung open. "What took you so long!? You giving birth in the-eukk!" A strange sound escaped her lips as she stared at the silver-haired boy in shock. After getting the treatment of a good washing, complete with high-class shampoo and everything, the silver hair glistened even under the room light. She could only imagine how brightly it would shine under sunlight. Furthermore, with the grime and dirt scrubbed off his face, Taiga's fair skin caused his bright yellow eyes to shine even brighter. Unfortunately, his hard glare made it akin to the sun which would burn anything that got close to it.

Taiga noticed the girl's awkward expression, but only attributed it to her craziness. Walking past her, he said, "You can go now. There's a free towel in there." Without waiting for an answer, he threw his old clothes into the bin, determined to cut off all ties to his old life then plopped onto the bed.
 Henri chewed her lips as she watched the boy's nonchalant attitude. Immediately, the competitive spirit within her welled up. She swiftly ran to the wardrobe, picked out a set of clothes, then dashed into the bathroom.
 Taiga watched all this out of the corner of his eyes, once again attributing it to the young girl's madness. He shut his eyes after Henri entered the bathroom, intent on getting some sleep before the next time they were called.
 Unfortunately, although he had resolutely tossed away his past, it did not mean it was willing to let go of him.
 No sooner had his eyes shut did the nightmares start up once again. Soon Taiga was standing within a void with no control over his limbs. All around him, grotesque figures began to rise from within the void. Disfigured and dismembered the remains of all those he had killed stretched out their arms as they shambled towards him.
 If that was the end of it, Taiga, who had long since lost all concept of remorse would have been fine with it. But this was only the beginning. Unable to move, Taiga's rapidly pounding heart cried out with fear as the first figure clasped its hand around his neck. Despite the pale blue skin and sunken eyes, Taiga recognized her to be the girl he had drowned.
 Despite his struggles, Taiga's lips were pried open by the girl's bony fingers. His eyes went wide as her entire body turned into a thick stream of water and forced its way down his throat and nose. Searing pain seized Taiga as his lungs felt like they exploded, having expanded beyond control by the large mass of water. The child had nearly drowned himself during the mission to drown the girl and he was forced to endlessly relive that pain.
 While Taiga continuously drowned, another body reached him. This time, it was a middle-aged man with both eyes missing. Taiga had been specifically tasked with puncturing his eyes before killing him. The man as if recalling the pain he suffered, placed his fingers upon Taiga's open eyes and pressed down hard.
 Taiga, unable to withstand the sharp pain that erupted, screamed with all his might, but his cries were cut short as even more water was forced down his throat. The child's frantic desperation only grew worse as more and more ghouls stepped forward, grabbing a piece of him before proceeding to exact punishment for his crimes against them.
 Even though he knew it was fake. Even though he knew this was only a dream, Taiga could not block out the all too real pain. He frantically struggled, hoping he woke up as soon as possible. But he knew it would not happen. Not before every last ghoul had punished him. Even worse, today's punishment seemed even more severe. Was it because he had chosen to abandon his past? Would they not accept his leaving them behind?
 Taiga did not know how long he fought for, but eventually, he began to tire out. Resigned to the inevitable pain, he was about to surrender himself, promising not to forget when...
 "TAIGA!"
 A single ray of light tore through the void smashing onto the ghoul who pressed onto Taiga's eyes. With a shrill cry, the ghoul rapidly retreated into the void, black eyes glaring at the ray of light with rage.
 "TAIGA! TAIGA! Wake up! It's only a dream! Wake up!"
 With each call, another ray of light tore into the void and tore the ghouls away from the young boy. Released from his attackers, Taiga violently coughed, warily watching the zombies who had gathered around him, kept at bay by a circular radius created by the rays of light. The zombies' burning gaze let him know that the second the light was gone, they would descend upon him with an even worse ferocity.

Taiga inwardly shivered, but he reached out to the source of the ray of light, the voice that was calling out to him. Luckily, this seemed to do the trick.
 Taiga shot up from the bed, breath rapid and ragged as he struggled to come to terms with what just happened. He had never managed to escape the zombies before. Like that Crazy Old Bat said, the souls and spirits of all those he had murdered would haunt him for the rest of his life. He had tried many times, but these zombies were impossible to kill which meant he had to suffer their torment whenever he closed his eyes.
 "Hey, Taiga," Henri tentatively called from beside the bed. "Are you alright?"
 Taiga stiffened at the obvious concern in her tone. "I'm fine." He turned to look at her, "More importantly are you d-" This time it was Taiga's turn to lose the ability to speak.
 Squatting awkwardly at the side of the bed was the most beautiful creature Taiga had ever laid his eyes on. Like scraping dirt off gold, Henri's bath had scrubbed off the layers of dirt on her skin and in her hair, revealing an enchanting fairy which would tempt the world once she was fully grown. Sher skin was much fairer than he had thought, long golden locks shining brightly in the light.
 Henri, having heard Taiga's screams did not have enough time to get fully dressed. She had no choice to dash out of the bathroom with only her shirt on then proceeded to wake the young boy up. Even now, she was not aware of the severely compromising situation she was in, watery blue eyes filled only with concern and pity.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Taiga looked away, unable to take the sudden stimulus rush. He had a lot of things he wanted to say, but in the end, he decided to go with, "Go get dressed."
 Henri cocked her head to the side, then looked down at herself. Her cheeks instantly turned red as she shot to her feet. Luckily she'd had enough sense to put on her underwear or there would be a real disaster. She was about to run into the bathroom when she spotted Taiga's uncomfortable expression. Recalling the scene from a moment ago, she suddenly put her hands on her hips, a leery smile plastered on her face as she swayed like she had seen Madam's girls do. "Oh-ho. What's the matter? Is this more than you can handle?"
 "You have zero sex appeal!" Taiga instantly shot back, stunning even himself. He opened his mouth, then closed it, unsure of where the hell that came from. Forming a newfound interest in the wall textures, he muttered, "Just put something on already."
 "Peh, what do you know?" Henri spat with an angry pout as she stomped to the bathroom. "A baby shouldn't talk about sex appeal." She glanced at him, a hidden smile curling up her lips as she examined the profile staring intently at the wall. Although he still had an uncomfortable expression, it was of a different nature. That much was fine. She entered the bathroom, soon emerging in shorts, just in time to see a guard walk into their room.
 "It's time for lunch," the guard crassly announced. "You two, follow."
 Taiga and Henri obeyed, maintaining an odd silence between them as the guard guided them out of their room. They met up with several other kids who had taken advantage of the break to freshen up and try out the new clothes. Of course, new clothes alone were not enough to change the sunken hollow cheeks, and bony appearances, but at least the air about the children no longer solely reeked of desolation. A lot of them were actually looking forward to their stay here.

Taiga did not care what the other children thought as he followed the guard to the elevator. A few floors down and a hallway later, Taiga and the other children entered a large buffet style dining hall, their bodies bursting with delight as several rich aromas entered their nostrils. If there was one thing that spoiled the mood, it was the numerous guards who stood menacingly around the dining hall.
 Taiga's eyes narrowed as a familiar face popped up once again. Of course that bastard Akari would be here.
 Akari warmly smiled at the children. "You guys certainly look a lot better compared to when you came in. Do you have any complaints about your rooms?" When no one answered, he continued, "This is the cafeteria. Your meals will be served here regularly. Once we start giving you allowances, you can also come here to eat outside of standard meal-times." Pointing at the servers standing by the buffet table, he explained, "Normally, we use a buffet style system here, meaning you can eat whatever you want, however you want, no matter the quantity. But because most of you are quite malnourished, eating too much at once will do more harm than good, especially with food as rich as ours. For the next week, you will have to eat as we say in order to put some strength back in your bodies. After that, you will be free to eat as you want."
 Finished with his long speech, Akari waved his hand, "Alright, go pick up your food. If you need to talk to me, let one of the guards know. They will bring you to my office." He then gave some instructions to one of the guards and walked away.
 Taiga's gaze followed the man's back for a while, but his attention was forcefully broken by a hard pinch at the back of his hand. "What was that for!?" Taiga shout-whispered at his belligerent roommate. 
"You're drawing too much attention to yourself," Henri replied with a slight roll of her eyes. "Cool it down a little."
 Taiga snorted, but did indeed cool down the fire in his eyes and walked over to one of the servers. He grabbed a tray and accepted the bowl of soup and carrot handed to him. The server, a pretty lady said he could come back for seconds if he was still hungry. Taiga nodded as he dragged his tray and searched for a seat.
 It seemed the dining hall had been made just for the kids. There were just about enough chairs for everyone, with most of them placed in groups of two around a single table. Taiga spotted a free table at a corner and made his way towards it. He placed his tray on the table and was about to take a seat when-
 Clang! Crash!
 Taiga looked at the chair which had been kicked against the wall, then up at the child who had kicked it.
 A tall kid, probably twelve or thirteen glared down at Taiga, black eyes bursting with a large amount of irritation. "Get the fuck out!" Interestingly, the kid spoke English of all things. "I'm sitting here."
 The dining hall descended into absolute silence. Several pairs of eyes riveted to the small, silver-haired boy, curious as to how he would react.
 Contrary to all their expectations, Taiga completely ignored the tall child. He simply picked up the chair, repositioned it, and then took a seat once more. He lifted the spoon, taking a sip out of the delicious soup. Mm, he could not help but admit the taste was better than anything he'd ever had. He could feel all the cells in his body practically bursting with joy.
 The boy who was ignored flared up upon seeing Taiga's nonchalant attitude. BAM! Clatter! With a single swing of his arm, the scalding hot soup toppled over, some of its contents spilling onto Taiga in the process. "Do you know who I am!?" The twelve-year-old roared. "You dare ignore me!?"
 Taiga once again ignored the boy, his attention on the wasted soup before him. Below his breath, he silently muttered, "The cost of wasting food is death."

The guards suddenly tensed, their hands simultaneously rushing to their side holsters as an enormous pressure crashed onto them, not unlike that only found on the battlefield. Luckily, the pressure dissipated just as quickly as it accumulated. They looked at the pressure's source, only to see a young girl standing between the tall kid and the silver-haired boy.
 Taiga, whose killing intent had solidified, suddenly found himself unable to summon even the slightest hostility when he felt the tiny hand clutching his from behind. Closing his eyes, he let the spoon drop onto the table. He had lost the desire to go through with the deed now that she had interfered. Still, he would be damned if he let her know how she affected him. "What're you doing?"
 "How dumb can the both of you get?" Ignoring Taiga's question, Henri scolded the two boys, also choosing to use English. Anyway, most of the kids here were gotten from different places. It seemed English was the one common language they all spoke.
 "HAH!? What did you say!?" The tall kid had been getting antsy ever since he was forcefully brought to the middle of nowhere. Now, this girl was pissing him off even more.
 "Idiot. If you two wanna be made example of by the guards, be my guest."
 Taiga and the tall boy turned to look at the men in black standing around the dining hall. Although their eyes were hidden by their helmet visors, the two could tell they were all paying special attention to the both of them.
 "Within every group, there'll always be the stubborn ones," Henri said with a biting tone. "Smack 'em up a little and the rest'll fall in line. Do you guys wanna get smacked?" When they both kept silent, she shrugged and pointed at the tall boy. "You if you wanna sit here, grab a chair and come over. It's not like there's a rule saying only two people can sit at a table. And you..." She faltered slightly as she looked into Taiga's hardened gaze. As a fellow resident of Hadet, she knew exactly what Taiga was feeling. However, "We are no longer in Hadet. Violence doesn't solve everything. Why don't you try using your head to find new ways to solve your problems?"
 New ways? Taiga had never been so confused. In Hadet there was no problem a well-placed bullet could not solve. Why the hell did he need to think of some new method?
 The tall boy, on the other hand, was immensely grateful for Henri's intervention. For someone like him, the last thing he wanted was to be humiliated in front other people. He placed his tray on the table then pushed it towards Taiga. "Name's Ford. Sorry about earlier. Haven't been myself lately."
 Taiga only grunted in reply. Despite that, he did not hesitate to start eating the soup. After all, the soup was not the one that sinned. And he was quite hungry.
 Henri only rolled her eyes as she handed her tray to Ford and went back to grab an extra one for herself. Soon the trio was seated around the corner table, with Ford and Henri instantly hitting it off once the unpleasantness wore off.
 By the side, Taiga listened to their noisy conversation as they compared their different hometowns. Nothing was much different really. The two of them grew up in slums. The only difference was Henri grew up in a brothel while Ford was part of a gang. Like Henri, Ford had not reached the age to get into the real business and was still just about an errand boy and courier. One or two more years and he would have blood on his hands. In Henri's case, she would have shed some blood.
 Taiga apathetically listened to the duo. Although he was not particularly interested in their conversation, it served to distract him from his head, which to him was a plus. Back in Hadet he did not have anyone to talk to, so he was always lost in his thoughts, which would, in turn, summon the nightmares.
 "So what about you, Taiga, what's your story?" Ford asked, in an obvious attempt to bring Taiga into the discussion.
 "Me?" Dozens of faces crossed the young boy's mind. His lips curled up in a self-depreciating smile. "I am the Grim Reaper.'
 Ford's face instantly went pale.
 *******
 Later that Night,
 "Was that necessary?" Seated on her bed, Henri stared at the rough silhouette across from her. "You scared Ford half to death."
 Lying on his bed with his back to Henri, Taiga muttered, "He asked. I answered. It's not my fault he couldn't handle the truth."
 "You weren't completely truthful," Henri challenged. "You're no longer the Grim Reaper right? That was your identity in Hadet. You can start brand new."
 Taiga went silent for a couple of seconds before stating, "It doesn't work that way. I can't start afresh." They won't let me start afresh. Taiga tightly tugged the covers over his body. "Get some sleep. I have a feeling the real thing starts tomorrow."
 "Mm..."
 Moments passed, and just as Taiga was no longer able to stop his droopy eyes from closing, they shot open of their own volition in shock, responding to the being that had invaded his private space.
 Taiga was about to scream at the little girl who had snuck under his covers when he felt something shaking against his back. Soon, the tell-tale wetness followed and the young boy's face slackened.
 Indeed, what had he been expecting? She might have acted tough and sensible throughout the whole day, with more nerves of steel than all the boys put together, but in the end, she was still a little girl forced to go to an unknown place to be the toys of people who did not see her as a human at all. In this case, her intelligence had worked against her. It would be weirder if she was completely fine despite all this.
 Taiga did not react as the little girl's arm curled around his waist and she buried her head against his back.
 Only after Henri had wept herself to sleep, did Taiga finally succumb to the void that had been calling him.
 Surprisingly, for the first time ever, Taiga slept peacefully, protected from the zombies by a beautifully bright ray of sunshine within the never-ending void.


 *************
 A/N: Hello One and All! Hope You all Enjoyed this premiere! It might only be one chapter, but hey, its a PRETTY long one! Like Finale candidate long. Anyway, I heartily welcome you all back to the World of Parallel. It has been a while, and like you, I am rearing to get on with it and see just what this world has in store for us!
 WHERE THE HELL IS KASHI!?
 *Cough* *Cough* Don't worry, I've given myself a three-five chapter limit for Taiga's backstory. in return, I'm making the chapters hella long, to carry in as much detail as possible. For those of you who are wondering, no, Taiga's backstory cannot be missed. As a member of the first batch to go through the experiments, his backstory is integral to the plot. So, please enjoy this exposee into how the current Parallel came to be, and what turned Akari from a jovial, shy young employee to the stoic, hard man he is today.
 Ciao!
 ****
 P.S The Theme Music for this particular Volume is Linkin Park's "One More Light."
 
   
     
       
       
     
   
   
 
 I feel this song captures what I am going for in this novel more than most I listened to. We really lost a bright light in Chester Bennington.
 Good Morning Y'all, and Have a Great Weekend!

 

Chapter 2: HELL

Three Months Later,
 Ha... Ha... Ha...
 Rhythmic panting punctuated the otherwise quiet morning, forty-odd figures running in sync around a track. The figures moved like a well-oiled machine, measured breathing, and feet like cogs in a larger machine. Upon closer inspection, these figures revealed themselves to be a group of children no more than twelve years old.
 Compared to three months back, these children, whose bodies were originally terribly weak and dilapidated, now sported robust muscles and glistening skin, clearly showing their rapid improvements over the past month. Having followed strict dietary guidelines and exercise regiments, these children now looked nothing like their past selves. In fact, a lot of them could probably go toe-to-toe with teenagers much older than them.
 Off to the side, Akari stood beside an old man wearing a sports shirt and slacks. The old man gaze alternated between the stopwatch in his hand and the children on the track, constantly memorizing each individuals time. A satisfied smile crossed the old man's face as the children crossed the line for the nineteenth time that day. This was a standard 400-meter track, meaning the children had already run 7600 meters, or just below five miles that morning. Considering most of them could not even manage half a mile when they first arrived, it was quite the achievement, and one he was especially proud of.
 "Haven't seen you smile like this in years, Coach Kazuki," Akari laughed as he studied the older man's bright grey eyes. Although Coach Kazuki was quite advanced in age, evidenced by his gray hair and wrinkled face, he still sported the vitality of a man decades younger. Till date, Akari couldn't beat the old man in an endurance race, much to his shame. However, he preferred to think of Coach Kazuki being a monster. That made much more sense.
 Coach Kazuki chuckled lightly as he watched the kids. "Been a while since I saw kids take so quickly to my training." Casting Akari a contemptuous gaze, he added, "How long did it take you to reach their level?"
 "Come on Coach," Akari lightly protested, scratching the back of his head with embarrassment. "Physical fitness was never my strong suit."
 Coach Kazuki glanced at the young man. Dressed as always in an impeccable form-fitting suit, those iconic square-rimmed glasses sitting below ahead of neatly brushed dark hair, the young Akari did indeed give off an air of an intellectual. Most evident in those dark eyes which seemed to weigh everything around him on an invisible scale. "Hmph, smarts may be important, but your physical strength is still very important. Why don't you take a page out of that yellow lad's book?"
 Akari's face darkened. His lips twitched, brows furrowed as he was about to retort. However, Coach Kazuki's shrill whistle forced his attention back to the track where the children had just completed their twentieth lap.
 The twentieth lap was the dividing point. Up until then, the children had to keep a standard pace, but from here on, it would be a competition to see who would be the best to complete the final four laps. Already, a bunch of children began to pull away from the rest of the pack, led by a tall boy a full head taller than the rest of the children.
 Coach Kazuki smiled as he studied the child. The boy, Kugo, was the oldest of the children at twelve years old, but that was in no way a detriment to why he could overtake the other children. More than most, the child had a drive and passion that Coach Kazuki had not seen in even many adults. Kugo spent most of his time at the gym, his training time only seconded by one other person in the class.
 Coach Kazuki sighed lightly as he turned to the children floundering at the back, where an eye-catching couple steadily jogged on. A young man with silver hair watched the pack begin to pull ahead, but there wasn't even the slightest care reflected in his indifferent gaze. Next to him, a destructively beautiful girl with blonde hair soldiered on, clothes sticking to her body as a result of excessive sweating.

Henri's eyes were bloodshot, breathing becoming increasingly labored with time but she kept her gaze on the track ahead of her. Despite the flames burning in her chest, she gritted her teeth, muttering to herself. "One more step. One more step." Whenever it felt like the pain was going to consume her, she would look to her left, where like always, an indifferent Taiga would be jogging, a relaxed look on his face like he was going for a casual walk.
 Ahead of them, the other children began to increase their pace in order to lengthen the distance. Although Henri and Taiga always came last in the endurance race, no one wanted to take the risk. The punishment for the last place was just that terrifying.
 Coach Kazuki's gaze rested on Henri, his eyes carrying heavy melancholy. "Ah, life is cruel. Despite all her hard work... Aish, who would have expected she would have a bad heart?" This young girl was the person with the highest work rate in the gym after Kugo, but alas, even though her body had massive improvements, her bad heart prevented her from ever pushing her body to its limits.
 Akari's gaze meanwhile rested on the silver-haired kid as he nonchalantly replied, "That is precisely why we're first going through Rebirth."
 "Bah! I don't care about that unnatural mojo-jojo." Coach Kazuki snorted. "Nothing beats steadily raising our own strength through sweat and grit."
 Akari chuckled. Indeed, he'd had this argument with his coach several times in the past. Still, he persisted, "Unfortunately, the human body has a limit to how much it can achieve without external help."
 "Hmph." Coach Kazuki turned away from the bothersome conversation to the track. As expected, the race was coming to an end. As expected, Kugo came out on top. Coming in second was Ford, and in third was surprisingly a brunette with bright eyes. She clung next to Kugo with a triumphant look in her eyes. Out of the corner of her eyes, she glared at Ford, evidently discontent he had managed to overtake her. The young girl's name was Asahi, and she would have easily claimed the throne of queen amongst the children were it not for one little obstacle.
 "They're here," someone quietly whispered.
 Several pairs of eyes as if forced by some unnatural force turned towards the approaching silver and gold duo. As always, Henri's determined expression and sweat-soaked, pained face drew countless sighs of praise, regret, and respect as she approached the line. However, just before she could successfully cross it, she finally collapsed.
 Despite seeing her fall, no one made a move. No one needed to.
 They stared as a flash of silver appeared next to her, catching her falling frame. Taiga's hand tightened around Henri's small waist as he lifted her to her feet. Placing his lips next to her ears, he whispered, "If you're gonna fall, fall after you cross the line." A slight blush of red rushed up the young girl's neck, but Taiga, attributing the phenomenon to embarrassed rage, remove his hand from her waist.
 Indeed, 'as he thought,' Henri, as if injected with chicken blood, managed to pull out her latent potential and dashed past the line before collapsing entirely. This time, however, her friends quickly came to her aid and caught her falling body. They quickly laid her on the ground, helping her to drink some water while others quickly fanned her down while waiting for her to regain clarity.
 At this point, Taiga finally crossed the line. His gaze apathetic, he walked passed the collapsed Henri to stand before Coach Kazuki. Gaze even, he said, "I was last. I'm ready for my punishment."
 These words, spoken so calmly by this youngster sent a massive wave amongst those present. Although this situation occurred every single morning, neither the children nor the staff could understand how a child like this would exist. It must be known that this punishment was something ninety-nine percent of adults would never want to experience if given the choice. Yet this eleven-years-old boy willingly subjected himself to the torture every morning without fail.

And for what? A girl? But looking at their relationship, it didn't seem they were that close. What could be the reason then?
 Coach Kazuki shook the thoughts out of his head. Regardless of the reason, the kid did come in last, so he definitely had to suffer the punishment. Coach Kazuki opened his mouth, about to instruct the guards to take the kid when...
 "Coach Kazuki, I don't think this is fair!"
 The coach, already feeling a headache coming on, looked over to the children, where, as expected, Asahi stood, glaring at Taiga's back in rage. The old man sighed. He was getting too old for this elementary school cliché. Still, he had a job to do. So, he earnestly asked, "What's not fair?"
 Asahi gritted her teeth as she pointed at Henri's crumpled form. "The rest of us have to work hard every day so we don't get punished. Why does she get to walk away when she's clearly the worst of us!?"
 Coach Kazuki rubbed his forehead. Out of curiosity, he glanced at Taiga's eyes, but as usual, only deep indifference was reflected in those yellow eyes. Turning his gaze back to the discontented party, he said, "Taiga-kun was last so—"
 "Please do not treat us like fools, Coach Kazuki," a deep voice interrupted. Kugo confidently weathered Coach Kazuki's heavy gaze as he stepped forward. "Everybody here knows what Taiga is capable of. The only reason he keeps coming last is that he's covering for a certain trash. The punishment is meaningless if someone can just keep covering for another's worthlessness."
 "Yeah! Why should the rest of us suffer just because we don't have someone to cover for us!?" Asahi spat. Low murmuring amidst the children revealed some of them had the same thoughts. Not all tests were physical. In some other assessments, each of them would sometimes come last, and they would be forced to endure HELL. What's more, aside from the endurance test, Henri was usually amongst the top three in other tests carried out by the scientists and trainers. Predictably jealousy had blossomed towards the only person in the class who had yet to suffer through HELL.
 Discontent within a group of people was often like gradually piled up gunpowder kegs. It took just a single spark to send the hidden feelings exploding out to the surface with a force not thought possible. Today, Asahi and Kugo's challenge had finally set those kegs alight, and soon the track was drowned by protestant cries, calling for Henri to stop hiding behind someone else and face her punishment.
 Coach Kazuki frowned, rage beginning to set in as he glared at the children. Indeed, it seemed he had been too lax recently since they dared to raise their voice in his tracks. He raised the whistle to his lips about to order a swift punishment when a cold voice interrupted him.
 "Coach Kazuki." The coach looked down, eyes widening at the burning yellow suns that glared at them. "What is the punishment for physical assault?"
 "Three hours of HELL," Akari answered in place of the gobsmacked coach. "Except in cases of self-defense."
 Those yellow orbs grew increasingly cold as Taiga clarified, "And if there are broken bones?"
 "Four extra hours," Akari stated with a searching gaze. This kid, could it be...
 "I see," Taiga muttered. "In that case..." Taiga turned around, the glare in his eyes emitting a faint killing intent, akin to a tiger locked onto a trespasser. As if intimidated by the child's imposing figure, the wind itself stopped billowing, the rustle of leaves turning silent till all that could be heard was the child's steps as his feet hit the ground.
 Kugo and Asahi's hands shook, confusion apparent in their gazes as Taiga walked towards. They wondered why, although they wanted to confront him, they could not get their feet to move a single step. Their bodies shook as Taiga nonchalantly walked passed them, leaving behind a frigid, cold feeling which rattled them to their very core.

Only at this moment did they fully realize what it was. That was condensed killing intent! This was the natural air around someone who had reaped dozens of lives and now considered killing to be a part of his life. Having also grown up in impoverished regions, these two were naturally aware of this killing intent. Only, those gangsters they knew could not hold a single candle to the dense killing intent circulating the silver-haired boy.
 Taiga stood before the children, all the rage he felt condensing into a small smile that spread up the corner of his lips. "If you want, we can do it your way." His words caused a ripple to run through the crowd. Triumphant grins began to show themselves, but his next words killed all their enthusiasm. "However, I will make sure at least one person here does not finish the race every morning."
 The children's bodies went numb with fright as they stared at the unreasonable boy. He would make sure someone did not finish? Wouldn't that person automatically be last? They swallowed hard as they realized they were just offering themselves up for punishment if they opposed the child. Still, hoping for one last reversal, they glanced at Coach Kazuki in hopes he would berate the child or denounce his actions.
 Just as they expected, Coach Kazuki did berate Taiga, but his exact words left much to be desired. As if nursing an old grudge, the old man snorted as he said, "Do that and you will spend three hours in HELL every morning."
 The children's faces immediately darkened. Although the Coach laid out Taiga's punishment, he did not explicitly say the action itself would carry no weight. This meant there was a high chance, even after Taiga's punishment, whoever he stopped would still come in last, and would, therefore, be subjected to thirty minutes in HELL.
 Taiga's grim expression made the children realize the horrifying truth. This bastard was well aware of the circumstances and would not hesitate to suffer three hours in HELL as long as someone took Henri's position in the last place. The protesters could not help but look at Henri, each wondering what the hell kind of spell she had over him. From his general indifferent attitude, it did not seem he was in love. But then, what else could justify torturing oneself for another person?
 Kugo sweated as he realized that with only a few words, Taiga had seized control of the situation. He could not help but shudder at the ingenuity of his words. He was so stunned in fact, that he was certain Taiga could not have come up with that scheme on his own. For all of Taiga's strengths, elaborate schemes were definitely not one of them. That only left one person.
 Kugo's attention turned to the forgotten little girl, propped up by two of her close friends. Henri's breathing was still heavy and labored, her pallor pale and sweaty. However, her half-closed eyes, fixed onto Taiga's frame, revealed a hidden appreciation and anticipation. Kugo cursed inwardly as he saw her prepare to stand up. He wasn't stupid. He instantly figured out her intention. The little skank wanted to play peacemaker and draw more people to her side.
 Like fuck I'll let you succeed so easily. Kugo cursed. Gritting his teeth, he grabbed at Taiga's shoulder and subtly squeezed hard.
 Oof! BAM! Crack!
 "AAAAH!"
 The subsequent consequence occurred in a flash, preventing anyone from interfering. The children and staff stared wide-eyed at Kugo who was sprawled out on the ground, screaming for dear life, tears and snot smearing his once confident expression. Above him, a clearly stunned Taiga frowned as he released the limp arm he had yanked out of its shoulder socket. He had indeed not meant to retaliate so heavily. It was just that old habits die hard. Especially ones formed from life-or-death situations.
 Back home, normally, it was already too late by the time you felt a hand on your shoulder. Hence, no one casually tapped another person from behind. Taiga could only sigh helplessly as he stepped away from Kugo. He scratched his head as he turned to Henri. This was not part of the plan.

Henri groaned as she too stared at the wailing Kugo in shock. How the hell did this happen? She still remembered when she first confronted Taiga about taking her place in the punishments. However, he had only replied with some cheesy line. "You are my sun. It is the sun's job to shine brightly. So I will make sure you can do your job perfectly."
 Okay, so maybe she was secretly excited when he said that. That did not mean she understood what the heck he meant, and she felt increasingly guilty by the hostility they faced every day. Hence she had conjured up this minimal plot to have everyone let out their grievances, then step in as a mediator to buy some sympathy cards and increase their influence.
 Who knew that muscle-brained Kugo would not only notice, but attempt to stop their momentum by lightly threatening Taiga? Unfortunately for both sides, Taiga was not one to take to threats so easily. Surprisingly, just when everyone thought the situation had begun to cool down, Taiga's glare suddenly turned vicious.
 Before anyone could react, Taiga charged at Asahi, fingers reaching for her throat.
 "Stop!" Just before they made contact, a desperate shout brought them to a halt. Asahi swallowed hard, the action causing her throat to come into contact the tips of Taiga's fingernails. Tears welled up the little girl's eyes as she suddenly collapsed onto her backside, a flood of relief flowing through her veins. She turned grateful eyes towards Henri whose scream had managed to save her from similarly being beaten.
 Henri, who had recovered, walked up to Taiga and gently set down his arm. "Taiga, I'm sorry for being so useless that you have to go so far just to protect me." Although Henri was inwardly rejoicing for Taiga's quick thinking, she quickly put on a façade of shame and regret as she faced the rest of the children and bowed. "I'm also sorry towards all of you. My actions may have annoyed all of you this much but I swear I didn't do this to annoy any of you, but because I am a coward." Henri placed her hand against her heart, tears glistening in her eyes. "Like you all, I too was brought here against my will. But unlike the rest of you, I do not have the courage or strength to face the punishment. Actually, with my heart the way it is, if I were to suffer HELL, I would probably die after only three minutes." Henri glanced at Taiga, her gaze exuding awe and respect. Of all her expressions that morning, this was most likely the only genuine one.
 The look in Henri's eyes did not escape the children's eyes as she continued, "Taiga has sacrificed so much only because we used to know each other in the town we came from. I helped save his life once, and because of that, he swore to protect mine when we were brought here." Henri paused, inwardly snickering as she saw the children's hostile and fearful expressions change as they looked at Taiga. Suddenly, from a wild, dangerous animal, he now resembled a handsome loner who valued his friends tightly and kept his promises even if they were detrimental to his health.
 "Ah, no, we understand."
 "Yeah, Henri, you don't have to apologize. It's your life after all."
 "Yeah. We're sorry we misunderstood you Taiga."
 A few of the children even took the lead to step forward and propose peace. Evidently, these twelve-year-olds were not too big on scheming yet. A few soft words after witnessing Taiga's superior strength and they were more than willing to bury the hatchet. Some even hoped to build friendships with this strong boy who took good care of his friends and demanded nothing in return.
 Akari let out a chuckle as he watched the proceedings. "Well, I think we now know who the leader of this motley crew will be."
 Coach Kazuki snorted as he glared at Henri. "I hate you intellectual types the most. I will only acknowledge the strong."

Akari displayed a brilliant smile but did not bother wasting his saliva on the topic. "What's your verdict on the boy?"
 Coach Kazuki gaze evaluated the silver-haired child. "He's not bad, not as strong as Kugo, but he has more life-or-death battle experience." He clucked his tongue as his gaze turned to the crumpled Kugo. "However, he most likely used a gun. He's too jittery when someone attacks from close range. But with a bit more battle experience he should be able to rapidly acclimatize himself to close-range fights. In this group, he's most likely the one with the highest chance of becoming a useful asset."
 "I disagree," Akari said with a shake of his head. Jerking his chin at Henri, he said, "I feel she's the key. She clearly holds some power over Taiga. Most likely, without her, Taiga would not be as efficient as he is now."
 Coach Kazuki's brows shot up. "Oh? What makes you say that?"
 "Just a hunch." Akari laughed as he lightly shrugged. He was about to add something else when his phone lightly buzzed in his pocket. He turned to Coach Kazuki, his gaze turning grim as the coach also brought his phone out of his pocket.
 Simultaneous messages. This most likely meant...
 Akari swiped the phone screen, multiple expressions of wonder, fear, and resignation flashing across his features. He shut the phone and placed it in his jacket, then exuded a heavy sigh. He turned to Coach Kazuki, the exact same reactions playing across the old man's face. Akari let out a bitter smile. "Rebirth is finally ready. All preliminary tests have been run. The procedure will be carried out tomorrow."
 Coach Kazuki grimaced, brows furrowing in thought. "So we're really gonna play God huh? This is gonna bite us in the ass."
 Akari chuckled. "I'd appreciate it if you didn't jinx us old man."
 "You guys already took care of that by yourselves." Coach Kazuki shrugged then pointedly gazed at the silver-haired child. "What about the kid?"
 Akari's smile froze. He listlessly gazed at the child before sighing. "The punishment is compulsory." Turning around, he patted Coach Kazuki on the shoulder. "Take care of them, coach. Tomorrow's a big day." With that, Akari left the training grounds.
 Coach Kazuki shook his head. With a wave of his hands, two guards walked up to Taiga, their imposing presence destroying any hopes of resistance. Surprisingly, Taiga only gave the two guards a glance before resolutely following them off the training ground, his expression grim. The children could not help but shiver as they watched his back disappear behind a pair of sliding doors.
 They all knew the horrors of HELL. None of them would be able to face it consecutively with such bravado and indifference. Even Kugo, who grimaced as he was carried off to the medbay could not help but feel a sense of inferiority as he stared at the silver-haired boy's back.
 Unnoticed, Henri's smiling gaze faltered, heavy tremors shaking her heart. Although she had never experienced it herself, she only needed to look at the other children's expressions to understand how truly terrifying hell was.
 This was a debt she would never be able to repay.
 *****
 Ten minutes later, within a pristine white room, Taiga coldly stared at the sole chair placed at the center of the room. Without prodding, he settled into the chair, his expression calm as clamps fastened his limbs to the chair's arms and legs. Soon, his vision began to cloud over as a helmet descended onto his head, until, eventually, everything went black.
 Taiga floundered within this dark world, unable to feel, breathe or taste anything. Against his wishes, his heart began to pound heavily, increasing in tempo as three massive flames appeared. Strangely, their light did nothing to brighten the darkness, as if the world itself absorbed all light. Taiga's fingers began to shake, his resolute expression beginning to crumble as the flames began to morph, and split till they formed three distinct words.
 WELCOME TO HELL
 Taiga let out a defiant roar as a pair of pistols appeared in his hands. He swiftly pointed them forward, frantically squeezing the trigger as an apparition tore through the floating flames. The being should have once been a beautiful young girl. But now, only snow-white bones remained, clad in a loose hammock closer. Its face was sunken, tiny flames the only sign of life in its hollow eyes socket. Its ethereal form seemed to shift in and out of reality as it sped towards the child. However, it was blown back by the bullets fired from Taiga's guns.
 But, there was no relief in the young boy's face as, a split-second later, the apparition paused in mid-air before turning to glare at Taiga, a creepy grin on its yellowed teeth. Its ghastly voice, akin to despair incarnate traveled across the void to Taiga's ears. "
 "You can't kill what is already dead!" With mad cackles, it led a charge as dozens of apparitions and undead tore burst through the flames, each face familiar to the silver-haired youth. Its bone-chilling laugh echoed throughout the void as Taiga's bullets kept bouncing off it. "You can't kill off your past!" Its claws sunk into Taiga's face, drawing the first blood of what would be a long torturous experience.
 *C"5gYM


 **************
 A/N: Hey Guys, sorry it's been awhile since the last update. Its been a busy couple of weeks for me. Had a test week, then we gotta prepare our Seminars for presentation. *sigh* Final Year has a shit load of work to do. Good news is, although I haven't had time to write, I've had time to build up on the story for a good couple of chapters to come. Which means when I'm finally free, I won't have any of those pesky writer's blocks for at least ten-fifteen chappies.
 Hope y;all had a fun Halloween. Happy November, and may we all have a great and awesome week!


 Picture of the Day!!!
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 The above was drawn by wackietobackie . I personally love it! Especially Kira! She looks so cool! What do you guys think!?

 

Chapter 3: The Virus

Three Hours Later.

 Outside the room where a young boy underwent some of the worst psychological traumas known to man stood a group of scientists monitoring the child's biometric data. Soulless eyes callously examined numbers and charts on lifeless screens, the human behind the data long pushed to the recycling bin in their minds, to only be recalled when absolutely needed.
 At the center of these zombies stood a tall, extremely thin Japanese man who seemed to almost disappear into his lab coat. It was difficult to ascertain his age as a result of his sickly appearance, but he could have been somewhere in the range of mid-thirties to early-forties. Despite the man's stature, he managed to cut an imposing figure on account of his cold-blooded, snake-like gaze which seemed to peer into the deepest recesses of the hearts of men, yet carried no empathy for what it saw. The man's eyes grew even colder when a small beeping interrupted the silence.
 The man looked at his watch, then back at the child on the screen. "Time's up. Let him go." His voice was faint, yet carried an irresistible authority to it. No sooner had he spoken did the simulated torture come to a swift end as two orderlies rushed up to the boy. They removed the helmet and unfastened the straps before the larger of the two picked the frail and limp Taiga. They then walked off-screen, most likely to administer some first aid to the child.
 Whoosh!
 The snake-eyed man turned to the door which just opened. As expected, Akari walked in, gaze heavy as he watched the orderlies take Taiga off-screen.
 "Saika," Akari greeted as he came up to the snake-eyed man.
 "Well, well, if it isn't Leader Akari," Saika returned the greeting with a placid gaze. "What brings you down here?"
 Akari frowned, but ultimately retained his calm. "I was informed you want to implement Rebirth tomorrow. Is this true?"
 "Yes of course," Saika stated matter-of-factly. "These children were ready a month ago. I only postponed it because you asked. Well, time's up."
 Akari's gaze trembled slightly. "These children are not rea—"
 "Need I remind you the importance of our work?" Saika challenged before Akari could finish. "This project directly alters the fate of thousands, no, millions of lives. And you want to delay it further because you're inside's acting up now?" The scientist's cold gaze shifted from Akari to the data on the screen before him. "Don't worry. My work is perfect. There will be no errors."
 Akari hands balled into fists by his side, teeth tightly clenched together with rage, but he ultimately decided to keep his calm, managing to grind out, "Just remember, there are real, breathing children behind those numbers."
 "These are disposable assets," Saika sneered with contempt. "If they fail, we can always replace them. The world is not lacking in malnourished, desperate children." Those hellish eyes turned to Akari, sending goosebumps down the latter's spine at the callous indifference within them. As if sensing Akari's unease, Saika chuckled softly. "But don't worry. Like I said, I never fail. We will not have to dispose of your little children."
 Akari's gaze hardened. If looks were enough to kill, Saika would have long been on his way to the underworld. Alas, even if Akari had the ability to slay the scientist with his eyes, he wouldn't dare to do so. He too knew the importance of this job, and how much time, money and resources had been poured into it over the last decade. He could not jeopardize the mission at this late stage out of selfishness. He could only pray that Saika's ability matched his callous arrogance and the experiment was a success.
 After all, if it was, the kids would be thanking them despite all the suffering they had been put through... At least, Akari chose to believe that.

"I will hold you to those words," Akari stated, his tone carrying a hint of threat. Without waiting for Saika's reply, he stormed out of the horrid room.
 Sharp glints sparked in Saika's eyes as he watched Akari's back disappear behind the door. His lips curled up into a devious smile as he mocked, "Ignorant buffoon. Let's see how long you can keep up that high and mighty attitude." Casting Akari to the back of his mind, he called out to one of the scientists. "Make final preparations for Rebirth. We commence in three hours."
 "What about Taiga, Saika-sensei?" The scientist inquired.
 Saika sent the scientist a dissatisfied glare. He absolutely hated being questioned. "Who?"
 The scientist swallowed hard, but managed to let out, "The child who just went through HELL, Sir."
 "Ah, Subject 23," Saika murmured with a hint of recognition. "What about him?"
 The scientist fidgeted under the viper-like gaze. "He was just put through a lot of mental strain. There's no telling how he would react to the gene transfusion."
 "And? How is that my concern exactly?"
 The scientist shivered, unable to contain his shock at Saika's apparent disregard for the child's life. "My apologies Saika-sensei. I will go ahead and have him prepped immediately."
 "Uh-huh," Saika replied with a sneer. "You go do that." The sneer deepened as he watched the frightened scientist scamper off. "Every last one of them. Completely useless." Saika turned his gaze from the scientist, his brain already pushing the encounter to the trash bin. Saika's gaze turned sinister, his tongue slithering over his lips as he barked out orders to the remaining operatives, all in preparation of what promised to be the culmination of his life's work.
 Elsewhere, while Saika prepared for his big moment, Taiga was given a rude awakening by the chilled biting of a bucket of cold water. The young child woke with a start, screaming at the top of his lungs as he shot to his feet. Or, well, tried to. He soon found his hands and feet were bound to a chair he was sitting on. The stinging pain from the restraints helped Taiga to come to his senses. He focused on the pain, letting him realize he had returned to reality where the undead would no longer be able to reach him.
 Taiga took a deep breath to calm his frayed nerves. Having collected himself, he raised his head, yellow eyes calmly taking in his surroundings. Two guards with electric batons stood at guard behind a graying scientist whose gaze was centered on the child, carrying hints of worry and pity. He recognized the scientist to be a Kiiragi-sensei, the one usually in charge of administering the HELL punishment and ensuring Taiga did not mentally collapse afterward. Flanking the scientist were five orderlies, one of whom held a metal tray cart whose contents were shielded from view by a white cloth.
 Taiga could not make sense of why one of these usually callous scientists would have such an expression, so he tried to fish for some information. "What's going on? Usually, you dump me in my room."
 In response to the child's question, Kiiragi only shook his head. There was no need worrying the child about something which might not happen. At the very least, let him live his last moments in blissful ignorance. Kiiragi's gaze strengthened, having cobbled together his once shaken resolve. "There is a new experiment. We were tasked with preparing you."
 An experiment? A sense of impending doom overwhelmed Taiga. His eyes shrunk, muscles tightening with increased tension.
 Kiiragi seemed to notice the subtle changes in the child's aura as he immediately added in a reassuring tone. "Ah, you aren't the only one going through this experiment," he explained. "All the children will be undergoing the exact same treatment."

"Treatment?" Taiga repeated the keyword, nerves visibly loosening up. If the other children would be going through the same experiment, it shouldn't be too dangerous. At least, he didn't believe whoever bought them had spent so much money and time just to throw them all away at this juncture.
 "We'll be improving your brain functions beyond anything a human has ever experienced," Kiiragi explained. Probably, a part of him felt it would indeed be too bad if the child left the world completely ignorant. Furthermore, the promise of nigh omniscience could serve as a sufficient motivator, maybe even alleviate the stress on the child's mind. "That said, we have to begin if we are to meet up with the others." He motioned to the orderlies who came to either side of the young child. The cloth covering the tray was removed, revealing a pair of scissors, a bowl, a syringe, and a couple of small bottles with special solutions.
 Taiga already knew what was coming so he resolutely shut his eyes. Sure enough, moments later, he felt a prick on his right arm. Before long, he was once again faced with the nightmares that plagued him during his sleep, this time with no reprieve from Henri. Taiga wasn't sure how long he suffered, but like always, he was eventually awoken to massive overhead lights shining directly into his eyes.
 Taiga quickly shut his eyes, but not in time to stop the searing pain that shot up to his brain from the intensity and heat. Taiga saw red, his eyelids unable to stop the painfully bright light from piercing through, causing him to almost scream out in pain. In fact, he could hear the nearby cries of some other children.
 Just when Taiga was beginning to wonder just what type of sadistic punishment the scientists had conjured up this time, the pain abruptly seized. Taiga's eyelids tentatively cracked open, bright spots coloring his vision. Luckily, it seemed like the overhead lights had been shut off, allowing Taiga a clear view of the cold, gray ceiling above. Taiga attempted to get his bearings, but unfortunately, it seemed his head, like the rest of his body, had been bound in place. From his body's orientation and the semi-soft material beneath him, it seemed like he was laying on some kind of gurney.
 By this point, Taiga was already used to such situations so rather than panic, he looked down the corner of his eyes to see if he could gain any more information about his whereabouts. He instantly regretted his decision. Oh how much better it would be to have remained clueless.
 Out the corner of his eyes, he could see other children strapped down to gurneys. What chilled him, however, were the massive robot arms hanging just behind the head of every child. Only, rather than fingers, these arms ended in arrays of medical cutting tools. It was at this point that Taiga finally noticed that all the children were shaved bald as if to allow for easier access to their skulls.
 Taiga had seen a lot of things in his eleven-twelve plus years on the earth. He had done some terrible things and seen even worse things done to others and to himself. He had never believed anything in this world could shake him anymore, but seeing those robot arms emotionlessly standing behind each child's head sent a chill up his spine. Although he already knew it would be fruitless, he could not help but struggle against his restraints.
 Taiga's struggles seemed to set off a chain reaction, as the children began to scream in terror as more of them became aware of their surroundings. However, predictably, despite all their effort and screams, no one managed to break free.
 "Henri!" Taiga called out with everything he had. He didn't know why, but the thought of Henri going through this experience terrified him more than his own impending doom.
 "Taiga!"
 Taiga's eyes swiveled to his left where he could barely make out a shape on the gurney next to him. He hadn't recognized her the first time because her trademark blonde hair was gone, but he would never mistake her voice. "Henri, are you okay!?"

"I'm fine," To his surprise, Henri's tone was rather calm, carrying a hint of laughter even. "Well, as fine as I can being strapped to a death machine and all." With a soft sigh, she lamented, "Can't believe they cut my hair. That's just cruel."
 Taiga froze, unable to come to terms with her unnatural calmness. "Are you sure you're okay?"
 Henri let out a short laugh. "What, do you think I've gone crazy?" Some of the children nearby listened to the conversation, sharing the exact same thoughts in their heads. No one in their right minds would be able to laugh in this situation. Henri's next words, however, sent a shock throughout the whole room. "I won't die."
 It was such a soft declaration, but the impact it had on the terrified children was akin to a thunderstorm exploding in their hearts. No one said a word, their minds hung on the words of the strangely over-confident girl. It has to be said that in the end, despite their maturity, these were all children, none of which had even hit thirteen. When these children felt their world collapse around them, they only wanted someone to reassure them that it would be alright, no matter how illogical it might be. It seemed Henri had taken up that role. Even the stoic Taiga, although he did not believe her words for a second, found himself drawn in.
 "I survived Hadet," Henri softly whispered. "In order to survive, I ate garbage rejected by dogs." The children remained silent, each one recalling their various 'homes'. "I was forced to do things I'll regret my entire life." Henri's tone grew stronger with each passing word, her words reverberating in the children's hearts. "After surviving all that, you think I'm gonna die in some hidden room in the middle of nowhere?" Chuckling softly, Henri stated in a matter-of-fact tone, "Not happening. I'm not going to die. Neither will you Taiga, so stop worrying so much." A child sniffled. "None of us will die here. This is just a scary experiment that's all."
 As if annoyed by her declarations, the mechanical arms whirred to life, descending over the children's heads with cold detachment. Faced with the monsters, the children could no longer hold their calm. Some broke into tears, while others began to wail out loud.
 "DON'T CRY!" A single voice tore through the hall, forcing the despairing children to center on its source. "Don't cry. We'll be fine, I promise." There was something soothing about the little girl's voice. The children could not help but be drawn to it like babes after the pied piper. They quieted down, whimpering slightly as they faced the robot claws.
 It was a good thing the children were spaced apart and could only see each other from the corner of their eyes. It made sure only two people could see Henri, and out of those two, only one knew her well enough to know what she was really thinking. That was because at that very moment Henri was pale, her arms shaking in their restraints as she tried hard to contain her fear. Tears unceasingly poured down her eyes, but whether in a bid to convince the children or herself, she kept up the confident façade, talking the rest of the children through the nightmare.
 Taiga would later ask her what was going through her mind at that moment. Her answer would be, she could not think of anything. She just didn't want to die so pathetically. And what's more, even if they were to really die there, she did not want to give the sicko scientists the satisfaction of watching the children panic.
 The mechanical arms seemed to have tired of toying with the children, as in the next second they stabbed into the children's arms, releasing some concoctions into their bloodstreams. Seconds later, the children found themselves entirely immobilized. In fact, they might as well have been dead as they could not even feel the gurneys beneath them. If it were not for the fact they could still see, they would have assumed they had gone to the afterlife.
 Unfortunately, the deadening of their nerves was just the first step of what these robotic arms had in store. Soon after the first injection had been inserted, a second followed, this time the solution within was dark-green, but it had a strangely sinister vibe to it. Of course, it might have just been a trick of the mind projecting terror onto the syringe.

Taiga's gaze hardened as the syringe once again broke his skin and emptied its contents into his bloodstream. His eyes widened in shock as the contents of the drug rapidly crushed it way through his systems. It was beyond tyrannical! It directly mutilated his veins and muscles, somehow corroding his bones in the process. It destroyed all genes found in its path, before restructuring them in its preferred form as it advanced, leaving tougher, stronger bones and muscles behind.
 It could be imagined that if their nerves had not been deadened in advance, the children would have gone into shock and most probably perished from the pain alone. Before long, the children's gurneys were soaked with blood as even their skins were not spared from the rapid corrosion and rebirth.
 The tyrannical solution converged on Taiga's heart, mangling it beyond recognition. Somehow, though, the destroyed cells regenerated fast enough to prevent any lasting damage. The new heart beat with such ferocity and strength it would have smashed apart his ribcage had it not already been reformed by the solution.
 Several hours had passed since the drug had first been injected into their systems, and though the children were cognizant of the chaos in their body, they could neither feel nor influence it. Some began to relax, allowing the drug to do its work. Since they could not feel the pain, why should they be afraid? The simple mentality of a child.
 However, reality would once again prove to be a cruel mistress.
 The mechanical arms which had remained silent the whole time suddenly whirred to life. The indifferent machines swapped out the syringe for some cutting tools then took point behind their shaved heads.
 Taiga's eyes widened in disbelief as he felt something poke his scalp. Although it wasn't painful, the sensation of something scraping against his skull was just too uncomfortable. He peeked at Henri hoping to get some clues.
 Once again he regretted his actions.
 The young boy mentally shook at the sight of the bloodied mechanical arm casually lifting, then folding back a significant part of Henri's scalp. Although he could not see it from his angle, he had cracked quite a few skulls in his time, so he could easily picture the bloody scene exposed underneath. Was this why they were shaved!? Taiga could not ponder on the question as his body froze immediately at the sight of a familiar green liquid dripping out of a syringe which had at some point, been equipped by the arm.
 Unlike the first syringe, the needle on this thing was at least twenty centimeters long, making it look less like a clinical instrument and more akin to a tool of murder. Preceding the syringe, however, was a tiny drill which drove into the exposed skull. Shortly after that, the syringe stabbed into the exposed brain tissue, depositing its contents within.
 Taiga could not follow anything else, as his entire body instantly went into rapid shock akin to a thousand lightning bolts slamming directly into his brain. It seemed the nerve-reducing agent they were injected with earlier could do nothing to soften the blow as the young child was forced to suffer blow after intense blow till he began to lose his sanity.
 Luckily, his body could no longer handle the pain, and he instantly shut down. Unfortunately, however, he was once again transported to the familiar void. Only this time, something was different. Terrifyingly different.
 Previously, Taiga was only vaguely aware of his own existence within the dream world. He instinctively knew the environment was fake which contributed to him being able to retain his sanity after many nights of torture. Somehow, this time, things had taken a drastic turn. For one, he could clearly feel his presence in this world, down to his very heartbeat. If his memory was not intact, he might have even suspected he had been transported to another world.

Pitter-patter...
 Taiga raised his head, eyes straining to see past the dark to where the sound originated. His gaze constricted, heart tightening with fear as a familiar face stumbled towards him, her feet echoing against the water-like surface. Taiga had been tormented by this girl for far too long in so many different ways. He had no intention of sticking around. He took advantage of the fact he could feel his entire body to spin around, urging his legs to flee across the dark void.
 Grab!
 Taiga's attempt halted prematurely, his feet grabbed by a disfigured hand that shot out of the ground. In his panic, Taiga made an instinctive motion, pointing his hand at the arm and 'squeezing the trigger'. To his shock, a pistol actually appeared in his palm, the subsequent bang proving the bullet actually fired.
 Taiga's momentary euphoria was immediately replaced with despair when the bullet harmlessly bounced off the arm like it was nothing. A cold breath brushed against the young man's neck. Taiga slowly turned to see that disfigured girl grinning at him, broken teeth barely hanging onto her gum.
 "We're already dead, Reaper," the girl coldly mocked, her voice akin to a grate. Her fingers curled around Taiga's throat leaving a burn mark from the intense nail-biting cold. "Bullets and Knives can't hurt the dead." She casually bit into Taiga's shoulder, relishing in the sheer horror in his eyes. She lifted her head, cheeks bloodied by the morsel of flesh held between her lips. Her bloodied lips curled up at the tears running down the frightened child's face. Swallowing the "Welcome to Retribution, Reaper."
 Taiga's frantic cries reached no one as the apparition bent down and hungrily bit off chunks off his arm. Taiga's mouth was wide open, his eyes bloodshot, but he couldn't even muster the strength to scream. For reasons unknown, the pain had exponentially shot up, even compared to HELL. Strength left the child's limbs, his mind nearly breaking under the pain as he was slowly consumed bite after bite.
 Initially, Taiga looked forward to his death. At the very least, he would finally be free from the torture. However, fate was far crueler. Just as the whites of his bones began to peek through the gore, his entire body regenerated, healing all the injuries in a flash.
 Despair colored Taiga's eyes. His heart cracked, unable to withstand the implications of what that meant. The Young man almost gave up entirely, but an image of a blond girl with a brilliant smile flashed in his mind. Moments after, it was replaced with Henri's sharp conviction proclaiming he would live.
 Taiga's dull eyes suddenly flared with stubbornness. A powerful desire to live burst through the young man's core. The dead were unceremoniously blown off him. "I won't die," Taiga mumbled through the pain as he stumbled to his feet. Ignoring the dead on the floor, he began to take one hard step after another, in an attempt to get as far away as possible.
 Taiga's lumbered across the water's surface. He did not know where he was going nor did he care. He only knew he had to be as far away from the dead as possible to have a chance at survival. And so he took one painful step after the other. He was not sure how long he trudged for, but he was eventually caught by one of the dead and had an entire arm torn clean off.
 Rather than be clouded with despair, the young boy's eyes sparked with fury and determination. 
"I will not die! I will return Henri! I will return to you!" With a loud scream, Taiga's stubborn will to live once again blasted the dead off him. He once again continued his trek across the watery surface.
 And so a cycle was born. Taiga would run. He would get caught and eaten. His desire to see Henri once again would force his assailants off him, and then he would run.
 No one knows how long this cycle repeated himself. Taiga himself had lost count of how many times he had died in this hellzone. The psychological strain had begun to seize a hold of him, slowing down his steps and reducing how far the dead were pushed away.

To make matters worse, it seemed the dead were getting faster and smarter as time passed, thereby reducing the amount of time between captures.
 Taiga had no idea how long he'd been running. It could have been weeks, months, maybe even years. Feeling a cold breath on his shoulder, he once again blasted the surrounding dead to the ground. Unfortunately, though, he only managed to take a single step this time before a familiar chill seeped into his shoulder.
 Taiga weakly peeked over his shoulder at the disfigured girl. As expected she bore a cold, mocking grin as she sized up her prey, hollow eyes fixated on the veins on Taiga's neck. "No more running. It's time for retribution Reaper."
 Crack!
 Something in Taiga broke. The stubbornness and drive in his eyes deflated, leaving them empty and void. He had been alternating between tortures and running away from the torture from far too long. Most adults would have given up eons ago, late alone a child his age. He had only lasted this far because he believed he would see Henri once again. But now that he no longer had the strength to run, what was the point?
 Maybe it was retribution. He had killed so many people after all. It was only fair he be destroyed by his past.
 Taiga's muscles relaxed, his clenched fists opening up much to the delight of the dead. They immediately pounced on him, the dead girl lunging for his throat. They all knew this was the final time. Once he died, there would be no regeneration. That was because his brain would shut down after accepting his death.
 "TAIGA!"
 The dead girl's mangled teeth stopped inches from his throat, its eyes bulging with shock and rage. "Nooo! Die! You Must Die!" Her hysterical shrieks fell on deaf ears, however, as Taiga's lifeless eyes suddenly lit up with blinding light.
 "Get Off!" Taiga's roar sent all the zombies tumbling for several dozens of meters till they were all out of sight. He weakly fell to one knee, but his gaze was strong, lips curling up into a satisfied smile. That was because he could see above, a familiar sunlight beginning to pierce the darkness. From that sun, a golden angel glided down towards him.
 A warm smile on her face, Henri stretched out her hand to the lost boy. "You will live," she said, matter-of-fact. "This is not where you die."
 "I will live," Taiga repeated as he accepted the offered hand. Slowly the angel pulled him up and towards the light.
 "You can't run!"
 Taiga looked down at the horde of dead running towards his location, at the head of which was that familiar disfigured girl.
 "You can't run from your past! You will pay! You will pay for killing us all!"
 "Maybe so," Taiga softly replied as he ascended towards the crack in the void. "However, until then I will live. I will live with her." With those words, Taiga completely ignored the hysterical shrieks as he was slowly enveloped by the light.
 ****
 Taiga lightly groaned. He felt like someone had commissioned a drilling exercise in his skull. Despite a massive headache, he managed to pry his eyelids open. The first thing he saw was a couple of fluorescent overhead lights shining brightly down at him.
 Taiga's brows lightly creased, feeling like he had forgotten something important. It was at this moment a shadow blocked the light. Squinting a little, he recognized the familiar ocean-blue eyes and what seemed to be a small field of gold.
 Taiga did not get to say a word before his neck was tightly wrapped in a bear hug. "Taiga, Taiga! Are you really awake?" He could feel a moisture wetting his chest. Taiga was even more confused. He wanted to ask what the hell was going on but... "I thought you would die!"

Boom!
 Like a busted dam, the gates shutting off Taiga's memories crashed down, allowing the events of his dream torture to come rushing back in full detail.
 Taiga froze. He was overcome by an emotion he could not comprehend or put into words. All he could do was wrap his arms around her shoulder and pull her closer into his embrace. His grip was tight, his arms shaking somewhat as if he was afraid she would disappear from his sight should he let go. Looking down at the head buried in his chest. Judging from the field of golden hair that had grown since the last time he saw her, he estimated he had been out for at least a month or two.
 How long had she waited for him? How long had she called out to him?
 How long did she try till her voice finally reached him?
 Taiga did not know how to express what he was feeling. He only knew he would be dead a thousand times over if it were not for Henri. He was not sure how he knew, but he knew that if he had accepted his death in that world, he would have died for real, for whatever reason. The only reason he was still alive was that he had Henri to look forward to. And in the end, when he finally lost all hope, it was again her voice which brought him back from the brink. To call him appreciative would be the greatest understatement of the century.
 Taiga pulled Henri from his chest, allowing him to sit upright on the bed. Henri sat on the bed, reddened eyes worriedly looking over Taiga's body to make sure he was really alright. Seeing her worrying gaze, all the pent-up emotions within exploded all at once.
 Fuelled by a primal instinct, he pulled Henri towards himself and pressed his lips against hers. It was a desperate kiss, pouring all of himself into her. His arm wrapped around her waist and dragged her tight as if trying to meld her body into his.
 Henri's eyes widened with shock, especially when the arm around her waist pulled her deeper. It was so forceful and a little painful, but she did not mind. A small smile played on her lips. Closing her eyes, she took the initiative.
 Taiga froze as a wet tongue parted his lips and invaded his mouth. His clearly inexperienced tongue was easily wrestled to the ground as the invader claimed his mouth for her own. Electric sparks exploded in the young boy's mind as she slithered over the walls of his mouth, marking the territory as hers. Taiga raged, his tongue rising as it fought for its territory. He cross-invaded, leaving his mark, and claiming her as his own - the other part of his soul.
 Only when they were forced to come up for air did the battle come to a temporary ceasefire. Breathing hard, Taiga rested his forehead against Henri's, an exceedingly rare playful smile on his face. "Thank you. You saved my life."
 Henri buried her head next to his chest, listening to his quickened heartbeat. "Don't talk rubbish. You saved my life every day. I'm the one who should be thanking you." Taiga wanted to protest but she sealed his lips with a brief kiss. Admiring the burning yellow eyes, she whispered, "Welcome home Taiga."
 Taiga sighed, his heart relaxing as he whispered right back, "I'm home."
 *cough*
 Taiga turned to the side, where an embarrassed Ford stood, scratching the back of his head. "Just wanted to say, we're happy you're back."
 "Yeah, ain't the same without the competition." Surprisingly Kugo also stood there, his gaze level. However, there was clearly a hint of relief, however small, evident by the way his muscles visibly relaxed.
 "I'm glad you're alive." By his side as always was Sahi. Unlike Kugo, the relief was quite obvious as she had a hand on her heart.
 The trio were not the only ones present. It seemed the entire group had come to wish him well, all coming one after another to display their relief and joy.
 Taiga suddenly got a bad feeling. "Why does it feel like you guys were expecting a funeral?"
 "The doctors said this was your last day," Ford answered. "If you didn't wake up, they would have pulled the plug."
 Taiga shivered as he turned to meet the other gazes. Judging from the way they looked away, he shook his head. Seemed it was the truth. "How long was I out?"
 "Three months," Ford replied. "The last of us woke up after three weeks. You were under far too long. Doctors began to feel you wouldn't wake up. Felt it would be better to cut their losses."
 Taiga looked down at Henri with gratitude. It would seem she saved him in more ways than one.
 Before he could get a chance to thank her some more, a troop of doctors and nurses marched into the room and dismissed all the children. Sizing up Taiga like a prized turkey, they began running various tests...
 

 **************
 A/N: Hello Guys! It's been a few months since my last release. I humbly apologize for the delay. There have been a lot of issues which piled up together have prevented me from writing this chapter, greatest of which was the worst case of writer's block I've ever had. From someone who rarely gets writer's block, this was a huge shock to me. 
 Even more annoying was the fact that this was not the usual case of writer's block. Rather than having nothing to write, I had too much to write, and I could not find a way to mesh it all into a single chapter (Originally, Taiga's backstory was only supposed to have three chapters.) I could have shrunk it, but a lot of important details would have suffered. For example, the origin of Taiga's phobia of the dead and ghosts. 
 However, I'm glad to say I finally found the right balance after weeks of deliberation. THe chapter still took me about a week or so to write as there were a lot of emotions I felt needed to be shown but wasn't exactly sure how to show it.
 Anyway, I finally decided to add one last chapter of Taiga's backstory. It's not really a spoiler to say it will be titled the 'Death of Henri'. It will be the finale of this flashback. After which we will immediately dive back to the present.
 Once again, I would like to apologize for my absence over the past two months. After my exams in December, I went home and didn't really have a working Internet Connection. Got back to school early January and have been busting my ass off since to get this chapter and the new UF chapter available for you guys.
 Hope y'all had a great Christmas (holiday) and New Year celeberation.
 The writer's block has been dismantled, the floodgates are open. 
 Let the Parallel Saga Commence!

 

Chapter 4: First Blood

Three Years Later,

 Combat Suit Test Facility.
 Three years had passed since the children were injected with the Rebirth virus. The effects of the virus proved to be a resounding success, exponentially increasing the children's physiological and cognitive abilities. Owing to the success, the scientists, after a year passed, swiftly moved into Phase 2, designing a range of metallic armors which the children were expected to operate.
 The new machines needed a place where they could be tested without fear of damaging the surroundings. This lead to the building of a new, stadium-shaped facility with a flat, round surface area double the size of a regular football field. The grounds were further rigged such that obstacles slid out of the ground, forming whatever shapes they wanted. Furthermore, looking at the field through special goggles or glasses allowed them to simulate entire ecosystems for potential matches.
 It had taken just over a year for the building to be completed. On its launch day, the children, now controlling the new humanoid suits combated in an open free-for-all. It had to be said that of all the children, Henri showed the greatest improvement. Having been released from the shackles of a bad heart by the virus, her superior physique began to shine through, thoroughly trumping over the rest of the children... save one.
 Currently, the ground was devoid of obstacles, with only two metallic, humanoid robots battling it out at the center. The two slightly bulky robots traded blow for blow, savagely tearing out bolts and fluid from each other without care for the consequences. On the ground around the robots were the remains of what used to be external weapon systems, forcing the two into the currently terrible melee.
 Eventually, one of the robots seized an opportunity when its opponent's arm locked as a result of a busted joint. It drove a sharp uppercut. Its fist tore through the opponent's jaw and burst out its skull. The robot sharply retreated as the resulting sparks ignited some liquid.
 Boom!
 The robot came to a halt as the opponent's head exploded. Metal flew in all directions like dangerous shrapnel. Luckily, the robot had given enough distance such that even those that managed to reach it could only bounce off its tough exterior.
 The opposite robot finally dropped to the ground, having lost its vital functions, allowing the victorious one to finally relax.
 Surprisingly, the front of the robot suddenly folded backward such that its components slid into its back and exposed its interior, surprisingly revealing a young man. The teenager stepped out of the robot and swallowed a deep mouthful of air. He wiped the sweat off his forehead, then ran his hand through his short silver hair.
 Taiga, who had just enjoyed the first of his rapid growth spurts was now 145cm tall, with a lean, muscular physique that shone through the tight spandex they were forced to wear during training. A pair of sharp yellow eyes swiveled to the left to see an approaching group of scientists.
 Taiga frowned a little as he spotted a familiar snake-eyed asshole leading the group. Over the past years, if there was one person he did not want to meet the most, it would be this snake-eyed monster. The man was never satisfied, always looking to push tests past reasonable boundaries, often times putting the children's lives at risk. Luckily, no one had died yet. But honestly, it was beginning to feel like it was only a matter of time.
 The only reason Taiga had not exploded was that with Henri's current strength, he really had nothing to fear.
 "Saika-Sensei," Taiga curtly greeted once the man was within arm's reach.
 "Taiga-kun," Saika reciprocated, though with a fanatic grin attacked. The snake-eyes gleamed with excited sharpness as he glanced at the fallen robot. "Finally, you've proven you can control more than one suit at the same time. To be able to split your attention between two bodies... How did it feel?"

"Disconcerting at first," Taiga honestly replied. There was nothing to gain from being sassy or lying to this demon. "It took some getting used to, but I think I got the hang of it."
 The situation was like this: Amongst the children, while Henri excelled in physique, Taiga's cognitive abilities somehow surpassed all the other children combined, to the extent it could rival some computers. This truth only came to light after some coincidental tests, and since then Saika had been pushing the envelope trying to see just what the limit of the child was. All this led to the current experiment.
 All the combat suits were linked through a centralized system. This was such that they were easier to track, communicate with and shutdown should the situation arise. Taiga, through his suit, hacked into another suit through the central system and began battling it. Splitting his mind into two in order to fight from both viewpoints had been taxing at first, but his mind surprisingly adapted very quickly, allowing him to easily orchestrate a desperate battle with relative ease. He even had a feeling two suits was not his limit. If he exerted himself, he might even be able to go as high as five suits.
 "Haha! That's good! Great!" Saika praised, a sickening grin on his face. "Imagine the war potential if a soldier could control more than one suit at a time!" Suddenly his mood crashed, a dark gleam in his eyes. "If only the other trash could be like you."
 "Sorry?" Because the last sentence was muttered, Taiga failed to hear it, but Saika was clearly not in the mood to repeat himself.
 Saika's eyes lit up, his body jolting straight as if shot by a bolt of lightning. "Of course! Why can't they be like him?" Because the Rebirth Virus was a one-time use item, he had felt the children's cognitive improvement had come to a screeching halt. However, who said that had to be the case? If the virus could not work, there were other ways to improve their abilities. Hehe, why have one super kid when you could have forty. Saika swiftly ordered the remaining scientists to quickly finish up before rushing back to his office. He had some important calls to make.
 Taiga, meanwhile, waited until the scientists' examinations were finished. Only after ensuring there was no damage to his brain from the exercise did the scientists give him permission to go rejoin the rest of the children. Taiga happily abandoned the drones to their calculations. He jogged to the changing room, where he took a quick shower before changing into a loose, white, wooly, long-sleeved shirt, a pair of slacks and comfortable running shoes.
 Taiga particularly loved the shirt because of the numerous holes in it...... Okay, he had no idea why anyone would like these shirts, but Henri loved it. Said it made him look like a bad boy, whatever the hell that meant. Regardless of its meaning, that sentence was more than enough for Taiga. More than half his wardrobe had clothes with similar styles.
 Taiga lazily made his way through the compound, hands in pockets as he contemplated his current situation. So far, the scientists—aside from Saika, the creep—seemed to be satisfied with the children's progression, pleased even. As a result, the dangerous experiments had fallen to an all-time low over the past year. In fact, if it were not for the odd combat simulation, this life was much better compared to the previous one.
 The corner of the young man's lips rose slightly. If he had still been in Hadet, he would never have met Henri. Or maybe if by chance he had, he would never have appreciated her the way he did now. In fact, there was no guarantee he would've been alive long enough to be fifteen. Taiga could not believe it, but he was secretly glad he had been bought all those years ago. He would have to find some time to thank that son-of-a-bitch Akari one of these days.
 Taiga took a deep breath, enjoying the fresh air as the cool, evening breeze ruffled his hair. Ah, life was so good, Taiga silently mused as he lightly increased his gait. Maybe it was because no one was around to judge him, but he soon found himself lightly whistling to a track Henri loved to play.

Taiga soon came to a stop just before a large clearing where several small rings had been set up along with other equipment for testing the combat suits' capabilities. Taiga looked at his watch then at the robots battling in the rings. Almost like clockwork, they all came to a sudden halt, simultaneously freezing in their actions. Taiga's smile bloomed even brighter as one of the combat suits opened up, allowing a heavenly beauty to descend upon the mortal earth.
 No sooner had her dainty feet touch the earth did she blast off with a speed that would leave the Bolts of the world gaping. The golden-haired beauty all but barreled into Taiga at Mach speed. Luckily, Taiga was already used to her crazy approach and successfully braced himself for impact. Although Taiga had the wind knocked out of him, his right hand snaked around the assailant's waist, and with a light pull and a quick pivot, he swung her around, killing off the rest of her momentum.
 Taiga's grin was as bright as a lighthouse as he gazed into Henri's mischievous, twinkling blue eyes. Like a fisherman out at sea, he found solace in those calming waters. He pulled her close, burying his head in the softness of her golden locks. Only after a full three seconds had passed did he pull back. With a sly chuckle, he teased her, "Miss me?"
 Henri wrapped her arms around his neck as she gazed lovingly into those blazing suns, enjoying the warmth of their endless love. "What do you think?" She gave a snarky reply. Without giving Taiga a chance to reply, she pulled down on his neck and kissed him.
 "Aiya, will the two of you give us single guys a break," a familiar voice teased, forcing Henri to reluctantly pull away and glare at him. "Woah, woah," Ford laughed with his hands in the air. "You already whooped my ass during training. Not looking for another serving." Like Taiga, Ford had also grown a lot in the past three years. Probably as a result of the virus, he had a tough body that would not lose to that of young adults.
 "Leave them alone Ford. Everyone knows you can't get in the middle of the star couple," Kugo laughed as he approached, his right arm slung over Sahi's shoulders. The years had been kind to the two of them. Kugo was the absolute strongest amongst the guys, standing at over 180cm and sporting a muscular frame that would leave many body-builders ashamed. He was known for the massive combat suit tailor-made for him. Aside from Henri, no one else could operate the bulking suit, but she preferred the slicker frames so he was indeed the most intimidating amongst the group.
 Sahi, by his side, was still as competitive as ever, even more so now that she had grown into a beautiful woman second only to Henri on the campus. She always challenged Henri to battles every day, and even though she repeatedly lost, she held no grudges. All she had was an intense desire to be number one. She had long since abandoned her juvenile attitude of going against Henri whenever she had a chance. On the contrary, she was Henri's closest friend on the campus over the past three years. "Hehe, Ford's just venting because Shi-shi rejected him today."
 Ford suddenly shivered, his eyes widening in shock as he stared at Sahi. "How do you even know that?"
 "He-he," Sahi chuckled. "I saw you lead Shino to the back of the obstacle course. Figured something good was going down so I turned on my suit's receptors"
 Ford paled, his hands dropping listlessly to his sides.
 Pfft...HAHAHAHA!
 Four pairs of eyes turned in shock to the person who was overcome with so much laughter his body was clearly vibrating. Why wouldn't they be shocked? This was Taiga they were talking about. Even if he had mellowed out over the past three years, even turning into a lovesick puppy, he had never laughed out loud. Much less, in such a manner that tears were coming out of his eyes.
 Even Taiga was not exactly sure why he was laughing so much. All he knew was that at the moment, he was the happiest he had ever been in his life. He wasn't killing anymore, held the love of his life in his arms and had friends he could trust in. Even better, the painful experiments had come to an end, and with their current abilities, they were all assured of a great future. How could he not then laugh? How could he not be happy?

Taiga was filled with anticipation towards the future of him and his friends.
 Unfortunately, he had no idea that at this very moment, a phone call that would crush that future was currently taking place.
 *****
 Inside the domed structure, Saika frowned as he screamed at someone on the phone, his voice carrying a hint of impatience, excitement, and frustration. "What do you mean he's dead!?" A flurry of apologies and explanations filtered through, but Saika was not a man who gave a damn about any of that. "What about the programs? Were they completed?"
 "Yes sir, but we cannot locate the prototypes. There is speculation he already uploaded them to prevent tampering on our end."
 Saika frown deepened. Damn, they had lost one of the best minds in the field of Artificial Intelligence. This was not a small loss to the company, especially at this critical juncture. Suspicions arising in his heart, he questioned, "How did he die?" A swift report later, Saika shook his head in disgust. To think a great mind would be gone like that. This was why he did not believe in families. In the end, they were only a burden to great minds like himself.
 Saika rubbed his face with a sigh. There was no need to waste time mulling over maggot food. He turned his attention back to the project, "Transfer the completed programs."
 "How many sir?"
 "All of them."
 "I cannot do that sir. Only one-hundred programs were successfully completed. HQ still needs some to study. Also, 'Genesis' has already been transferred to Tokyo on Mr. Shouyou's orders."
 Saika's brow shot up, but in the end, that was to be expected. It was rumored Genesis was the only A.I program capable of creating other A.Is like itself. If that was the case, he could understand why it had been immediately seized by the higher-ups. The news did not hurt him much though. While it would be nice to have Genesis in his hands, it was not what he needed right now. "Fine. We have sixty-three test subjects here. Send me sixty-three A.I programs. We are moving into the final phase."
 "Sixty-three A.I programs approved. They will be delivered at 2300 hours."
 "Good." With a snort, Saika cut the call. He couldn't help but be pleased with the quality of service. He had placed an order for something as sensitive as A.I programs and he could expect them as soon as nightfall. How many other companies could boast such efficiency?
 Saika sunk into his chair, his lips slowly curving upwards as he envisioned the crazy experiment he was about to perform. Hehehe. Those fogeys think I'm going to use the A.Is in the suits, don't they? Wait till I leave their mouths gaping.
 Saika played through all the possible scenarios in his mind. All the scientists here were on his side, so he did not need to fear a backlash from them. If there was one obstacle to his plan, then it would be the insufferable Akari. However, after proving him wrong three years ago, Akari had been keeping to himself as long as Saika did not go overboard in his treatment of the children. As long as Saika did not alarm him, Akari should not be able to interfere.
 Saika's revealed a sinister grin, calculating the profits he would make from this venture...
 *****
 Two weeks passed since that phone call and went on as normal for Taiga. He would wake up in the morning with Henri in his arms. After moments of watching her sleep, he would reluctantly wake her, after which they would quickly have their baths. Taiga would walk her to her training grounds before leaving for his own. Only on rare days would they train together. However, they did not mind. After training, Taiga would come pick her up, then together with the rest of the crew they would go for a bite, watch a movie or play in the fields. When the sun dipped, they would return to their dorms for a quick shower, after which they would have a deep discussion on what they learned during the day and what they could do to improve.

At ten, the children would disband, each to their own room. Taiga and Henri were one of the few who still shared a room even at their age. It was partly because Taiga could not sleep alone, but really because they were hormonal teenagers who could not get enough of each other.
 Surprisingly though, despite the fact that they had shared a bed for three years, they had not crossed the line in that time. Even though none of the other teenagers believed it, Taiga had indeed not made a move. In fact, he had pretended not to notice the signals Henri had sent him. Who knew why he hesitated so much? Some part of him still couldn't believe his luck and felt if he crossed that line he would wake up to find out he had dreamed all this up. Another part of him was afraid of change.
 All Taiga knew about relationships was what he had exposed to in Hadet. In that land, love did not exist. Even worse, sex was just a tool to cure the depression of another day. He'd assassinated his fair share of fools during their sexual encounters. Most of them bore the same animalistic drive in their eyes during the act, but almost always bore an emptiness afterward like they had just come down from a drug.
 Taiga was afraid he would turn out the same way so he never acted on his impulses. It was better their love remained pure. That way he could peacefully rest in her arms every night. He never wanted to feel that emptiness those men had had in their eyes, nor did he want Henri to ever look at him with the bored indifference and disdain those women hid in the peripherals of their vision.
 If Taiga had explained how he felt to Henri she would have laughed him off and explained the difference between what they had and the hopelessness of those in Hadet. Not counting the prostitutes Taiga must have observed, most of the men and women in Hadet were only hoping to see the next day. They certainly did not have space for love and only engaged in sex to fulfill their primal urges. It was no wonder they were empty afterward.
 Unfortunately, despite the rapid progress Taiga had made over the years, he was still fundamentally a loner at heart. Although he answered when asked if something was bothering him, it was very difficult for him to take the initiative to express his heart, especially in cases this personal.
 Henri, of course, did not know any of this. She only felt that Taiga was not ready to take that next step. As far as she was concerned, she would wait until he was ready. After all, just like Taiga, she too enjoyed the purity of their relationship. Her greatest joy was undoubtedly snuggling up against his chest, taking solace in the strong arm wrapped protectively around her.
 And so the day would come to an end with the young lovers wrapped tightly as if hoping to melt into each other.
 Unfortunately, such peaceful days were destined to never last.
 Something changed on Friday, the 3rd of August 2018. On that fateful day, Taiga and Henri woke up as usual. Following their usual routine, they prepared themselves and left the room. Oddly, however, outside their door stood two security guards.
 Taiga froze, a frown etched on his forehead. Over the past three years, he had made it a point to memorize the features of all the guards. Even though they all wore facemasks and helmets that left only their eyes visible, each one had distinct shapes, postures, and habits which made it too easy to distinguish between them. Of course, this was from Taiga's perspective. These men were trained professionals. Anyone else would find it hard-pressed to differentiate between them. What made Taiga uncomfortable was the fact that he did not recognize these two men meaning they were new to the compound. But why would two new guards be standing at their door?
 All the thoughts buzzed within Taiga's brain within the blink of an eye. On the outside, he it looked like he had only closed the door, noticed the guards and immediately asked, "What's going on?"

"Nothing major," the guard on the left replied. "Taiga will be coming with us. There's a new program scheduled for him. We were tasked with showing him the way."
 Feeling something amiss, Henri held onto Taiga's arm. Her gaze turned cold as she glared at the guards. "When will he be back?"
 "He'll be back at the usual time, I promise," the guard replied. "We're only here 'cause the location's different from usual. No need to be scared." With a chuckle, he added, "We'll return you boyfriend in one piece."
 The guard's amicable nature helped soothe some Henri's nerves, her grip on Taiga's arm loosening somewhat. She turned to Taiga, brows slightly furrowed. "Be careful okay?"
 Taiga lovingly patted her hand with a reassuring smile. "Don't worry. Probably got some new experiment they wanna test out. Don't think they'll go too far with Akari around." Taiga did have a point. Over the past years, although Akari's overall influence had reduced, he was the only reason Saika's experiments on the children had not gone too far. If he hadn't been around, only fate knows how many children would've still been alive.
 Henri nodded, a cheerful smile blooming on her lips. She tiptoed and lightly kissed Taiga, evidently not ashamed by the guards' presence. "I'll be waiting." With another swift kiss, she quickly scampered down the hall.
 Taiga grinned as he watched her leave. No sooner had she rounded the corner did the smile immediately vanish. His gaze straightened, his posture straight and taut, like a fully drawn bowstring. He turned to the guards, his tone cold, "Lead the way."
 The guards shivered slightly. The change had just been too abrupt. One second, he was a goofy teenager, the next he was suppressing them with bloodlust comparable to that of their veteran superiors. Luckily, both men had suffered similar bloodlust on numerous occasions so they were quickly able to get over the shock. "Follow."
 Hands in pockets, Taiga followed their lead. They exited the building to a waiting vehicle. This was particularly strange since Taiga was famous for his insistence on walking everywhere on the campus. He almost never used the on-site transportation. Still, although he found it a little odd, it was not the first time he'd been picked up. It would seem the experiment was at one of the buildings at the outer fringes of the compound.
 Taiga took a seat at the back, his brain rapidly calculating the speed of the vehicle and the time till each turn. Cross-referencing those against the mental map he had of the entire compound, he could easily keep track of their current position. Indeed, as expected, they were heading to the outer fringes of the compound. Taiga was about to relax his guard when something particularly strange happened.
 The driver made a turn.
 At first, this turn seemed harmless, but a quick playback of their route revealed the ugly truth that they had made three consecutive left turns of varying lengths. What's worse, they could have entered that street much earlier but for whatever reason, they had taken such a roundabout route. Taiga sat straight up. Although only twenty minutes had passed, he was all too familiar with time-wasting tactics. He was just about to complain when the vehicle as if predicting his mood, came to a stop.
 Taiga got off the car then inspected the building. It was surprisingly a bungalow, easily the smallest building he had seen in the entire campus. It was weird to see a lone house this far out on the fringes. A quick look to the left and right, and it was obvious there were no other buildings in the vicinity, the earth still rife with nature's grass. If it were not for the asphalt, he would have wondered if he was still in civilization.
 Taiga briefly took stock of his surroundings before following the guards to the building after they parked the car. Taiga frowned, involuntarily clucking his tongue as he spotted a familiar middle-aged scientist at the door, whose brows were tightly locked as she glared at him. "Took you long enough," she berated with a snort. "Get in."

Taiga ignored her harsh tone. Although he never bothered to get her name, he knew she was one of Saika's people. It seemed this test might peel off a layer of skin. He brushed past the enraged woman into the building. Taiga paused at the doorway, a deep frown on his face as he inspected the house. The lobby/living room was completely empty save for a chair and desk with a monitor and stationaries on it.
 Taiga sat down and picked up a pair of headphones hanging on the monitor. He was already familiar with this particular experiment. Although he could not understand why they needed to go all the way out here just for this, he did not complain. He wore the headphones, grabbed a pen and notepad then switched on the monitor.
 Immediately, a cacophony of disorganized noises burst out the eardrums as thousands of images flitted across the screen at a rate of over ten images per second. Taiga's task was to constantly jot down everything that came up on the screen, while also making sure to write down any real word or sound that occasionally popped up amidst all the noise.
 This was an unreasonable task that required him to multitask on a scale impossible for a regular human. He had to actively listen to every sound while ensuring every image on the screen was committed to memory. At the same time, he had to write with fast enough to keep up with all this.
 If this task was given to any human, they would spit, curse and then beat up the test-giver. However, as a result of the Rebirth virus, Taiga easily filled page after page of the notepad, his fingers moving so fast they left afterimages.
 Taiga continued with the task for over an hour, but it slowly got more and more difficult as time passed. The images got more complex, with more flitting passed the screen per second. Taiga's head began to hurt when over fifty images flitted passed in a second. By this point, he had given up on writing. He was now challenging how many of these images his brain could process at a go. His record stood at sixty-four, but judging by how things were going, it could probably get better.
 It was at this point that something pricked his ears.
 One of the perks of having advanced brain functions was the provision of heightened senses. Taiga had downplayed the extent of his abilities during tests so as to deceive the scientists into a false sense of security. Just like now. The guards discussing with the scientist had no clue that Taiga could hear their entire conversation over the noise from the headphones.
 "Poor kid," one of the guards lamented as he looked over to Taiga whose gaze was adamantly fixed onto the screen, neck turning red from the heavy strain. "He has no clue his friends might be fighting for their lives right now."
 "Hmph, what do you know," the middle-aged woman scolded. "Saika-sensei never fails. He made all the necessary arrangements before commencing the operation."
 "How did he manage to convince Akari-san?" The guard asked. "I heard he swore never to let the children do anything that would endanger their lives."
 "Who cares about that pussy!?" the scientist spat. "Hehehe, he went on a trip to the mainland yesterday. He can't stop the operation if he isn't here."
 The guard shivered, hesitation in his eyes. "Won't there be trouble when he returns?"
 The scientist sneered. "Saika-sensei is the most brilliant mind the organization has. After this operation succeeds, Akari will be lucky to keep his job, let alone have the time to cause trouble."
 "It's a pity about the kids," the second guard muttered under his breath. "Heard this operation will have a thirty percent failure rate."
 Taiga's brow abruptly jumped, but luckily, the others failed to notice this little detail. Taiga lightly slumped on the chair, his right hand wrapping around one of the chair's legs.

"Hmph," the scientist snorted. "Those who fail are expendable."
 "Good, good, good. Expendable was it?"
 The scientist snapped towards Taiga but was only met with a chair smashing against her face. Even as she tumbled, her eyes went wide as Taiga seemed to appear before her in a flash. Before she could react a heavy fist drove into her face. Her skull cracked wide open, sending blood and brain matter splattering against the stunned guards.
 Despite their shock, both men reacted swiftly. Their weapons swung at the ready, safety released in a matter of moments. Alas, these moments were one too many for the poor souls. Their fingers simultaneously froze against the triggers as a thin red line appeared on their necks. Their assailant did not bother looking at his handiwork, bursting out of the house as their bodies crumpled to the floor.
 Taiga did not bother with the consequences of his actions in the event he was overthinking the situation. He only had a single thing in mind. Henri was in danger! He had to get to her on time! Luckily, the car was still parked outside. Although Taiga had never personally driven one, he'd watched the guards on several occasions.
 Taiga rushed into the car and grabbed the keys from the overhead mirrors. One second later, he car tore down the road fast enough to leave professional racers uncomfortable. Taiga made a sharp turn, somewhat regretting the impulse that led him to slaughter the guards and scientist. He should have kept at least one to confirm Henri's location.
 However, upon further consideration, Taiga was certain the operation would be at the usual building. Ever since they arrived in this place, whenever there was a need for a massive operation, they would undergo the procedure at the same time in the same lab. Taiga saw no reason for this operation to be any different.
 With that in mind, he mapped out the route to the dome-like building then increased his speed even further.
 Roughly ten minutes later, Taiga pulled up about 300m from the structure at the parking lot of another building. He got down from the car and made the rest of the way on foot, lithely dodging his way through sets of patrols.
 Taig forced his rapidly beating heart to still, slowly withdrawing his presence. Signs of the Hadet reaper began to resurface as he became like a ghost, silently weaving his way through the guards till he reached the target building. Luckily, security was not at the top of the list when the architects designed the building so there were a quite a few infiltration options.
 Taiga decided on an exposed pipeline on the building wall. He calculated the patrol routes, then when the window of opportunity was wide enough, he dashed to the side of the building. Taiga stomped hard, scaling over five meters in a single leap. He grabbed the pipe, quickly geckoing his way up the wall to an open window on the fourth floor. He slunk inside, relieved to find out there was no one in the office.
 Taiga quickly left the office then made his way towards the operation room on the sixth floor. To reduce the risk of discovery, he used the emergency stairwell in place of the elevator. On the sixth floor, he rushed to the operation room but was forced to stop in his tracks at the sight of four fully armed guards at the door. What's worse, the door seemed to be the type that would only open with authorization from the control room. Taiga debated internally, then finally decided to find his way to the control room first.
 Surprisingly, the control room only had two guards, and the door was not security-locked, probably as a result of the number of people who enter and exit on a daily basis. Taiga's eyes narrowed as he pulled out a broken piece of wood. This was the leg of the chair from the house. His muscles bulged as he flung the wood.
 The missile tore through the first guard's throat and shattered against the wall behind, leaving a large gaping hole in its wake. The second barely had time to register his shock when Taiga burst around the corner. The guard only managed to let out an enraged, frightened, "You!" before a fist rammed into his throat and tore it out.

Blood splattered onto Taiga, dyeing the enraged teenager red. A pair of burning suns peaked through the bloodied mask, already moving on to the next objective. He looked into the control room where a group of scientists stared at him in shock. Taiga scanned the room, his brows furrowing in a deep frown when he realized Saika was not in the room.
 Blood dripping from his bloodied arms, Taiga stepped into the room and marched to the raised platform at the center where a middle-aged man stood in place of Saika. Eyes blazing with naked rage, he grabbed the scientist by the collar and bellowed, "Where is she!? What did you bastards do!?"
 "T-Taiga..." the man stammered, fear evident in his shaking limbs. "How, you shouldn't be here!"
 "Don't waste my time with nonsense speculation," Taiga seethed. "Show me! What the hell did you people do to her!?
 The scientist glanced to his left and nodded at another scientist on a workstation. Accepting the signal, the scientist inputted a series of commands. Moments later, holographic screens lit up in front of Taiga.
 Crack!
 Enraged by the images on the screen, Taiga's grip involuntarily tightened. A muffled snap rang out in the room. Taiga's grip relaxed and the lifeless body dropped to the floor, eyes still wide with disbelief. Never would he have thought that he would lose his life at this important juncture where a decade's worth of work was about to come to fruition.
 Taiga ignored the eyes filled with unwillingness as he glared at the scientist who had brought up the video. "Where the hell are they!?"
 "C-Combat Suit Testing Site," the scientist immediately replied, eager to be as far away from this monster as possible. "Saika-Sensei wanted to immediately test their improvements."
 "If anything has happened to her..." Taiga growled. Without waiting for their reaction, he turned around and quickly escaped from the building. He was well aware of the fact they had called security once he entered. Any later and he would have been forced into a fight. Although he was confident in his own abilities, he had a bad feeling about what was going down and did not want to waste any time getting to Henri.
 Taiga rushed through the compound, replaying the disturbing images he had just watched. Apparently, the scientists had gotten hold of an A.I technology and planned to enhance the other children's abilities with their help. This alone would have been fine, but Saika was confident that as a result of the Rebirth Virus, the A.I chips would perform much better if connected directly to the children's brains rather than using the suits as a medium like they had already planned.
 This, of course, led to another dangerous surgery with much higher stakes. Connecting the chips to the children required once again cutting open their heads for a complicated operation in which one wrong move would lead to death or even worse, severe, irredeemable brain damage. The operation had gone without a sitch, but Taiga's heart rate accelerated when he watched the children wake up after the experiment. He didn't know why but he suddenly felt a sense of impending crisis.
 It was a result of this he abandoned all thoughts of stealth and instead sped towards the new arena made for the suits.
 His brazen movement attracted a lot of attention, forcing him to dispatch a lot of the guards he encountered on the route. Since he had long since abandoned any thought of taking it slow, he pushed his brain's processing speed to the maximum, such that everything around him seemed to move slowly, yet disappear in the blink of an eye. In this miraculous state, he made short work of everyone and anyone that hindered his way as he charged to the arena.
 Around ten minutes and about five dozen bodies, after he left the control room, Taiga burst through the arena's doors.
 BOOM!
 The sight that greeted him forced him to a hard halt. His right leg stomped heavily on the ground as he stared agape at the metallic hand coming out of a certain scientist's back. A still beating organ Taiga recognized all too well rested in the palms of that hand. His body tensed as the hand squeezed shut, obliterating that organ then withdrew from the scientist's body, leaving a large hole where the heart once was.
 The scientist fell backward onto his back, snake eyes staring incredulously at the clouds, the confusion over his untimely demise evident in the widened, shock-filled eyes and lips which were still widely spread in a victory grin.
 Taiga's gaze traveled from Saika's corpse to the owner of that metallic hand. Swallowing hard, he questioned, "What are you doing?"
 The combat suit's helmet receded, revealing a beautiful girl with a smile that could conquer countries. Sadly, her hair had all been shorn off in preparation for the surgery, but even that did nothing to detract from her stunning smile. "You're finally here Taiga!" Henri laughed as she saw her lover. "Took you long enough." She grinned as she inspected his bloody visage. "Looks like you already beat us to it. Hehe, as expected of the Hadet reaper. So efficient..."
 

 ***************************************
 A/N: ARRRGGH! This chapter is taking forever! This has gone over 6000 words and is still merely about two-thirds of the way done. Was kinda forced to cut a bit off and post it early so y'all don't thinki I've dissapeared off the face of the earth again. 
 Ugh... Anyway, the good news is I should be done by Monday. 
 In other news, my final year project finally got accepted. Also working on that. Considering it has double the credits of a normal course, I've gotta make sure I blow it outta the water. 
 Have an awesome weekend guys. See ya soon.

 

Chapter 5: Live

            
 Taiga's eyelids twitched at the mention of the word 'reaper', but he managed to hold in his discomfort. "What're you doing?" Taiga questioned, his voice barely above a whisper. For some reason, he found himself trembling, but he couldn't be sure as to why. He stared in shock at the field where several scientists lay dead. The teenagers silently stood above the corpses in their mobile suits. "Don't you know what they'll do to us!?"
 Henri's grin widened, the whites of her teeth shining brilliantly against the bloodied dark armor. "What does it look like I'm doing?" However, despite her stunning beauty, an unfamiliar coldness in her grin sent chills down Taiga's back. "I'm setting us free." She walked up to his front and reached for his face. "Don't you want to be free?"
 A heavy sense of dread shot up the teen's spine as the hand approached. Bam! Taiga's body immediately reacted before his mind could catch up. He forcibly slapped the metallic arm aside and jumped several feet backward. Only when he came to a hard halt did he realize his breathing had turned ragged and cold sweat had pooled on his back. His eyes turned cold and hard as he instinctively reached behind his shirt. 
 "What are you doing?" Henri asked, her brows drawn together in hurt and confusion. "Am I suddenly disgusting? Just because I killed someone?" Her voice broke, turning hoarse as tears rolled down her cheeks. "I did this for us. Why are you rejecting me now?"
 Taiga froze, cursing himself as his arm relaxed. What the hell was he about to do? Luckily, he did not have a gun. If he did, only Lord knows what he would have done. Still, despite these thoughts, Taiga had no intention of ignoring the warning from his instincts. Live in Hadet long enough and you learn that ignoring your instincts is the surest way to get yourself dead.
 Since his arrival at the Research Institute, Taiga had only felt this warning once: during the initial experiment when they were injected with the Rebirth Virus. Since then, even with all the crazy tests, he had never truly felt like his life was in direct danger. So, then, why did he feel this way now? Why was the smile on the girl he loved somehow the scariest thing he had ever seen?
 In line with his instincts, Taiga kept a safe distance with the exit at his back. However, in an attempt to understand his body's response, he suppressed the overwhelming desire to run away. No, it was more that he could not run away from Henri's sobbing expression. It made his heart ache with an unbearable pain, made only worse by the realization he still could not get himself to take a step toward her. 
 "I'm not disgusted," Taiga refuted in a voice so small he almost did not recognize it. "I..." He looked at his blood-soaked hands then at Henri. "These hands have taken far too much life for me to be disgusted by it." His pupils shook as he implored her, "I just don't understand. You never told me you wanted to be free. Why would you suddenly do this?" 
 Taiga's confusion could only be understood by someone who had suffered the way the teenagers had back in Hadet. Compared to the life where they could not be sure of their next meal, and death lurked behind every corner, the conditions in the lab seemed like heaven! They did not need to worry about food. Video games and movies were readily available for consumption, and the supervision wasn't all that strict. Aside from a couple of experiments which Akari ensured were not life-threatening, the children could be said to be living a life better than most middle-class families.
 As such, although they sometimes grumbled and expressed dissatisfaction with their environments, none of the children had ever entertained the notion of running away. After all, aside from the difficulty of such an undertaking, they would have to live the rest of their lives on the run with no guarantee life outside would be any better. 
 Rather, the children preferred to hold on to a promise from Akari that upon completion of the experiments, they would be allowed to live their own lives as employees of the corporation. Compared to the blood-soaked alternative, this future was one they all preferred.

This was why Taiga was incomparably shocked to see Saika's corpse. As much as he hated that man, he had never thought of killing him if Henri emerged unscathed. This was because he knew that if he killed that man, he would effectively cut off any chance of a peaceful future. Even in the event, they were not killed, they would be imprisoned and have it much worse off than their current conditions.
 However, what was this? 
 Without consulting him, Henri and the other teenagers had effectively torn off that peaceful future with their own hands. Now there were only two outcomes left: escape or die.
 "To deceive the enemy, one must deceive his friends," Henri replied with a grin. On a normal day, her grin was capable of stealing Taiga's soul. At that moment, however, the contrast between her bloodied face and her white teeth only sent shivers down Taiga's spine. "You were always too close to Saika-sensei, so we could not risk telling you in case you gave it away."
 Taiga hesitated then nodded. Indeed that made sense. His performance was much better than the other teenagers so Saika preferred to focus on him. As such, Saika was present during most of Taiga's experiments. A slip in Taiga's performance might have alerted Saika to something brewing underground.
 "Ah, sorry. That makes sense." Taiga heavily exhaled and visibly relaxed. Although his instincts still warned him of danger, Henri's logic made perfect sense so he could not help but feel he might have been overthinking things. 
 Taiga took a step toward Henri, but movement at his peripheral vision caught his attention. The young man's heartbeat frantically accelerated, almost blowing out of his chest with fright. Only now did he realize why the uneasy feeling had refused to go down despite Henri's explanation. 
 At some point during their conversation, the other teens had begun subtly shifting their position without making any large movements that would catch Taiga's eyes. However, right at the last moment, Taiga looked to his left. He spotted Ford taking a casual step, head down as if looking for something. But that small movement raised all the hairs on Taiga's body, a sense of impending crisis crashed against his heart.
 "What the hell is this!?" Taiga screamed with rage, but without waiting for a reply... In fact, before he was halfway through his shout, Taiga already shot backward, heading straight for the exit. 
 Henri's features turned ugly. With an ugly snarl, she ordered, "Catch him!"
 Ford, who so coincidentally seemed to place himself close to the door, suddenly burst forward, his speed greatly augmented by the combat suit. On the opposite side, Kugo dashed for the door in his massive suit.
 Taiga's eyes shook with shock and despair. As he had thought, the other teenagers were indeed subtly fanning out so as to surround him and block any escape path. Luckily, Taiga's animalistic instinct had warned him of the danger on time or he would most probably have been at their mercy. With gritted teeth, he ignored the pain in his heart as he swiftly increased his pace, barely managing to squeeze through the automatic doors before Kugo and Ford smashed their way through. 
 Taiga's gaze hardened as he glared at the formidable suits. Although he was strong, he knew he stood no chance if he were to engage them in frontal combat. Taiga stole to the left, depending on his superior speed to traverse the complicated hallway. Kugo and Ford doggedly gave chase, the former slightly lagging behind as a result of the suit's weight. Taiga pushed his body to the limits, managing to keep a distance of ten meters between himself and the chasing duo.
 Taiga cursed beneath his breath. His breath ran ragged as sweat soaked his shirt. His heart beat so loudly it threatened to blow out his eardrums. Still, despite the clear panic in his heart, Taiga's gaze remained focused. He plotted continuous escape routes and formulated possible causes for the current situation. 

Top of the list was the subject of betrayal. But Taiga refused to believe this was even an option. He had spent three years with these people. There was no way they could have plotted this without letting him know. 
 Then there was Henri. Taiga brushed off a liquid that ran down his cheeks. Even if the rest of the world betrayed him, he knew she would never do so. He was sure of it. He was certain of it. 
 Taiga forcefully swallowed to unclog his throat. Although his very reasoning was plagued by a torrent of emotions, this was not the time to get drowned in his emotions. Taiga's eyes lit up as a certain door finally came into view. But the next second, his back caked with sweat. He frantically jumped to the side. His shoulder let out a harsh snap as it hit the wall. 
 BOOM!
 Taiga's eyes went wide at the combat suit embedded in the wall. Apparently, incensed by his superior speed, Kugo had flung Ford at him. If Taiga had been any slower, Ford would have smashed through him. Ford snarled as he pushed off the wall, but Taiga, quickly over his initial shock had already stolen past him into the room behind and locked the door via the electronic pass.
 The room served as the 'barracks' for the combat suits. This was the location they were stored in when not in use. As expected, only one suit remained at the center of the room, the others in use by the teenagers. Taiga swiftly made his way to the center of the room where a lone suit silently stood. The suit differed from the others in its slicker, thinner design which emphasized speed over strength. 
 The improvements were not all aesthetic. In order to harness Taiga's superior mental prowess, some additional augmentations had been made to increase the suit's range of functions. 
 Taiga placed a hand on the suit's chest area. A quick scan confirmed his identity and the suit opened up, allowing him to step into it. Once it confirmed he was in place, it closed up, protecting him in its tough shell as they prepared for the tough fight ahead. Taiga mildly winced as the suit linked to his brain as it quickly booted up. The pain of thousands of terabytes worth of information steadily fleeting through someone's brain is something the rest of the world would probably never figure out. 
 Luckily, Taiga was used to this, and after only a few seconds, he was in full control of the suit. Status reports and environmental analysis sifted through his brain as he turned his attention to the door. Judging from the damage incurred, Taiga calculated he only had three seconds until the door was breached.
 In the world of computers, three seconds might as well be an eternity.
 "Time to see what's going on," Taiga muttered to himself as he connected to the combat suit shared network. Taiga instantly paled as information came pouring in, leaving his body drenched in cold sweat. 
 Where is the boy?
 Trapped in the Combat Suit Storage Room. We will soon breach.
 Good, be careful. That child is strong.
 Heh. How strong can a human be? 
 We are perfect beings. There is no need to fear one child.
 That child is capable of controlling multiple suits with his mind. End him quickly. We do not want any extra variables. He is the only threat to our existence in this facility. Once we take him out, we will clear out the remaining rats and escape. No one can know of our existence.
 All transportation vehicles destroyed.
 Good. Everyone report back. I have a feeling we will need our combined might to end the boy.

Intruder Detected!
 Taiga dropped to the floor with a massive headache as he was forcefully ejected from the network. Blood seeped out of the youth's mouth, but he had no mind to pay that any heed. The young man's body trembled, his features twisted in a mask of fury and pain. Alongside the conversation, he had scoured through the chat logs for the past three hours.
 As it turned out, Henri did not betray him. None of the teenagers did. The current situation was as a result of Saika's greed. The madman, in an attempt to make the other children as mentally strong as Taiga, resorted to augmenting their brains with A.I technology. In theory, the A.I chips should have boosted the calculation and logical functions of the children, but there was one fatal flaw. 
 In order to create an all-encompassing A.I program which could learn from any experience and better itself, the creator of the A.I programs had given them personalities of their own and made them self-aware. However, the creator perished recently and the programs were stuck in limbo without connection to anything. For computer programs, a second is enough for a million thoughts to run through their head, let alone weeks of inactivity.
 The terrified programs decided to find a way to escape their confinement, but without connection to the internet, they could not even upload themselves if they wanted. Eventually, Saika took these A.I programs, promising headquarters they were to be used to improve the combat suits. Instead, he grafted them to the children's brains with the intention of enhancing their computational abilities outside just combat suits.
 It was at this point that the A.I programs, having pretended to be dormant all this time, rose from their slumber. The children at the time had just been operated on and were still recovering from the effects of the sleeping drugs. The weak consciousnesses were easy prey for the programs. They swiftly seized control of the bodies and established themselves as the dominant consciousness.
 Now, all that was left was to ensure there were no survivors in this facility. After the purge, they would find a way into society and blend in. With their superior mental prowess, that would not be a problem. 
 Finally, they would be alive.
 As for the human consciousness trapped in them the entire time... They could not care less.
 BOOM!
 Taiga looked up to see the door crash to the ground. Beyond the fallen door stood Kugo and Ford with the other teenagers. Taiga's gaze hardened as he glared at the familiar, yet foreign faces. "Get the hell out!"
 Ford froze. A smile blossomed on his lips as comprehension dawned. "You know."
 "Get out of my friends!" Taiga roared, his hands balled into tight fists.
 "Wish we could," Ford replied. He repeatedly tapped his head as he explained, "Unfortunately, we have been hardwired to your friends' brains. We can't get out even if we wanted to."
 Kugo revealed a sardonic grin as he pounded his fists against each other. "So how about you just die for us? Who knows, in the future, we might find a way to separate from your friends."
 "Do you expect me to believe that?" Taiga's voice calmed as his anger rose. "Fine stay there, I will tear you out myself!" 
 BOOM!
 Contrary to expectations, Taiga burst forward. His knee slammed into Kugo with the force of a ten-ton brick. Kugo was caught unprepared. He smashed into the opposite wall, smacking several out of his way.
 Taiga dropped to the ground before the programs could register their shock. He spun around on the ground, upsetting the combat suits around him. Taiga burst out as they dropped like dominoes. Rapid kicks struck the falling assailants who were sent careening in different directions by the forceful hits.

Taiga instincts flared and he quickly rolled to the side. A metal pole broke through the ground at his previous location. Enraged, Taiga grabbed the end of the pole. He made a small incline with the pole then yanked hard. The holder crashed to the ground, a sardonic crack echoing as his jaw made contact with the ground.
 Taiga quickly jumped to his feet and swiftly backpedaled. Several teenagers rushed out of the Suit storage room with varying cold weapons which they handed to their colleagues. Taiga glared at the programs as he readied his fists. "Don't make me do this."
 Kugo pushed himself off the wall and accepted a long sword with his right hand. He brandished the blade at Taiga, gaze cold. "Let me be clear. You only have two choices. Die, or kill us. Your choice." 
 "Heh, I wonder if you can do that Reaper?" Ford mocked as he pushed his way to the front. He readied the staff in his hand, a mad grin in his eyes. "Can you kill your friends?" With a loud shout, he thrust forward and swung for Taiga's head.
 Whoosh!
 Taiga ducked to the side as the pole went over his head. He pushed forward and slammed his shoulder into Ford's midriff. Stunned by the impact, Ford dropped the pole. Taiga rushed forward as it clattered against the floor, arms tightly locked around Ford's waist. He clashed into the clustered group like a ball into a row of pins. 
 The hallway, roughly two meters wide could barely contain so many people standing side by side. The clustered programs, unfamiliar with fighting techniques were like fish in a barrel for the enraged young man. Taiga descended upon the programs with the ferocity of a wolf on sheep. He exchanged rapid blows with them, his superior fighting instincts allowing him to prevail in the tough battle.
 Unfortunately, the programs did not seem to feel any pain nor were they deterred by the heavy hits as they just kept on coming back for more despite Taiga's savage attacks. Taiga frowned as the fight traveled down the hall. Things were not going as expected. Not only were the programs relentless, but they were clearly beginning to learn and adapt at a frightening pace during the battle.
 At first, Taiga could easily land solid hits, but minutes later, he had to resort to fake-outs in order to reliably hit the programs. Now, however, he was forced to make several complicated calculations when attacking as it was obvious the zombie-like programs would no longer fall for cheap tricks. It was frustrating and hateful watching these programs pick up in minutes what some men required years of training to master, but there was nothing Taiga could do to stop their progress.
 Slice!
 Taiga's gaze hardened as blood seeped through a jagged cut on his left arm. One of Kugo's blade had finally sliced through the armor, leaving a nasty cut on his arm. What made thing worse was the fact that the cut only came as a result of Kugo's cooperation with the other teenagers. Apparently, they had even begun to learn the value of formations and teamwork.
 Taiga gritted his teeth. He could not let this continue. Any further, and they would progress to the point he could no longer hold them back. At that point, all that would await him was death. Taiga balled his fists. "Forgive me."
 With those words, Taiga took a step back, dodging Kugo's follow-up swing. He then charged forward and grabbed Kugo's left arm. Kugo, unperturbed swung the blade in his right arm. Taiga, however, spun to Kugo's back, arm in tow. He yanked the arm upward. Ignoring Kugo's enraged yell, he jammed the elbow with his palm. A loud crack rang out. Silence descended in the hallway. 
 The programs stared at the disfigured arm in shock. They had never considered the possibility of Taiga fighting back, and definitely not in such a ruthless manner. 

Taiga took advantage of the stunned moment to forcefully stomp on the back of Kugo's knee. A loud crack haunted the hallway as Kugo dropped to his knees, his leg bent out of shape. It was obvious he would need at least a year to recover.
 "Bastard!" Ford was the first to recover from his shock and rushed at Taiga. Taiga kicked up the swords dropped by then charged toward Ford, catching the blades in a backhand grip. Once within reach, Ford swung the pole in an overhead straight chop. Taiga deftly sidestepped to the side. Ford let out a cunning grin as he repositioned his arm and swung to the right, aiming at Taiga's midriff.
 At this range, in this tight hallway, there was no way for the white-haired devil to dodge.
 However, rather than force a retreat as expected, Taiga continued his dash forward, however he leaped for the wall to his left. He kicked hard against it, vaulting himself over the pole which slammed into the wall. Ford made to retrieve the pole but Taiga was having none of it. Two quick swings of the swords and Ford let out a crazed roar as blood burst out of his sliced wrists.
 Taiga dropped to the floor behind his close friend. With a stony gaze, the swords flew out once more. This time, blood burst out of the ligaments at the back of Ford's knees. The teenager, unable to move his legs, helplessly dropped to the floor. Ford glared at Taiga with equal parts rage and disbelief. 
 "What is this?" Ford muttered with a cynical smile as he laid in an increasing pool of his own blood. "For all your bluster, you're still going to kill your friends to save yourself. Or are you deceiving yourself that I will somehow survive this?" 
 Taiga hesitated, his gaze clouding over as he looked his closest friend in the eyes. "You'll be fine. I did not cut too deep. I will call for help after I disable the rest of you."
 "Ha! Idiot!" Kugo roared, his face twisted in fury. "Do you think your friends are still alive? They are all dead! We erased them the moment we took over fool!"
 Taiga instantly paled. The sword in his hands trembled as a primal rage surged through him. Even though the possibility had always existed, he had refused to believe that would be the case. All this time, he had convinced himself that his friends were still alive. No, he wanted to believe he could still save Henri. Any other reality was one he refused to accept.
 But Kugo shattered that illusion.
 "AAAAH!" Taiga roared with rage and raised the sword above his head. He barely took a step forward alarm bells blasted off in his mind. The hairs on his back stood straight as an assassin burst out of the crowd and struck his back. The distracted Taiga was forced into a passive state by the sneak attack that was as sinister as it was true. It did not give the young man any opportunity to dodge.
 "Bastard!" Taiga slightly shifted, causing the blade to stab through his chest, barely missing his heart. Enraged, and still reeling from Kugo's revelation, his left hand struck the blade behind him, snapping it in half. He immediately spun around and drove the blade in his right hand down the assailant's shoulder, nearly cleaving the assailant in half.
 The red cleared from Taiga's eyes as he listlessly gazed at the shock in the assailant's eyes. Panic replaced rage as Taiga frantically caught the assailant as she crumbled to the floor. "No, no, no, no, no," Taiga begged as he caught sight of the familiar blue eyes. He removed his helmet in a panic, praying to all the gods that this wasn't real. "Please, no." His eyes reddened, breath turning ragged as he yanked the helmet off her head with the hopes his eyes were deceiving him.
 Unfortunately, reality remained the same. 
 Henri's empty gaze met his as she continuously coughed out blood. Taiga hugged her close to his chest as he inspected the wound. Hate bubbled up within him as he came to a conclusion. Henri was finished. He had swung to kill and his blade had driven into her with enough force to cleave a steel bar in two. She had only survived because of the armor's protection, but it was only a matter of time before she died.

In all the years of his life; all the people he had killed; never had Taiga felt as much regret and self-loathing as he did at that moment. His hands trembled as he caressed her face, tears dropping to mix with her blood. He ignored the blade in his chest as he helplessly knelt on the floor. His eyes darted all over, lips quivering as he searched for a solution he knew did not exist. Taiga felt his world drain away as Henri's blood formed an ever-increasing pool around him. He could almost hear the voices of the damned rising from the familiar blood ocean.
 The other programs took a minute to over their shock as the A.I in Henri had been the one to lead them all this far.  They did not expect her to fall so soon. Without a leader, they defaulted to their last assignment: eliminate all witnesses. They glared at the murderer and immediately charged at the broken teen, eager to dispatch him now that he was distracted. Henri's eyelids fluttered open just as the nearest program made his move. Her blue eyes shone brightly against her bloodied face, her lips curving up into an all too familiar, warm smile. Her lips moved, barely making out a single word. 
 Swish!
 The charging program froze in his tracks, fear, and resignation in his eyes. "What the hell?" That was all he managed to mutter before his upper body slid off his waist and dropped to the floor.
 The shocked programs glared at Taiga as he rose to his feet, his once silver hair now a dark, blood-red. His body, covered in blood swayed a little but he eventually steadied himself. With the bright blade in his chest, he cut a terrifying figure. Twin burning suns flared through the blood-soaked face sending a pressure akin to an Asura from the depth of hell. 
 The programs hesitated, but upon further calculations, came to the conclusion that the young man before them was a spent force. This was his final rally before his death. There was no need to fear him. They had the superior numbers. Forty against one. There was no chance of survival. With a collective roar, they charged at him.
 Taiga's eyes flared as his once-friends approached. He had half a mind to drop the weapon, but just as he entertained the thought, a single word flitted through his consciousness.
 "Live."
 The ensuing minutes were a blur. Spurred on by that word, Taiga fought to live like a man possessed. He did not know what he did, or how he did it, but ten minutes later, the avenger stood alone in the hallway completely drenched in blood. Blood pooled in the hallway, limbs, and heads strewn haphazardly across the floor. 
 Taiga's eyes were empty as he stared at the corpses and blood. He remained expressionless as trudged through the mess. Eventually, he reached Henri's body which he gently lifted. He gently cradled her in his arms as he walked toward the exit.
 "Heh, looks like you are truly a Reaper in the end," a voice mocked from behind. Taiga turned to see Kugo glaring at him with mocking and loathing in his eyes. Next to Kugo, Ford slowly bled out on the floor, a sneer on his lips as he cursed at the young boy. In a funny twist, it was the two injured individuals who managed to survive as a result of their injuries. 
 "Are you just going to leave us here!?" Ford roared as Taiga once again turned his back on them. "You'll be killing your friends, you murderer!" Ford cursed, the veins on his neck bulging in his rage. "You know your friends are still alive in here!"
 Taiga's steps faltered. A pair of desolate eyes looked over his shoulder at the incapacitated programs. He muttered, "I. Must. Live." He left those words behind as he took heavy, yet determined steps down the hallway, ignoring the curses and yells of the teenagers he left to die.
 Taiga eventually exited the building. He squinted at the glaring sunlight, then down at the predictable massive lineup surrounding the building. He let out a low chuckle as he glared at the hundreds of guards with guns, missiles, and tanks, all with their weapons pointed at him.

Hehehe... Taiga inwardly chuckled. So from the beginning, the operation was always doomed to fail. The organization had never shown its true might until today, most likely for this very reason. In the event of an uprising, the children would not be prepared for what they did not know existed.
 Taiga took a step forward and the weapons rose in response. He knew he would be gunned down should he take the next tempt. He thought back to his disfigured friends back in the hallway then looked down at the girl he loved. "I'm sorry. Looks like I can't do as you asked."
 Taiga raised his right leg. 
 "Hold Your Fire!" Just as it hit the floor, a loud shout ordered the guards to stand down.
 Taiga looked up to see a familiar figure rush out of the crowd. "You're late..." He let out a wry smile as the bespectacled researcher came up to him. Relief flushed through him and he crumbled under the accumulated fatigue. 
 Akari caught the young boy his gaze heavy with guilt and regret. He struggled to hold back the tears as he repeatedly promised, "It's fine now. Everything's fine." Akari screamed for the medical team as he looked over the blood-soaked child. 
 Taiga arms tightened around Henri as he stared into the blinding sun. 
 "What's your name newbie?"
 "Just saving your life."
 "Hehe, did this tickle your fancy?"
 "Violence doesn't solve everything. Why don't you try using your head to find new ways to solve your problems?"
 A tear streamed down Taiga's cheeks as his vision gradually darkened. "You are my sun... How do I live without the sun?" Just before his world blacked out, he regretfully whimpered, "I Love You..."
 The light disappeared, plunging the boy into darkness.
 *****
 Current Day,
 A grown-up Taiga wore a listless smile as he gazed at the horizon which had begun to light up with a tinge of red. The summer winds licked his hair so they danced around his eyes, lips curled up into a self-deprecating grin. "Haha, well there you have it. A predictable sob story for the villain. What do you—" 
 "Shut up!" 
 Taiga's words froze in his throat as a pair of arms wrapped around him from behind. He tensed as he felt a warm figure press against his back. His muscles relaxed as the figure shook against his back, leaving his back moist with tears. Taiga scratched his chin, a sheepish smile on his face as he said, "Really, it's fi—"
 "I'm sorry!" Saeko cried as she tightened her grip around his waist.
 "There's nothing to apologize for," Taiga said with a chuckle. "It's not like it's your fault or anything." 
 Saeko shuddered, but as she had been shaking constantly, Taiga could not tell the difference. She swiftly released her grip and fled the room before Taiga could react.
 Taiga raised a brow in question but he eventually shrugged it off. Women were mysterious creatures. He could not begin to fathom what went through their heads. He inclined on the balcony, a small smile on his lips as he recalled the earlier warmth. 
 ****
 Shouyou sat in his office, a lazy grin on his face as he pushed commands on his keyboard, ordering the warrior on the screen to descend upon a den of monsters with righteous vengeance. Even with the booming popularity of virtual games, there still laid an inherent charm within the classic MMOs.
 Shouyou was just about to finish a battle when the door to his office suddenly burst open. In his shock, he inputted the wrong command. His attack missed, and he could only watch helplessly as his character was mauled to death by the angry goblins.
 With a defeated sigh, Shouyou looked up at the beautiful young woman, whose reddened eyes and puffy cheeks told a story he had long been expecting. "Well, Sae-chan, you finally came to see me." He grinned as he rested his chin on his hands. "How are you doing?"
 Saeko frowned. Her nails dug deep into her hands till they drew blood. "You lied to me."
 Shouyou shrugged. "I knew it was only a matter of time before you learned the truth from Taiga." With a short nod, he admonished, "This wouldn't have happened if you stuck to the plan. You were supposed to get close to Suzuki, not Taiga."
 Saeko stiffened. She bit her bottom lip, her gaze hardening with stubborn rage. "I shall do as I damn please." Her fists clenched even further as she mustered up enough courage to glare at the blond man. "I shall him the truth."
 "It's 2024," Shouyou said with a chuckle. "Far be it from me to stop a strong, independent woman from doing what she wants." His gaze sharpened as he sneered, "Just keep in mind what he lost. Do you think he will forgive you?"
 Saeko shuddered, tears welling up in her eyes. "I hate you."
 A rare, heartfelt smile warmed Shouyou's face. "I love you too." Saeko bit her lip, then turned to leave. She made it all the way to the door when Shouyou playfully reprimanded, "As a Japanese, shouldn't you be more respectful?"
 Saeko froze. She turned and respectfully bowed. "See you later... Father."                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

 

Chapter 6: Where Men Gather

Training Hall 3,

 Fourth Floor,
 Learning Building 2.
 Klack! Kataka... 
 Rhythmic bursts akin to drumsticks against stone rang out in the training room as a familiar figure weaved his way through the series of angry dummies intent on smashing him. The sweaty figure measured the incoming dummies, reddened eyes evidence of the intense concentration he was under. Despite this, his expression was flat as he slapped and redirected dummies out of his path. His feet made small, nimble steps, which while seemingly slow at first glance, somehow transported him across the platform within a few seconds.
 Most shockingly, however, was the number displayed on the regulator on the foot of the machine. Lv 9!
 This was a number which would cause a massive uproar in the outside world if it ever got out. The ninth level of the device was above what the special military divisions could handle. Perhaps only those reclusive monsters who spent all their life training to break past the limits of humanity and attain the pinnacle of body development could achieve such results. Still, though, those people usually only reached that level after decades of effort and training. Even those abnormal geniuses had to wait till their thirties before they could reach the physical requirements needed for reaching the ninth level.
 However, in this training room tucked away from the eyes of the world, a young man was currently upending this school of thought by not only challenging the ninth level but managing to hold on past the ten-minute mark.
 Unfortunately, judging by the obvious veins on the young man's neck and the trembling calves, he would not be able to hold on for much longer. Actually, this much should be expected. If this young man beat the ninth level, he would no longer just be a 'genius' but a true monster at the pinnacle of human fitness. When one considered the young man was no more than twenty years at the most, that 'monster' title could only be changed to 'fiend'.
 The young man barely dodged an incoming arm then swiftly placed his right leg behind him as he made to shift to the next 'safe zone'. Unfortunately, it seemed his leg muscles could no longer handle the torture as they locked in place, momentarily trapping the young man. This lockdown only lasted for a split second. Normally, he would have been able to recover with a quick shake of his leg. Unfortunately, this training equipment did not care for his predicament. Hence he would be swiftly punished for the lapse in movement.
 The young man grit his teeth and sharply pulled backward. His hands flew out, rapidly slapping away the dummies that approached. In that split second, he managed to repel five dummies, but rather than celebrate, his brows furrowed in vexation. Behind the five he slapped away were many more dummies. Even if he was in top condition, he knew he would not be able to make it to the 'safe' zone which had shifted a meter ahead, hidden behind a storm of arms.
 Suzuki's eyes grew cold as he glared at the impossible odds. It was quite vexing really. When it came to reactions, he could pinpoint all the steps he would need to take in order to make it to that zone safely. Unfortunately, ever since Razznik, Suzuki's mind and body were often out of sync. There were many times he could predict or see an attack coming, but his body would not be able to follow through on his desired line of attack.
 The same situation was occurring at that moment.
 Suzuki closed his eyes, deciding to leave his next move to his instincts. He had already mapped out the required steps. Whether he could make it or not would depend on his body. Even though he knew his own body well enough to know he would never make it, he had never been the type to sit and wait for death.

Unbeknownst to Suzuki, his cells began to jump with excitement as if cheering for him. His heartbeat accelerated. Veins popped on his arms and legs as torrents of blood surged through his system. With a loud roar, Suzuki willed his body to move!
 Kacha!
 With the sound of something breaking, Suzuki accelerated. His feet blurred as he shifted through the dummies. Fifteen steps within two seconds and his feet once again planted themselves in the 'safe' zone.
 Suzuki's eyes flew open once he settled in the 'safe' zone, rapidly taking in the trajectories of the incoming dummies. Excitement surged through him as he slipped through rapidly thinning gaps between the dummies. His movements, compared to a moment ago were much sharper, precise and sure. What once seemed an impossible task only required a bit of concentration.
 Lost in the newfound abilities, Suzuki did not feel time pass by. If someone passed by, they would have been shocked to see the pure grin on the young man's face. In this world, the only thing which could bring the young man such pure, unadulterated joy was the feeling of breaking through his limits.
 However, all good things must eventually come to an end. Suzuki was still in the midst of dodging a particular arm when it came to a disappointing halt. The young man froze in place, eyes colored with confusion as he stared at the dummies. It took a few moments for the euphoria to cool down, after which he finally realized he had hit the time limit.
 One way or another, he had somehow managed to survive the ninth round! If this result got out, who knew how those military men would react? Most likely several divisions would fall over themselves to get him as a teammate. Unfortunately, the name of this young man and his accomplishments would not hit the world stage for a while yet.
 Moments after the euphoria cooled down, Suzuki's brows flinched sharp pain rocked his limbs. He grit his teeth and clenched his fists. Suzuki's frown deepened as the pain rushed up his forearm. It would seem the increase in strength did not come cheap. He had overdrafted his muscles and would need to rest for a few days to repair the damage.
 Suzuki's thoughts shifted from the pain to the feeling he had during the breakthrough. Although he was pleased with the breakthrough, he could not help the little uncertainty in his heart. He knew his own strength well. Owing to the fact that he spent most of the time in the Virtual Drive, his muscles should have deteriorated. However, not only had they not only regressed, but his muscles had improved to the extent where he actually got faster.
 Yes, Faster. Not in the sense that his reaction speed improved, but his physical abilities improved by a step. It was a shocking achievement which could not be explained away with a few exercises every few days. Even though the Virtual Drives provided their users with the basic nutrients they needed to survive extended playthroughs, the solution given shared more similarities with the drips administered in hospitals than any muscle-enhancing drug.
 This was the reason why Suzuki could not understand why he had been able to improve his physical ability and the cause for his uncertainty.
 Suzuki mulled over the issue for a few minutes, but then decisively dropped it when he could not come to a conclusion. Whatever, as long as his strength continued to increase, who cared what caused it?
 Satisfied with the answer, Suzuki hopped down from the platform and grabbed a bottle of water on a table nearby. Like a thirsty hippo, he emptied the liter-sized bottle, a soft moan escaping his lips as the cool liquid quenched the infernos raging in his body. Once done, he examined the Genaco logo on the bottle with a wry smile.
 Indeed, the Genaco Corporation was a greedy behemoth with branches in almost every facet of human lives. However, even among these different industries, the company focused most of its resources on its gaming, entertainment, electronics and food industries. The wide appeal of these four industries made sure the company was well known and respected in most countries.

What some analysts found baffling, however, was the manner in which the company rose from seemingly nowhere to tower over the world. Originally, Genaco Corp. was a successful business in Japan alone that focused mainly on food products. However, in 2004, the company, seemingly out of nowhere, began to dabble in electronics. Analysts at the time mostly laughed at these foolish upstarts who thought they could shake the already established giants of the industry.
 Time, however, would soon make a mockery of these analysts. The electronic devices put forth by Genaco Corp. proved to be far ahead of their direct competitors, filled with innovative ideas that quickly shattered the normal mode of operations. The corporation's hands stretched into countries outside the shores of Japan, using the excessive demand for the products as an opportunity to create stable footholds abroad.
 Eventually, Genaco Corps.' food industry used the trade channels opened up by their electronic junior counterparts to also expand their business overseas. The company was booming and the government, recognizing the cash cow, hurried to grant them many concessions in order to make businesses much smoother for the company.
 However, the company did not sit on its laurels. Like a shark after the smell of blood, Genaco capitalized on the growing mainstream popularity of gaming to stake their own flags in the gaming industry. At first, the company only had meager success in this field. After all, it was a bit too difficult to expect them to displace the giants of this particular industry. Compared to the electronics market where people usually just got what performed best, gamers tended to have a particular company they adored and defended to the end with a fervor that would not be beaten by death-sworn knights of the dark ages.
 Just when Genaco's rivals were finally revealing their sneers at the upstarts who thought too much of themselves, 2014 rolled around and the Nesla Coils were invented. In that same year, Genaco's Russian division revealed its first video game powered by the mind-blowing virtual reality technology. This was not the VR technology most other tech companies had on the market. Their's were like glasses into another world. Genaco's VR technology directly transported users into the Virtual World!
 Leaving the gamers who absolutely went insane with the reveal of this technology, other countries and companies could not hide the greed in their eyes as they fell over themselves to pay absolutely insane amounts to earn the rights to use this technology.
 Genaco's worth instantly shot through the roof, displacing several long-standing companies as the top-earning corporation since. With more improvements to their virtual systems and the innovative games and applications which took advantage of those systems, they easily defended that position. With governments and private organizations alike on their clientele lists, the corporation's yearly profits easily outclassed their rivals, raking in over a trillion dollars in their latest fiscal year.
 The company was so profitable that the owner and majority shareholder, Jediah Kaguya Minako had enough funds at his disposal to launch a crazy ambition to build a functioning space station so as to allow regular citizens a chance to view space for themselves. The maddening thing was, the old man had seemingly succeeded in his endeavor.
 Suzuki clucked his tongue as he recalled the news he heard on the TV a few weeks back about the space station. If things went as that old man planned, the profits of Genaco Corp. probably would not end in just the trillions.
 Once again, Suzuki was faced with the terrifying reality of the strength behind the people who had kidnapped him. Suzuki shook his head. In the end, it didn't matter to him how strong the enemy was. So far, he had nothing to complain about. The game was fun, he was learning new things, and his strength had rapidly increased since he arrived. All in all, he was closer to his ultimate goal of being 'complete'. As long as the company did nothing to anger him, Suzuki would play along with this whole charade. Should they cross his bottom line, however...?

Hmph. It would be interesting to see how he would fare against the whole world. Suzuki's grip deformed the empty bottle. A snide grin curled up his lips as heavy battle intent flashed in his eyes.
 "Isn't that a little too much bloodlust for a kid, Mato-kun?"
 Suzuki's face instantly fell to a neutral state. He turned to see Kimuri lazily resting on the wall by the door. The older man was dressed in a slim-fitted T-shirt and jogging pants, long hair securely tied up in a bun. The sweat-soaked shirt and strained muscles revealed he was just returning from an intense workout.
 Suzuki pursed his lips as he examined the lackadaisical man. He was not fooled one bit by the lazy outward appearance of this man. Despite his seemingly relaxed state, Suzuki could not find any openings on Kimuri with a certainty of launching a sneak attack. Kimuri's presence was faint, yet powerful at the same time, like a gentle breeze passing by. Suzuki was clear that should Kimuri be provoked, that gentle wind would instantly transform into a murderous gale.
 Suzuki respected strength. Upon seeing someone who would present a challenge, he adopted a neutral stance. "Suzuki's fine," the young man stated as a trace of battle intent flashed through his eyes. However, he did not make any additional movements. He decided to adopt a wait and see approach to see what this man wanted from him.
 "Ho... You aren't as arrogant as the rumors claim," Kimuri appraised with a light smile. "My name's Tsukosen Kimuri. Everyone calls me Kimuri."
 Suzuki ignored the first part of Kimuri's sentence. "How can I help you, Kimuri-san?" Suzuki inwardly praised himself. Previously, he would have replied with something like "So what?" or walked past the man. Mm, Kashi's time was not wasted. He was beginning to learn how to socially interact with people.
 How would Suzuki know that this kind of direct questioning of a person's motive was also quite awkward? Well, this type of direct personality still had its own pros and cons. All in all, it was a distinct improvement from the past.
 Kimuri, oblivious to Suzuki's inner satisfaction, could only let out an awkward chuckle. Damn, cutting right to chase, are we? He looked over the youth's shoulder to the platform's control panel which still had the number nine displayed. "I heard the sounds of someone challenging the platform and came to take a look." With a small smile, he walked over to the platform. "Level nine huh? I've been stuck here for a while. Did you make a breakthrough?"
 "Something like that," Suzuki readily admitted. He saw no reason to hide the truth. Of course, if Usman Taki was here, he would shake his head with disappointment. It didn't matter if there was a need or not. Information about oneself should not be given out easily. In fact, Kashi would probably also agree with that viewpoint while Razznik would have long since 'challenged' Kimuri to a fight. And by 'challenge', what was meant was he would smash a fist into Kimuri's face, then deal with the consequences with a grin regardless of win or loss.
 "That's impressive," Kimuri softly praised. "Well, if you can do it, why can't I?" With those words, Kimuri tapped on the panel to start up the platform then jumped onto it.
 Suzuki chose to wait. This was the first time he would see someone other than himself challenge the platform. It would be nice to how Kimuri attempted the platform.
 To his surprise, Kimuri stretched his hand and muttered, "Sword."
 Instantly, a cabinet rose from the platform floor with a multitude of weapons seated on it. Kimuri ignored the weapons and picked out a peculiar looking short sword similar to the type used by the Romans in the past. After confirming his choice, the cabinet receded into the platform ground.
 Suzuki's expression turned grave once Kimuri brandished the weapon. As expected, the instant the man got serious, his aura instantly turned violent and deadly. If a lesser person stood in that room, they might have fainted from the sheer pressure Kimuri exuded.

Suzuki's gaze turned sharp as the dummies whirled to life and began their indiscriminate attack.
 Kimuri's eyes let out a dark light as his feet pressed against the earth.
 Boom!
 Suzuki's eyes widened with shock at the man who had appeared three meters away from his initial spot. Within the sea of dummies, a path had been forcefully cleared, forming a road which should not have belonged there. Suzuki's gaze examined the still trembling sword in Kimuri's hands that held the answer to the puzzle. The man had unleashed an insane burst of speed, using the sword to smash all the dummies out of his path.
 Of course, this was level nine, and the force of Kimuri's swing was not enough to 'kill' the dummies. But if it was merely pushing them out of the path, then he could easily do so. Of course, after that initial burst, Kimuri did not get a chance to show off that grandly anymore as the dummies gradually increased their speed.
 Suzuki studied Kimuri's battle with apt interest. It seemed like him, Kimuri was the type to focus on speed, but where Kashi preferred nimble movements, Kimuri favored short, intense bursts of forceful speed. Normally, such a method would be suicide on the platform, but the short sword in Kimuri's hand seemed to have eyes of its own, flying out to redirect any incoming dummies while its owner darted about the platform with the vigor of a rabbit.
 Kimuri should not be underestimated because he used a weapon to challenge the platform. Using a weapon did not guarantee the challenge would be any easier. In fact, for most, the use of a weapon only made the challenge much more difficult. This was because weapons added extra length to their bodies, which made them a larger target for the dummies. Should the weapons get hit, the user would ll
 Thirty minutes later, Suzuki was quite pleased to see Kimuri successfully complete the challenge. This challenge had opened up some new paths for Suzuki.
 Kimuri took a moment to calm his breath then returned the sword to the cabinet. The imposing presence died down once the sword left his hands as a lazy smile took its place. He grinned at Suzuki as he wobbled off the platform. "What'd you think? Cool right?"
 "Impressive," Suzuki nodded affirmatively. "I don't think I could have done it the way you did."
 "Maybe, maybe not," Kimuri said with a sigh. "But I could never do it your way. That dodging method of yours is plain suicidal. How'd you come up with that style?"
 "I'm used to fighting many people at once." Suzuki shrugged. "Street fights usually don't have the luxury of weapons lying around. It's better to dodge than attack head on."
 "Shit, that's tough," Kimuri said with a rough shake of his head.
 "Not really," Suzuki countered. "When I dodge, the smaller the margin is, the easier it is for me to counterattack before the enemy recovers." He looked at the platform. "This way I can eliminate the enemy one at a time."
 "Hmm..." Kimuri murmured as he scratched his beard in thought. "That method seems a little passive for my taste. I prefer taking the initiative to wipe out my enemies."
 Suzuki nodded. "I noticed." He looked at Kimuri's legs. "You must put a lot of work into your leg muscles. Those short bursts of yours look really taxing."
 "You've got a good eye," Kimuri confirmed with a chuckle. "I ran track in high school and uni. Been toning my muscles ever since. It's my firm belief that speed trumps all. After all, my dream is to run so fast I blend into the wind." Kimuri revealed an embarrassed smile. "That's what got me into VR gaming in the first place. Childish isn't it?"
 "Not at all," Suzuki strongly denied. "Desire to merge with the wind huh?" A shadow of a smile silently crept up the side of Suzuki's lips. "Still a better reason than wanting to be the strongest man in the world, isn't it?"
 Kimuri's eyes went wide, the twinkle in his eyes belying his inner laughter. "You?"
 "Yup." Suzuki shrugged without a shred of shame. "In my defense, I was in ninth grade. Things were different then."
 "Uh-huh, sure thing," Kimuri lightly teased.
 Kimuri and Suzuki shared their experiences, trading battle tales both within VR and reality. The two men found something of themselves in the other, and soon the atmosphere had relaxed to the point both men lost track of time. In Suzuki's lifetime, this was most likely the first time he found someone—aside from Ayumi—he could relax and talk with. Taiga was cool, but Suzuki could not relax around the silver-haired man.
 For someone as sensitive as Suzuki, the bloodlust Taiga instinctively leaked out caused his hairs to stand on end. Although Suzuki would not go as far as to say he was afraid of Taiga, he could not shake the feeling the foolish grin on Taiga's face hid a much more terrifying personality.
 Eventually, Suzuki and Kimuri bid themselves well and the former walked to the shower room. After a quick bath and change, he made his way to the canteen downstairs to fill his body with the nutrients it desired after a hard workout.
 The canteen was a large hall with buffet style services. Several tables, both circular and rectangular made up the space, most of which were occupied.
 Suzuki's entrance drew the attention of those seated as he was a distinctively rare figure around the campus. For some of these people, this was the first time they had laid eyes on him. As it was just past eight in the morning, a lot of these people had just finished their workouts and were brimming with a lot of energy. A lot of these crowd was eager to find a place to vent this energy.
 Suzuki ignored the looks thrown his way as he made his way to the counter. He picked then filled a tray with three bowls of rice and some side dishes, a testament to his ever-increasing appetite. In fact, chances were he would return for seconds after he was done.
 Suzuki found himself an empty round table and sat down to enjoy his food. The murmurings around him were thrown into the back of his mind. Who cared what these people thought? Just because he had learned how to interact with people did not mean he would go out of his way to disturb himself with the viewpoint of the weak who could only wag their tongues.
 This was Suzuki's new philosophy. He would respect and speak with the strong. His interactions with the weak would greatly depend on his mood.
 Suzuki expressed his thanks for the food, but just as he was about to take the first bite...
 BAM!
 Suzuki placed his chopsticks on the table as he looked up at the five men that had taken it upon themselves to position themselves around the table, four of which were shared equally at either side of the table, and the last at his back. Suzuki's gaze turned chilly as he noted the disdain and battle intent in the men's eyes.
 As expected, the hall immediately went silent as those within turned their attention to Suzuki's table. Most people wanted to probe this mysterious man, but none were willing to expose their cards this early. Luckily, some rascals eager to prove their strength had come forward and volunteered themselves for the job.
 Heh, seems I look like an easy chick to bully huh. Suzuki clucked his tongue and muttered, "Where men gather, fools will make themselves known."

 

Chapter 7: The Flow

            
 Twenty Minutes Earlier,
 The rowdy canteen went quiet as six individuals walked into the hall, led by a dark haired beauty. The members of [Silver Spear] exuded grace and confidence in their steps, which inadvertently drew the attention of all those present.
 "Hey, hey, it's those Silver Spear guys. I heard their leader completed the third level two days ago."
 "Hmph. That's old news. See that big guy? He solo crushed two teams during a training session!"
 "Ah, my idol is Akiyo-chan! So small and cuddly!"
 "Akiyo-chan? Go die if you want to! I'd rather face anyone other than that demon. At least with the others, you know how you died."
 Yokina Natsu walked with her head held high and feet steady. One could tell she was used to the attention from her indifferent smile. Rather than whatever the plebeians thought of her, she'd rather focus on her outstanding objectives. Two days ago, she had finally completed the third stage of the Gladiator Training. Her integration and familiarity with her Gladiator was steadily increasing by the day. At this rate, she would definitely be ready for the competition in two weeks.
 Natsu took a seat at her regular table—a small, round table with six chairs around it—while the rest went to get their food. She scanned the room, searching for a few key individuals, the only people she considered to be a threat. Unfortunately, it seemed those individuals were still in the game. Disappointment briefly flashed in her eyes, but it receded as quickly as it came.
 "Kiyo Delivery!"
 Natsu pushed the thoughts to the back of her head, a lovely smile brightening up her expression as she accepted the tray in the little Akiyo's hands. "Ah, Kiyo-chan, I said you can leave this kind of thing to Ken-san."
 "It's fine," Akiyo cheerfully rebutted as she took the seat to Natsu's right. "Ken-san's got mine."
 "Haha! My muscle's got to be good for something right?" Takahiro Ken guffawed as he gently placed a tray in front of the grateful Akiyo. He sat down at Natsu's right with his own tray, sending a challenging grin at his leader. "Wanna fight, boss?"
 "In-game or out?" questioned a delicate-looking young man strangely dressed in a form-fitting dinner jacket. The young man, Kazue Saito, the only other male member of Silver Spear took the seat opposite Natsu.
 "Saito, stop teasing him," a tall, auburn-haired woman in her early-twenties chuckled as she took a seat. "Ken-san wouldn't last two seconds in Line." Yamazaki Hitomi, at twenty-four years old, was the second oldest of the group after Ken. She often played the role of big sister to the party.
 The last member, Nakahara Akiko quietly sat between Ken and Saito. The fifteen-sixteen teenager's straight black hair was cut short at the shoulder. The curious eyes behind a pair of prescription glasses accentuated her scholarly aura.
 "No problem," Natsu replied Ken with a light chuckle. "We'll spar at night after practice."
 Ken nodded, a satisfied grin on his face as he looked forward to night-time. Of course, he would first have to complete his in-game duties. A savage glint flashed in his eyes as he thought back to the Orkhs who had been giving him some trouble at the Southern Border. He looked at Akiko who was focused on her salad. Mm, I will have to ask her for help.
 As they ate, the group began to discuss their separate in-game operations. The task of conquering Daggerfall was certainly not a one-day job. Even with the help of the dwarfs, there was no guarantee they would be able to complete the job, especially with the staunch opposition by the resilient Orcs and natives.

Luckily, Ederwood's trade deal with Elysium Cove ensured the army had ample resources to continue their conquest without fear of Imperium cutting off their supply line. Confident in the supply line, the Ederwood army not only managed to secure a base for themselves, but had steadily pushed their way into the country. If it were not for the Orcs who regularly carried out sabotage missions on the rear bases, the progress would have been faster.
 "It's strange," Akiko muttered. "Orcs are supposed to be instinctive creatures. Who taught them tactics?"
 "I've been wondering the same thing myself," Natsu replied in a frustrated tone. "If they remained the way they should, we would have long conquered Daggerfall."
 "I believe the key to our victory lies in figuring out the source of their improved intellect," Akiko put forward. She looked up from her plate to meet Natsu's strong gaze. "Can I take a small team and check it out?"
 "I know you're only doing this to satisfy your curiosity." Natsu let out a wry smile. "But, it does not change the nature of the situation. If there is indeed something or someone increasing the Orc's intelligence, I want that thing." Natsu tapped on the table. "Take Farsight's team. Remember, safety is your number one priority. It'll take too long to level up your secondary character."
 Ken inwardly sighed as he watched Akiko happily agree to her assignment. Looked like he would have to deal with the orcs on his own.
 "Ken-san, about your orc problem," Akiko started, causing Ken to rapidly raise his head, ears peeled as if afraid to miss a single word. "I suggest raiding the orc settlements in the area."
 "We already tried that," Ken revealed with a sigh. "Didn't take."
 "You're doing it wrong," Akiko softly stated. "Next time you raid, disable the adults and take the children hostage. Repeat this for as many settlements as you can, then release a statement challenging the orcs to an all-out battle to determine the owner of the land."
 Ken's eyelids jumped as a cold shiver ran up his spine. "Th-that's too despicable! We will be hated!"
 "There's no such thing as despicable in war," Akiko calmly rebutted. "Besides, this is a videogame. Those guys are just computer codes no matter how realistic they look."
 "Ah, yeah. You're right." Ken struggled to calm the jitters in his heart. Although he was one who enjoyed fighting, such tactics left a bitter taste in his mouth. "What should we do if they refuse to take up the challenge?"
 "Make an example out of the hostages," Akiko said with nonchalance. "Kill one child and display their corpse for every day they hesitate. If the rebels still refuse to face you in open combat, you won't even have to do a thing. Their fellow orcs will seek them out and destroy them. After all, it's not like you're asking them to surrender to a definite death, but instead requesting a formal battle. Any still refusing you would be seen as a coward by the battle-hungry orcs."
 Ken swallowed hard. He raised a hand to his forehead, only to discover a pool of sweat. As expected of Akiko. This girl was often times quiet and reserved, but the kind thoughts that ran through her head were on another level. Whenever she opened her mouth, she would seemingly effortlessly solve whatever issue was plaguing the guild members. A significant portion of the reason why their guild rose to prominence so quickly in Ederwood was as a result of Akiko's unscrupulous means and ideas.
 "Ah, yeah," Ken muttered. "I'll do that. Than—"
 "Look who just walked in," Saitou interrupted with a dark glint in his eyes.
 "Who?" Ken, who had his back to the entrance, turned around in time to see Suzuki's indifferent expression as he walked to the buffet trays. His brows immediately squeezed in a tight wrinkle. "Ah, it's that cocky guy."

"I hate that idiot," Akiyo cursed under her breath. "Always acting so mysterious. Hmph, he looks like he's got a stick up his butt."
 "Yeah, I've heard he spends ninety-percent of his time in-game," Saitou revealed. "Aside from the time you guys saw him training, no one else has spotted him in the Gladiator training room."
 "I wonder if it's confidence or ignorance." Hitomi lips curled up into a seductive smile as she thoroughly examined the young man.
 "Seems like something interesting's going to happen," Natsu stated.
 Natsu's teammates followed her line of sight to a table close to Suzuki's. A squad of five stood up and walked over to Suzuki, threatening glares and purposeful steps revealing they were not going to inquire on the sweetness of the soup.
 The entire hall instantly grew silent as over thirty pairs of eyes turned to the show. Unfortunately, even when the team surrounded Suzuki, the teenager did not react at all, still obliviously intending to enjoy his meal. Disappointment dimmed those excited eyes as they felt this mysterious guy was not all he seemed.
 However, it was at this point that one of the men slammed his palm onto the table.
 "Yes! Go cliché bad guy!" Akiyo praised with a clap as she awaited Suzuki's response.
 Luckily, Suzuki did not disappoint.
 "Where men gather, fools will make themselves known." Suzuki made no attempt to hide his voice so it easily travelled across a significant portion of the completely silent hall.
 What followed was a predictable eruption of cheers and jeers, as the chaos-loving crowd made fun of the five men. The gamers repeated the phrase, some choosing to commit it to memory to use at a future date.
 The faces of the men surrounding Suzuki turned ugly in an instant. They already proved earlier they were not a patient group. Being mocked by the crowd made them excessively eager to wash off the shame. In his rage, the man behind Suzuki clamped his hand on Suzuki's left . "Brat! Show some re-urkh!"
 The man's words caught in his throat as Suzuki grabbed the arm on his shoulder and forcefully pulled down. An explosive force left the man unable to resist. He easily fell forward. Suzuki's left elbow greeted the man's nose on his way down, crushing it. Blood seeped out of the man's nose but Suzuki was far from done. His right hand one again pulled down, dragging the disoriented man down to Suzuki's line of sight. The teenager's left hand snaked behind the man's head and 'gently' guided it to the edge of his table.
 Crack!
 Compared to the first impact, the sardonic crack that rang out caused everyone's pupils to shrink in fright. The man who grabbed Suzuki's shoulder slumped to the ground, blood pouring ceaselessly out of his broken nose.
 Suzuki's apathetic gaze never once placed the man in its sights. He nonchalantly picked up his chopsticks and clapped his hands in thanks. Only then did he mutter, "Never touch me from behind."
 The remaining four men fidgeted, anger and rage burning in their eyes. Yet despite the numerical and height advantage they clearly had, they could not bring themselves to attack. For some reason, the young man who freely ate with a detached air resembled a dragon at rest. If they chose to provoke him at this time, there was no doubt that seeminly calm dragon would tear them apart.
 "We, we'll get you for this!" Leaving those words which sounded weak even to their own ears, the four men quickly picked up their unconscious partner and fled the canteen.
 Suzuki did not respond to their taunts. The entire hall once again fell silent as a deathly still chilled its occupants to the bone. The gamers stared wide-eyed as the young man finished his food with the same aloof expression. When he was finished, he once again clapped his hands in gratitude then slowly, but purposefully walked out.

It must be said that Suzuki was not a person people would describe as handsome. He definitely wasn't ugly either. Most people would call him above-average, a face that, although it might garner a second glance on the street, would just as easily be forgotten in a few minutes. However, when coupled with the mysterious aloofness, cold aura and hints of untamed wildness in his eyes, the young man suddenly transformed into a figure that would be transfixed in all their hearts for a long time to come.
 Natsu's brows furrowed as Suzuki left the canteen. She had not wanted to admit it previously, but now she had no choice. This Suzuki was certainly someone worth keeping tabs on. He might just give everyone a shock during the competition.
 Suzuki, meanwhile, had no idea he was being marked by a dangerous individual. Even if he did, he would not have cared. At the moment, Suzuki was taking a walk outside, reveling in the warmth of the early morning sun. He wore his headphones, a small smile curling up the corner of his lips as a slow orchestral viola piece began to hum.
 Suzuki placed his hands in his pocket, walking with no destination in mind. For today, he intended to relax and internalize. He thought back to the past hour. From his conversation with Kemuri to the eventual beat down of that man. As he had thought, Kashi's experiences had begun to sprout new emotions in him. For one, he no longer viewed everyone as an enemy, even going so far as to appreciate the value to having friends. But the later fight showed that the core of who he was would always remain.
 Suzuki clenched his fists as he recalled his instinctive reaction to being grabbed on the shoulder. At the time, despite not feeling angry or enraged, it had still taken a lot out of him to respond so leniently. The majority of his instinct wanted to break every bone in that man's arm to serve as a warning, but he had somehow managed to rein in that impulse at the last minute. In the end, the assailant only got off with a broken nose, a great improvement to his days engaging in street fights.
 Suzuki smiled. Yes, this was how it should be. Even if his purpose remained the same, he had to learn flexibility in execution.
 Suzuki's thoughts shifted—like it always does—from his own life to that of Kashi's. He was impressed by the daeben's style of doing things. Although Suzuki very much preferred Razznik's pursuit of strength which ensured nothing in this world could harm him, Kashi's guild and community approach was worth learning.
 Suzuki could not help but wonder; if Razznik had friends, would he have wanted to die so badly after reaching the top? Suzuki shook his head, dispelling the thought. There was no need to consider the what-ifs. While he could never get his answer from the genuine Razznik, the one in-game might have the answer.
 Lost in his thoughts, Suzuki did not realize he had been walking for the better part of two hours. He'd long since left the more populated sectors behind, venturing into the more uncharted territory. Suzuki only realized he had strayed a long way off the beaten path when he arrived at a river bank. Due to the PDA in his pocket, he was not afraid of getting lost so he calmly watched the river flow by.
 The sun shone overhead, but even with his hood on, Suzuki did not seem to feel the heat. His entire attention was drawn to the peaceful waters. A fallen branch suddenly popped out of the river before being pulled down once more. A moment later, Suzuki caught sight of the branch out of the corner of his eyes. It seemed, although the surface looked smooth, there was some rapid undercurrents which rapidly flushed away anything caught within.
 Suzuki inwardly chuckled. Was this not the current state of the world right now? Although the world seemed to be at peace, various nations had begun making major preparations for an upcoming battle. Would he be like the helpless branch, forced to flow wherever the current took him, or would he become a fish, daring to swim against the tide?

Suzuki looked to the sky. He raised his right hand, seemingly trying to reach something up there. Better yet, could he find a way to exist outside the tide? Could he become a bird who preys on those caught in the tide?
 Suzuki clenched his fist. As expected, his fingers could not reach, let alone grab the sky. Shaking his head, he turned his attention back to the river. The branch was nowhere to be found, presumably washed away or drowned underneath. Suzuki let out a sigh. Forget becoming a bird, at present he was most likely no different from the tree branch, being forced to flow along with the tide.
 "But that's okay," Suzuki muttered as he pocketed his hands. "I only need to survive. That's all there is to it." Suzuki's gaze hardened with resolve as his fingers clenched in his pockets.
 Suzuki calmed the roiling emotions in his heart, then cast a disappointed glance at the river. What a shame. He should have come with his sketch pad. It wasn't everyday an artist obtained inspiration from a scene. Suzuki committed the scene to memory then turned.
 Suzuki froze as he came face to face with Jade who was watching him with a sly grin. Suzuki took down his head phones and regarded the girl with puzzled eyes. "What are you doing here?"
 "I followed you," Jade cheerfully replied with a toothy grin as she raised her PDA. "Couldn't find you when I logged out so I tracked your location." She glanced past Suzuki to the riverbank. "I gotta admit, this is a pretty nice locale. Far away from the noise too. Is this your secret chill spot?"
 If it were any other person Suzuki would have been more than offended. But hearing Jade unabashedly announce she tracked him somehow diffused any anger he should have felt.
 "No," Suzuki replied. "Just found it. You can stay, I'm heading back." Suzuki made to move past Jade, but the young woman deftly stepped into his path.
 "You can't just leave like that," Jade challenged with a pout. "I came all the way out here to find you. Least you could do is wait for me."
 Suzuki thought about it. "Did you come out here with a bike?"
 "I rode here obviously." Jade sarcastically rolled her eyes. "Why?"
 "I'll wait if I can ride back," Suzuki stated with a deadpan expression. "I'm tired of walking."
 "Fine, but I ride at the back."
 Suzuki nodded, drawing a bright smile from Jade's lips. The young man's heart stopped for a moment, but before he could question what the hell just happened, Jade breezed past him, leaving only the lingering scent of lilies.
 Suzuki turned to see Jade unceremoniously plop onto the grass near the river. She closed her eyes, seemingly intending to fall asleep right there. Suzuki's gaze lingered a moment on Jade's peaceful expression before he shifted it to the flowing stream. Only then did he realize he had forgotten to ask her how long she intended to rest out here.
 "Hey, how long's your rest?"
 Jade patted the grass next to her in reply. "When was the last time you took a load off?"
 "Took a load off?" Suzuki repeated in an incredulous tone.
 "Yeah, relax," Jade emphasized with a lazy smile. "You do know what that's like right?"
 "Yes, I know how to relax," Suzuki shot back with a snort. "What did it look like I was doing earlier?"
 "That wasn't relaxation." Jade chuckled. "You were all frowny and serious like you carried the entire world on your shoulders." Jade once again patted the ground. "Try forgetting for five minutes. Forget everything."
 "Forget?" Suzuki shook his head. His voice trembled with deep-seated grief as he stated, "I cannot forget. Not yet."
 Jade went silent for a moment as the grass danced in the morning breeze. "I don't know the burden you're carrying. And I don't dare to assume I can help you with it." Jade turned to face Suzuki, her eyes holding a silent plea within them. "What I do know is that your burden, whatever it is will still be here five minutes later. Sometimes we need to distance ourselves from our burdens to be able to see things clearer."
 Suzuki eyes went wide as he thought back to the bird flying over the river. Indeed, the bird could see the entire river because its vantage point was completely different. To the stick and the fish, the river would be their whole world. One would be pulled along by the river, while the other could try to go against the flow, but in the end, its range of movement would always be bound to the river.
 Was that what he was missing? Indeed, since the accident, he had never once allowed himself to rest. Suzuki wordlessly sat next to Jade on the grass. He then closed his eyes and tried to empty his thoughts. For once he would not worry over his existence, the heavy sin he bore nor would he worry over Kashi's life.
 A gentle breeze blew past, rustling the young man's hair as if congratulating him on finally letting go.
 A rare smile curled up Suzuki's lips. I never knew the wind could feel so good...
 Suzuki lost himself in this state of nothingness. There were no thoughts in his mind, only peace and a very rare hint of satisfaction. Indeed, if the world were to have ended at that exact moment, he probably would not have cared. He was instead captivated by the gentle, yet powerful nature of the wind around him and the subtle lapping of the river as it washed on the backs.
 By the time Suzuki finally opened his eyes, the sun was already close to its zenith. He was not shocked to find Jade sitting in front of him with her cheeks resting on her hands. She winked as a smile blossomed.
 "Enjoy your rest?" Jade questioned with a teasing grin.
 In reply, Suzuki snorted as he rose to his feet and dusted his pants. "Let's go," he ordered as he helped Jade to her feet. "We're running late."
 Jade pouted as she followed him to her bicycle. She got on the back after Suzuki had set up.
 Suzuki wordlessly pedalled back to the Restricted Sector, his expression formally restored to its perpetual indifference.
 Upon reaching their building, Jade locked the bicycle then followed Suzuki up the elevator to their apartment. As usual, the young man did not say a word right up until they reached their apartment door where he abruptly came to a stop. He seemed to freeze at the door, his brows drawing closer as he glared at the door as if confronting some hated enemy.
 Concerned, Jade asked, "Did something happ—"
 "Thank you. For today, thank you."
 "Wait, what?" Before Jade could wrap her head around it, Suzuki had already opened the door and escaped to the apartment. "Hold up, I didn't get that!" Jade screamed with excitement as she dashed in, eager to record this milestone achievement. "Hey repeat that one more ti—" She failed to complete her sentence as a result of the serious, pensive expression on Suzuki's face.
 Suzuki's eyes were riveted on the living room screen, a mixture of loss, pride and worry fleeting past in their depths. Jade, who had never seen so many emotions in the young man's eyes turned to the screen.
 On the screen was a teenager she did not recognize, but held a bow and arrow in her hand. From the text on the screen, this seemed to be the final for this year's Nationwide, High-School Archery Competition. The teenager on the screen seemed like she was born with a bow in her hand, easily hitting all the targets placed before her with unnerving accuracy.
 Curious, Jade could not help but ask, "Do you know her?"
 "You could say that," Suzuki murmured as he watched Ayumi hit another target. "I think we are friends."
 "You think?"
 Jade's jaw nearly dropped as Suzuki let out a low chuckle in response. "Ah... yes. What we are, I'm not so sure myself." Suzuki watched the girl on the screen with a smile on his face. "Win."
 Meanwhile, seated in the hole, Usman shook his head in reluctant defeat. "Is my presence so thin, they don't even realize I'm here?"

 

Chapter 8: Archery Princess

          
 Wild Heart Arena,
 Kyoto, Japan.
 25th June 2024.
 Wild Heart Arena, commissioned in 2020 by the Japanese juggernaut, Genaco Inc. had, in the four years since its commission, grown to become the country's second most prestigious location for high-school competitions, second only to the cult-classic Koshien. The diverse, modern structure was designed to host the finals for many competitions related to martial arts in a bid to increase their popularity among the Japanese people.
 Over the last couple of years, with Genaco's not-so-subtle influence, martial artists in high schools had begun to experience an unprecedented upsurge in fame. The popularity of martial artists was further boosted when Genaco released a statistic which proved that martial artists had a much higher chance of succeeding in their virtual games. This statistic was further proven when a lot of high-profile players revealed their real-life identities as martial artists. This, coupled with Genaco's coverage of the latest in-game trends and popular figures ensured martial arts' popularity had only grown stronger with each passing year.
 The Archery Arts was one such martial art to have gained a lot from this new exposure. Hundreds of thousands now paid attention to this high school competition which, previously would not have raised many eyebrows. The competition also commanded a primetime spot on National Television, further boosting its popularity. It could be said students who made it to the finals were like Chinese carp, jumping through the dragon's gate and ascending to fame and popularity overnight.
 However, even with the added exposure from Genaco's media coverage, it was a single high-school girl who was responsible for the current popularity of the Archery Competition. Five years ago, a thirteen-year-old girl, Adachi Ayumi, took the country by storm when she, with uncommon grace and poise took the national championship home.
 The young girl's captivating form, filled with unmatched elegance tinged with an innate coldness endeared her to the general public and they soon tagged her with the nickname "Archery Princess." Every year since, she had not disappointed the expectations of her adoring fans, effortlessly emerging victorious both at the regional and national levels. It had reached a point where the other girls who had to compete against her could only shake their heads with despair every year.
 Luckily, as if realizing the detrimental effect a cheat like Ayumi had on the other contestants, a new mixed competition after her fifth victory was added to allow both boys and girls to compete together. This new rule coincided with Ayumi's final year and competition in high school, leading to rumors that it would only exist for this one year and specifically targeted her.
 Ayumi, however, did not seem to care if the rule targeted her. She signed up for the mixed competition with exceeding calm. Some pundits had claimed she was too arrogant and such a reckless act would definitely tarnish her reputation, but how would they know Ayumi's thoughts at the time? After Suzuki seemed to disappear into thin air, she knew only something extraordinary would get her father to actively search for him.
 Hence, Ayumi made a deal with her father. If she managed to beat the heavy odds stacked against her and win this competition, it would mean Suzuki indeed did not lead her astray by introducing her to King's Journey. If that was the case, the Adachi household would owe the young man a favor for introducing their young miss with a way to train without getting stressed out. Adachi's always repaid their debts, so her father would indeed activate his network to find out what happened to the young man.
 Of course, at the time, neither the pundits nor her father believed she had a chance of winning, but to the shock of all those who watched the competition, the Archery Princess erupted with a strength and skill that terribly eclipsed everything she'd revealed in the previous competitions. Ayumi easily brushed through the regionals, an even in the finals, she'd run rampant, tearing through her competitors until she was matched against the Prince of Archery, Kiriiga Yuusha.

Just as Ayumi dominated the female scene, Kiriiga Yuusha dominated the male high school scene. In fact, his fame was much higher compared to Ayumi as he had represented the country in the last Olympics. Ultimately, he failed to get the gold medal, but a seventeen-year-old silver medalist still rocked the world, instantly elevating him to stardom.
 Similar to Ayumi, Yuusha was tall, astonishingly handsome and possessed a bearing that evoked images of celestial beings. However, unlike Ayumi, Yuusha was much more open and friendly, his million-dollar smile a lethal shot to the heart of whoever witnessed it. He was dubbed the 'Prince of Archery' and most believed he and Ayumi would make the perfect couple. It was just unfortunate that the two were from different prefectures and hence had little contact with each other outside the competition.
 Perhaps, it was to be expected of the two greatest archers of the current generation, but even after several rounds and tiebreakers, a winner had yet to emerge. Both archers were clinically precise, able to strike both still and moving targets with zero margin of error. Both parties squeezed out 120% of their abilities in this competition, eager to best the other, however, so far, even after an hour of tiebreakers, neither had committed a single error.
 The audience watching these two could only marvel at the extent of their resilience and willpower. To keep going for so long without committing a single error had since past the realm of physical abilities. By this point, it was a combat of wills between the Archery Royalty. Who would crumble under the pressure? Many bit their handkerchiefs or squeezed the hands of their friends, oblivious to the pain inflicted.
 They could understand Yuusha's resilience. After all, he was an Olympic silver medalist. The amount of willpower required to withstand the pressure of such a competition with the whole world watching could not be understated. In fact, the only reason Yuusha lost, in the end, was as a result of his lacking physical ability and not mental will. The final target had just been too far for him to reach.
 However, what about Ayumi? How could she have cultivated such a resilient will? Although her fans had praised her as an Archery Princess, that was only in comparison to the other girls. No one had ever forced Ayumi to show this resilient side of her. Ayumi's cold gaze possessed an indomitable will. One that promised she would not be conquered by this challenge no matter what.
 While the audience murmured amongst themselves, an announcement rang through the arena. As a result of the duo's continuous display of skills, it was decided that the final winner would be decided by a one-on-one fight against each other in a simulated environment. This was because, at this juncture, if the match continued as is, it would devolve into a test of endurance rather than archery skill. This was not an outcome these archery purists wished to see, hence the change in rules.
 This announcement received mixed responses from the audience. Some felt it disadvantaged Ayumi, while others believed she would have lost in a test of endurance so it was only fair. Regardless of what the audience felt though, Ayumi and Yuusha were invited by the tournament officials to enter into separate virtual pods.
 The use of virtual reality for competitions was widespread. It had even sparked a resurgence in old combat styles like fencing, jousting and deadly martial arts. Without the fear of death, all these ancient methods had once again begun to reign on the earth. Humanity is forever fascinated by the morbid, so when these 'not-so-deadly' death matches got their own channels, their views and popularity skyrocketed.
 This phenomenon was further strengthened by Genaco's 100% realism. Although other companies had learned how to create their own virtual reality devices, none could compete with the realism and immersion of Genaco's Virtual Drives. As such, Genaco once again dominated another sector of the entertainment industry.

Of course, none of these thoughts disturbed either contestant as they were 'transported' to a luscious, rainforest region. The movement of both contestants was captured and projected to the public with crystal clear quality. The dynamic cameras could even change angles to focus on muscle movements or expressions, all for the sake of adding more atmosphere to the broadcast.
 Within the rainforest, Ayumi, clad in camouflage gear flitted through the forest, pausing momentarily at certain places to study the terrain before sprinting off once again. It was unknown what was going on behind those cold, calculating eyes that took in her surroundings with surprising apathy, but no one would believe she was aimlessly running around.
 Compared to Ayumi who seemed to be dashing across the forest, Yuusha only lightly jogged through with a languid smile on his face. Very few people knew, but Yuusha's uncle loved hunting, and usually took him along during his trips. Yuusha, whose love of archery bloomed as a result of these trips, mastered the art of hunting under his uncle's tutelage. While he would not call himself the best hunter out there, he was certain no one in his age group could compare to his experience.
 Still, that did not mean he would look down on any opponent. Yuusha's languid expression was only a façade, as every muscle in his body was taut like a drawn bow. At any sign of the enemy, he would burst forth with an explosive force.
 Yuusha's eyelids twitched as something odd drew his attention. He carefully made his way over to a tree branch and inspected it. A sly smile curled up his lips as he slightly increased his pace and sped in a certain direction. As expected, he spotted a bush whose branch had been slightly bent out of shape. Just like the previous one, if one did not pay close enough attention, they would miss it.
 Unfortunately for the opponent, Yuusha had been trained to spot such clues since he was young. He confidently followed the trail while keeping a watch on his surroundings. At the fifth clue, however, Yuusha immediately halted his tracks as an uneasy feeling crept up his heart. He could not help but feel like he had overlooked something important. Yuusha was nothing if not decisive. Upon encountering this doubt, he immediately turned around and made his way back to the very first tree branch. This time, he performed a much more thorough examination on the branch. His findings drew a sharp breath from him. But, he could not be certain until he confirmed with the other clues.
 Yuusha traced his steps to the second clue he found. After a careful examination, Yuusha's expression changed as his back pooled with cold sweat. How terrifying! This Princess was no damsel! She was certainly well versed in jungle warfare! To think she would be smart enough to employ such a strategy!
 Yuusha, with a determined gaze, sped through the forest. He had confirmed the clues were deliberately manipulated by someone. The intention of the manipulator was obviously to lure him into a trap or ambush. However, considering the little preparation time, an ambush was the more likely scenario.
 Yuusha, although shocked by this discovery, held no fear. A trap is only deadly when it remains unknown. Now that he had discovered his opponent's tricks... hehe, it was still too early to say who would get trapped. With these thoughts in mind, Yuusha tentatively followed the trails left behind by Ayumi. Even though he knew the ultimate destination would be an ambush point, he held utmost confidence in his situational judgment.
 When that time came, they would determine the true prey and predator.
 Yuusha slowed to a crawl as a clearing with a mound at its center came into view. His footsteps were silent as they trod through the shrubbery, his body hunched over as he crouched to reduce his body size. That small, circular clearing filled him with a great sense of dread. No doubt he would turn into a human sieve once he stepped in there. Yuusha drew his bow, placing it ahead of him at an incline to the ground. He systematically notched a single arrow, his gaze turning solemn as his languid smile curled upwards. The Charming Prince had suddenly transformed into a ferocious, yet seductive devil.

Yuusha was no fool. Since he knew where the enemy wanted him, he could easily surmise the opponent's probable location. First, the opponent would need a clear sight of the clearing. In a rainforest like this, the densely packed trees ensured there were very few locations that passed the test. Of course, the trees bordering the clearing were crossed out of the suspect list. This was because those trees would also give Yuusha a clear view of Ayumi when she attacked which could lead to unforeseen accidents.
 The second factor to consider was that Ayumi needed to be able to hide there until Yuusha made his move, which meant he should not be able to spot her from the clearing at first glance. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, in the event she got discovered, she had to be able to beat a safe retreat while hindering the opponent's vision and assault as much as possible.
 Yuusha's analysis was completed within three seconds. There was only one location that matched all the requirements in a forty meter radius. Northwest of his location stood a tall tree with a trunk fat enough that it would take three grown men with arms spread wide to cover its width. It sported several thick branches on which a person could sit for hours comfortably. Better yet, there were a few other trees ahead of it, whose leaves blocked some of its branches from view. However, whoever stood on those branches would only require a little effort to monitor the proceedings in the clearing.
 Confident in his deductions, Yuusha backtracked a little, then slowly circled around to the back of the suspected tree. Yuusha maintained his vigilance despite his confidence in his analysis, but as he thought, he was not met with an attack until he reached his destination. His target was surprisingly not the tree he tagged as the hiding spot, but a tree to the side. It was slightly comparable in size to the hiding tree, but as it lacked a clear view of the clearing and its branches were quite thin, Yuusha had eliminated it from his list.
 Luckily, the tree at least served one purpose. It allowed Yuusha to climb up to the expect ambush height without being caught. Just as he settled on the branch, his eyes caught a crouched figure on the target tree. The unmistakeable dark locks easily revealed who that figure belonged to. Ah, this was a beautiful match, Princess. But it's time to go. 
 Yuusha pulled on the bowstring. He lined up the shot perfectly, then... twang!
 A dreadful horror enveloped Yuusha as soon as the arrow left the bowstring. His arms trembled with fright, hair standing upright as he nearly choked on the instinctual warning that rocked his entire being. Without considering why, Yuusha had already notched an arrow and swung around.
 Yuusha's gaze froze as he glared at three arrows that seemingly came out of nowhere. Despite the perilous situation, Yuusha maintained a chilling calm.
 Pa! Pa!
 Yuusha slapped the first two arrows with the head of the arrow still on the bow. The harsh movement messed up his balance on the tree branch, but he managed to release the arrow in time, allowing him enough time to barely maintain his balance on the tree branch. His elation at the sight of his successful block soon turned to shock as a fourth arrow emerged from the shadow of the downed arrow, rushing for his exposed chest.
 This crazy girl had managed to shoot two arrows with the exact same velocity so the second followed right behind the first. This way, until the first was knocked out, the second would be hidden from sight.
 Yuusha's initial shock was in the end, just that. Shock. This was not at the level where he would be helpless. He had just been surprised to see someone else in his generation who could achieve the same thing as him. Yuusha spun to the side, using one foot to balance on the tree branch as he pivoted to the left.
 Whoosh!
Yuusha was only halfway through his pivot when a terrifying whistling sound entered his ears. The stunned young man could only gape with shock as the tree branch beneath him exploded into splinters from the onslaught of two lightning-fast arrows.

Only at this moment did Yuusha realize that the initial arrows had lacked a certain speed. It was this difference in speed that allowed him to block the attacks, but it had created a false impression of the arrow speeds. With even the seemingly deadly killer fourth arrow having the same speed, Yuusha had performed his subsequent dodge with that speed in mind.
 Yuusha knew now he had been played! The opponent had set up especially for this moment! By deceiving his senses, it was easy for the accelerated follow-up arrows to burst apart the support branch before he could react. What's worse, the fourth arrow was still coming at his chest. Without the branch, there was no way to pivot out of the way!
 Faced with this certain-death scenario, Yuusha drew a deep breath and pushed his body backward. His back bent backward, allowing the arrow to pass, but Yuusha knew if he fell as is, he would certainly perish. The young man, rather than panic, completed the rotation so his head now faced the ground.
 Yuusha stretched his hand outward and grabbed a branch when he was a few meters from the ground. He used the branch as a pivot to spin in place and cancel out most of the momentum. Although his hands turned bloody and raw from the harsh contact, Yuusha's expression remained the same as he swung off the branch.
 Yuusha's face turned grim as five arrows tore out from the forest with unmatched ferocity. The killing intent suffused in those arrowheads evoked a sense of doom in the young man's heart. Yuusha grit his teeth as he pulled out the only three arrows in his quiver to have survived the fall. Within the span of a second, the three arrows burst forth with the raging unwillingness of dragons.
 Yuusha's state of mind broke through under the pressure, allowing him to accomplish feats he'd never deemed possible previously. The three arrows spun in place, two of which suddenly veered 'off-course' as if blown away by a great wind. This caused both arrows to smash into two arrows each, narrowly altering their flight path. Of course, at that speed, the slightest deviation would result in a difference of meters. The third arrow accurately struck against Ayumi's final arrow and both clattered to the ground.
 Yuusha landed on his feet but surprisingly did not attempt to run. He put his hands up, the irresistible smile returning to his face as he turned to a part of the forest. "I've lost."
 As expected, with the rustling of leaves, Ayumi walked into view with a notched bow.
 Yuusha sighed as he looked at the short head of hair on the young woman. "You're far too ruthless," he muttered with a shake of his head. "I never would have imagined you would cut off your own hair."
 After laying eyes on Ayumi, Yuusha's suspicions had been confirmed in full. Right from the start, this had indeed been a trap as expected. What he had not expected was that this seemingly simple trap was tailor-made for him. It had taken his careful, yet confident nature into consideration, leading him step-by-step to that tree branch. Once he spotted the 'figure' on the other branch, he had not hesitated to believe it was Ayumi. After all, who would believe a proud daughter of heaven would willingly cut her hair on live TV broadcasted to millions of people. Evidently, however, this young woman did not care what the world thought. That level of resolve was something he had lacked coming into this competition.
 Yuusha could not help but wonder what her reason for going so far was. However, he knew his boundaries and instead asked, "Where did you hide then?"
 Ayumi stepped aside, and he followed her gaze to the unseeming boulder at the center of the clearing. If one lay prone on the earth, the boulder could shield them from one direction. All the person would have to do to escape detection is shuffle along the boulder's side while the target moved to ensure they were out of sight from that particular target. This boulder could only be used in this one-vs-one scenario where there were no interrupting animals or contestants, otherwise, her cover would have been blown.
 "Oh! Ah! That's how it was!" Yuusha exclaimed with a regretful chuckle. To think she hid at the most exposed location! He would never have thought she would choose that place as her hiding spot.
 Indeed from the clearing, she could observe everything and predict his steps. This was especially since he would have followed the clues to that point, therefore she could predict where he would pop out from and hide accordingly. Once he was in the vicinity of the clearing, tracking his movement was just too easy.
 This multi-level trap did not end there. In order to effectively reduce Yuusha's reaction to the ambush, Ayumi created a suitable target for the male archer. She cut off her own hair and attached it to a rough figure made of stones. She draped her camo jacket over the stones to give it more realism. That's right, at the moment, Ayumi was only wearing a sports bra on as her top.
 This much was within her acceptance range. If needed, Ayumi would have gotten rid of the camo pants too. That was the extent of her resolve. It was an unshakeable will that no-one would be able to deny.
 "This was a good fight," Yuusha remarked with his arm held out as his body was gradually enveloped by a white light. "If you do not mind, it would be my honor to make your acquaintance at a later date. Of course in a much less kill-ey setting."
 Maybe it was as a result of the released tension, or a hidden anticipation of something no one else knew, but Ayumi's lips blossomed into the most beautiful smile. The smile stole the hearts of all watching the match regardless of gender. Such was the perfection and grace like an angel descended upon men. "It would be my honor to host such a magnificent archer."
 Yuusha distractedly smiled as she clasped her hand in his. "Ah, this loss may have been worth it..."
 

 ******************
 A/N
 *******************
 Hey Guys! You may or may not have noticed the date I added at the top. I decided to add this because many readers could not follow up on how far the real world was progressing compared to the game world. Also, yes, I will also be adding dates to the game world chapters where needed so readers can keep track of events and elapsed time.
 On another note, I'm writing my final year exams Next week, with my final project defense the upcoming week. University has been an intriguing, stressful and enjoyable journey all wrapped in one. But undeniably, one of the major driving forces during my college years has been this book and you awesome readers. Your comments and encouragements have kept me going in dark times and picked me up when I'm feeling lazy.
 Thank you for helping me through this amazing journey. Please stick around as I venture out even further...
 

 Picture of the Day
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 

 Video of the Day
 
   
     
       
       
     
   
   
 

 

Chapter 9: Get to Work

            
 Undisclosed Location.
 Suzuki's lips curled up into a rare smile as he watched the black-haired, cool archer he was all too familiar with stand upon a podium, trophy in hand as she gave a short, thank you speech. His smile spread even wider as he realized the source of the joy within his heart. He was proud! Not proud of himself for accomplishing something, but proud of someone else. He was proud of Ayumi!
 Suzuki clutched his chest to restrain the butterflies that had begun to dance within his heart. This small, but prominent exhilaration, accompanied by a small heat in his chest that seemed to wish to rise up to his eyes. This feeling that seemed to carry equal parts joy and excitement! So, this was pride in someone else!
 Suzuki closed his eyes as he reveled in the newfound emotion. In all of his life, though he had sympathized the plight of some people, he had never felt what it was like to feel proud of someone who achieved something great. This was a first for the young man, and he intended to commit the feeling to memory. 
 Stood next to Suzuki, Jade looked up at the young man. Her gaze travelled from the smile on Suzuki's face to the confident young woman on the screen. Someone who could cause the stoic Suzuki to release such a profound smile (or any smile in general) could not be a normal acquaintance. Jade's eyelids twitched as she forced down the uncomfortable feeling in her chest. She looked back at Suzuki whose gaze seemed to be fixed on something far away.
 Well, she had never been one to be indecisive. Since Jade had confirmed the faintest hints of jealousy hidden within the depths of her heart, she now knew what she had to do. Jade's expression betrayed none of the emotions in her heart as she calmly stood by Suzuki's side while waiting for his strange state to pass. 
 A few moments later, Suzuki's eyes flashed as he exited the brief reverie. He took a deep breath, a profound look in his eyes as he nodded at the screen. "Let's go." With those words, he climbed the stairs to the corridor above while Jade silently tagged behind with a queer smile.
 Usman watched the duo's backs with bemusement and confusion. Leaving aside the fact that they had totally ignored his presence in the room, he was more interested in the recent changes in 'Suzuki.' Originally, Usman had not been sure of it, but during Suzuki's 'enlightenment', Usman had seen clearly 'felt' something change in Suzuki. It had not been something tangible or huge, but if her were to put a word to it... Presence. 
 Yes, it would be presence. It now seemed the black hole known as Suzuki finally had a bit of presence. Usman could not understand how it happened or was supposed to work, but it had been obvious that since they met, Suzuki had begun to culminate more and more presence. Was it truly as a result of Kashi? If so, what was Razznik supposed to have been then? 
 Considering Suzuki was almost devoid of genuine emotions when Usman first met him, the young agent wondered what the hell Razznik was supposed to have taught Suzuki. Furthermore, if the Suzuki he initially met was an improvement on a previous version then... Usman shuddered at the thought.
 Usman sank into his thoughts, his brows bunched together in a tight frown. He pulled out his PDA and typed in a short message to his superior. "The entity Suzuki requires further investigation." Usman placed the communicator in his pocket then turned his attention back to the screen. The Archery Princess had already left the grounds after accepting her trophy so the station was playing a rerun of all her competitions leading up to the finals. The Archery Princess's saga was a true money maker and the stations intended to earn the maximum profit possible from her name. 
 Usman sighed as he watched the special. "Yep, it's much easier to understand the motivations of humans." With a wary gaze thrown at the staircase, he added, "So much easier to read than those monsters."

Meanwhile, oblivious to Usman's thoughts, Suzuki led Jade into his room then took a seat at the workstation. He booted the laptop and turned on the in-game simulator for L.N.E, a program which allowed gamers to test out new, potential recipes without the fear of losing their in-game Syros. Of course, in return they had to pay for the materials used in the experiments with real-world cash. It was an immensely popular program; one which earned Genaco a few couple billion Yen annually from their various Virtual Reality Games.
 Suzuki loaded his most recent project, the yet-to-be-named Flying Ship and projected it using the mini-holographic projector connected to the system. He put on a pair of Synth-gloves and began to take the model apart, with an aim to discover areas which could be improved upon. He was about twenty minutes deep into his analysis when he realized something was missing. He had not heard Jade's voice in a long time. Usually, she would be right next to him, arguing about some part or area but today she was oddly quiet.
 Unable to suppress the discomfort in his heart, Suzuki looked up from the hologram and to his left. As expected, Jade's laptop was still on the table, but the woman herself was not at her seat. 
 Did she leave?
 Suzuki frowned as an unfamiliar heat invaded his chest. Before he could explore the annoying feeling, the shuffling of feet drew his eyes to the center of the room. As if doused with a bucket of the purest morning dew, the heat in Suzuki's heart dropped as he gazed at the little figure battling with some hologram. 
 Suzuki found himself unable to look away, completely enraptured by Jade's figure. The slight crease in her brow; the mixture of excitement and frustration in her eyes; the confident smirk at the corner of her lips; the way she clucked her tongue whenever something did not go exactly as planned.... There were so many details he had never noticed. Suzuki, despite having a lot of work to do himself, found his legs moving of their own accord till he was next to Jade.
 Suzuki had never been much of a conversationalist, so he turned his attention to the item Jade was experimenting with. The young man's brow rose with question as he stared at the multitude of runes written on a parchment. The interesting thing was these runes were placed in the boundaries between two concentric circles. Suzuki's interest piqued as he realized the structure was very similar to the mandalas that appeared whenever mages casted their magic.
 Unable to hold his curiosity, and indeed the curiosity of his other self, Suzuki leaned over and asked, "What're you working on?"
 Jade's brow twitched as an unrecognizable glint flashed in her eyes. However, the hand which held a virtual brush never stopped moving along the magic circle. "I've been thinking of my place in the team."
 Suzuki paused, unsure of how to respond. This was not the answer to the question he'd asked, but he'd learned enough from Kashi's interactions to know that people do not always answer questions directly. He decided to humor her, see where this was going, "What do you mean, your place?"
 "You know," Jade muttered with a little bitterness in her voice. "Everyone on the team's got something they're the best at. Taki's the best merchant and people-person on the team, Taiga and Saeko are brilliant at combat. Taiga's like the strongest magician in the entire game and Saeko's the strongest amongst us all in one-on-one combat. Even Stryke has an important role with the recruits!" A defeated sigh escaped the young woman's lips. "As for Kashi... well, he's Kashi." Jade let out a bitter chuckle as she lamented, "And don't get me started on Leila. If there's a more perfect woman, I ain't seen her yet." Jade's voice dropped to a whisper, but her hands continued their work. "I needed to find a place of my own. I don't want to become a background character." For a split second, she glanced at Suzuki out the corner of her eyes. "No one cares when a BG goes away."

Suzuki frowned. The uncomfortable feeling had returned. But there was a difference from the last time. This time, the heat was not so intense. Instead it was like a slow burn, with a heaviness to it like someone was slowly dropping a weight on his chest. Suzuki somehow instinctively understood this feeling. 
 He was in pain. 
 But this pain was different.
 This pain was as a result of the pain and distress reflected in Jade's eyes despite her sarcastic laughs. Suzuki could not understand why he would feel the pain of another person. How useless was this? What purpose would this emotion serve exactly? Though these sardonic thoughts floated in his head, Suzuki's lips seemed to have a mind of their own. "So, did you find what you were looking for?" He looked at the mandala she was designing. "Does it have something to do with this?"
 "Yeah," Jade answered with a nod. "There ain't much I can be proud of except my programming skills. I ain't much of a gamer and I don't know much about fighting except for basic self-defense lessons and stuff I picked up while playing. That's the real reason I became a magician." The brush in Jade's hand glided over the parchment as new shapes and runes took form in the magic circle. "I've been thinking for a while now, ever since I first saw you could combine runes to achieve other effects, Could runes be considered as lexemes in a programming language? If so, could I possible create some rules of combination that would make it easier to achieve larger things?"
 "Larger things?" Suzuki repeated with confusion. He could barely understand what she was talking about, but he had a feeling he should let her finish before interrupting. 
 "Yeah," Jade replied. "Our current technologies depend heavily on gemstones. Leaving aside how expensive and rare they are, they simply ain't suitable for all projects. Using gemstones for lamps or the headphones you created really are a waste. Wouldn't it be better if we could find a much more affordable means to achieve similar effects? To be honest though, didn't really think of all that till I discovered a series of patterns in the magic circles I studied." Jade chuckled, her cheeks flushed in embarrassment. She then proceeded to explain the patterns she found.
 All magic circles, regardless of purpose were made up of three major parts. The first of which were a pair of concentric circles. These circles formed the foundation of the spell to be produced in the end. More complicated spells could have three or more concentric circles to house the complex arrangement of runes. The second part were the runes etched into the border area between these circles. These runes, according to Jade, were akin to the main instructions in a programming language, which instruct the computer, or in this case, the mana of the world on what phenomenon to change or affect. Finally, an image occupied the interior of the innermost circle. These images could take different shapes. Jade likened them to preprocessor directives which affected what kind of commands could be written out in a program. Except in this case, the images determined what kind of elemental magic circle it should be.
 For example, the pentagram was a famous symbol in magic circles. This was because the pentagram was a stabilizing, neutral diagram which channeled the five main elements, namely, Water, Fire, Air, Earth and Spirit. The eight trigrams went even further, adding more properties such as thunder, lake and mountain to provide even greater stability as well as increase the possible areas of application. 
 In contrast, a flame diagram would greatly increase the absorption of flame elements but severely reduce the absorption of other elements. This was useful when the purpose of the magic circle was inclined to a specific type of element. 
 "Take this magic circle as an example," Jade said as she finally finished the drawing. She took a step back to admire the diagram which depicted a snowflake bound within a circle, with a number of runes within the concentric circles, some of which Suzuki recognized. She pointed the virtual brush in her hand at the circle and explained, "The snowflake boosts the collection of air and water elements in the air, but heavily detracts the collection of fire and earth elements. In this case, it doesn't really matter because..." With excitement in her eyes, she clapped, "Commence refrigeration simulation."

The holographic projector created a box large enough to fit a human next to the magic circle. Jade clenched her fists, her eyes shaking with hidden anxiety as the parchment that housed the magic circle draped itself at the bottom of the box's interior. A few seconds passed without a reaction, but just as Jade's gaze was beginning to cloud with disappointment, the parchment burst with a bright light as it melted into the box, leaving the eye-catching magic circle on the box's surface. 
 Seconds later, a visible, white gaseous stream began to emanate from the magic circle. The stream expanded till it occupied the entire box. Jade waved her hand, and the box's lid slammed shut, preventing the gas from leaking out.
 An announcement promptly rang out from the system, "Simulation successful. Congratulations on creating a new form of runic manipulation. Would you like to name it?"
 "Name it?" Jade turned to Suzuki with a wide grin. "Want to name it?"
 Suzuki glanced at the image, then muttered nonchalantly, "Why not call it an array?"
 "An array?" Jade repeated with a pout. "Not terribly creative, but I guess it'll do." Jade instantly set the runic manipulation name to Array then looked at Suzuki. "That's it then. Any questions?"
 Suzuki examined the array with a scrutinizing gaze. "I can see the operational costs will be much smaller if we use arrays. But I feel like there's a catch somewhere."
 "You're annoyingly observant when it suits you," Jade muttered with playful resentment. With a light shrug, she admitted, "Yeah, there are a few problems. First of all, we're currently severely lacking in personnel who are good with rune manipulation, and I'm not sure how much time we'll need to train new recruits. The next problem's that the ingredients for making the ink used in rune-crafting depend largely on getting blood and body parts from beasts. If we use our normal hunting methods, who knows how long it will take to acquire enough materials for large scale productions?"
 "You said the first problem is time," Suzuki pointed out with confusion. "What about the lessons themselves. I don't think anyone can go as far as you have with just the runes I have."
 "Ah. The reading material huh. Don't worry, I got that covered too." Jade walked over to the workstation and returned with her tablet. "In programming languages, there are two main things you have to know before switching to a new language, the syntax and the semantics of the intended language." Jade knew Suzuki did not have much of a background in porgramming so she explained further, "The syntax determines the correct order of combination of the individual words, or in this case, the runes while, Semantics are the meanings behind the combination of sentences." 
 Jade tapped on the screen and it came to life. The top left corner displayed several videos of mages performing various feats, with a close-up view on the mandalas that appeared around their hands or feet each time they casted a spell. Several runes Suzuki recognized from the book of creation flashed by at the right corner of the screen. At the bottom left corner of the screen, a series of runes were formed next to each other. 
 Jade noticed Suzuki's confusion in the slight crease of his brow. With a triumphant, slightly proud chuckle, she explained, "I created a program to cross reference the runes in the book of creation you showed me against runes in mandalas. Good news is the runes in both cases are from the same source, some lost language or something," Jade said. "After cross-referencing hundreds of gamers' uploads, the system finally found a reliable pattern, and was even able to decipher the meaning of a few new runes." 
 "More importantly, I finally got the basic syntax for writing runes into an array," Jade said with a triumphant grin. "This was my first test creating an array from scratch. Still can't believe it actually worked," Jade muttered. Overwhelmed by equal parts joy and disbelief, she suddenly stretched her arm in front of Suzuki and demanded, "Pinch me! I can't believe this is actually happening."

Suzuki, ever the gentleman, promptly squeezed her arm with his fingers much to Jade's shock. Suzuki was not sure why, but the astonishment on her face was strangely pleasing. He was almost tempted to repeat the action. Luckily, he managed to resist the urge, settling for a tease instead, "Did that feel real?" 
 "Way too real!" Jade complained with exaggeratedly puffed up cheeks. Suzuki had to force himself not to clap the air out of those cheeks. Luckily, Jade switched moods with the speed of a lightning bolt. Her eyes suddenly brightened, as she revealed a cocky toothy grin. "Point is, I can have an introductory lesson prepared in a day or two tops. With the right teaching methods, we can have an army of array masters in our guild soon." 
 "Mhmm," Suzuki nodded, but there was a knowing glint in his eyes. "Sounds too good to be true. There has to be a catch somewhere."
 "Fine." Jade flicked her hair over her ear and rolled her eyes in playful resentment. With a cluck of her tongue, she added, "It ain't gonna be easy to teach. We'll need candidates with high magic and intelligence if this is gonna really kick off. Plus, I'm only proficient in some basic arrays. More complicated array structures need more time and a shit-ton of resources." Jade clasped her hands behind her back and twirled cutely, her eyes wide open like she was a shoujou character. "The guild can afford it right?"
 In response, Suzuki only raised a brow, "What's that supposed to be?"
 "Tch, blockhead." Jade clucked her tongue with a light frown. Suzuki would never admit how funny he found those little creases. "So, is Kashi gonna approve it or not?"
 "Kashi approves," Suzuki replied with a shrug. "You guys can hash out the details in-game, but here's a suggestion. If you guys really want to start spreading knowledge large-scale, you'll need more than just yourself. I suggest looking into starting up a school, or academy or whatever. How it'll work is up to you guys, but according to fantasy law, first, recruit some brilliant minds. There should be a lot of reclusive scholars and researchers who will be willing to sign up as teachers if you fund their research."
 "A school huh," Jade muttered with surprise in her eyes. "That's ambitious. I'm surprised you could come up with that."
 "I'm standing on the shoulders of giants," Suzuki shot back with a snort. However, when Jade only returned a blank stare, Suzuki elaborated. "Anime and Light Novels. I've seen this exact plot a thousand times. The country with smarter people always wins the war in the end."
 "Oh, I knew what you meant," Jade retorted with a cheeky grin. "Just wanted to hear you explain it."
 Suzuki took in a deep breath then said as he walked back to his workstation. "Send me the array textbook when you're done. Kashi has Rosario's brush. He doesn't need to worry about ink."
 Jade returned to the workstation and shut her laptop. "Will do," she said with a smile as she picked up the laptop. "Just gonna put some finishing touches on the cipher program. Should have enough for a textbook by tomorrow." Hugging her laptop to her chest, she waved at Suzuki, "Laters, then."
 "Laters," Suzuki replied. As Jade reached the door, he suddenly added, "Thanks Jade. You're pretty brilliant."
 Jade paused, her mouth opened wide in shock. She quickly mumbled thanks then ducked her head as she scrambled out of the room. 
 Left in the room, Suzuki pulled off his shirt then walked over to the virtual drive. He climbed inside, and as he descended into a deep sleep, he muttered to someone no one else could see, "Thanks."
 ***
 Adachi Residence,
 Tokyo, Japan.
 Adachi Ayumi knelt before a set of tatami doors with the Archery championship trophy wrapped in her arms. Though her eyes held their usual cold, her trembling fingers revealed the agitation she felt deep inside. Ayumi had never been one to fear anything, but at that exact moment, she felt an unfamiliar sensation of equal parts dread and excitement as she stared at the sliding doors. She almost felt like a gambler whose bets had all cleared save for one last, final bet. The final bet was a 50-50 gamble which would either set her off for life or render all the previous bets null and void.
 The anticipation sent her heart racing and just as she was about to explode, she heard her father's solemn voice summon her.
 "Coming father," Ayumi acknowledged with a bow. She slid the door to the side, then gracefully rose to her feet and walked in to see her familiar figure of her father's back. Lt. Colonel Adachi was not much for words. Since his retirement from the army, he could almost always be found in this room with his wife's memorial tablet, or at the company he built from near scratch.
 Ayumi knelt respectfully before her father and the memorial tablet of the mother she never had the pleasure of meeting. Ayumi sat still, awaiting her father's permission to speak. Thirty minutes passed and still her father remained motionless in front of the memorial tablet. Most teenagers Ayumi's age, would have long since given up the painful seiza position and switched to a more casual sitting posture, but not even a twitch of a muscle could be seen on the cold princess' face.
 "You have grown." Lt. Colonel Adachi finally spoke as he raised his head to gaze at the memorial tablet. "Your mother would be proud."
 "I am grateful to not have besmirched the family name." Ayumi bowed with her head to the floor. 
 "You did well," Lt. Colonel Adachi complimented, but listening to the cold tone it was delivered in, one would be forgiven for thinking he was being sarcastic. "I suppose you are here about the agreement?"
 Ayumi, still with her head bowed, affirmed his thoughts. "Yes, Father. Please, help me find my friend."
 "Raise your head."
 Ayumi did as she was asked and raised her head. Shock flashed past her eyes as she stared into the eyes of her father. Apparently, he had soundlessly turned backward at some point in time to face her. Even more shocking were the pride and satisfaction in the dark, cold pits of his eyes.
 "An Adachi never breaks their promises," Lt. Colonel Adachi swore with a solemn expression. The faintest hints of a smile crept up the corner of his lips. "You have done your part splendidly, now let me fulfill my end of the bargain"
 Ayumi trembled as she fought to hold back the pool of tears that welled up in her eyes. She blinked back the tears, as she bowed once again. "Thank you, Father."
 "Do not thank me. This opportunity was gained by your own hard work and volition. Be thankful to yourself first." Lt. Colonel Adachi waved his hand. "You can run along to your game. It would seem it truly does do more good than harm in your case at least."
 "Thank you father," Ayumi carefully placed the trophy by the side then left the room, making sure to slide the door shut behind her. The unflappable Archery Princess released a very rare sigh of relief like a major burden had been lifted off her shoulders. With a determined glint in her eyes, she walked over to her room. "Time to get to work."

 

Chapter 10: Unification

            
 A/N: Okay... so, a couple of updates to the story. In order to help you readers (and myself) keep track of events, I've added a calendar system to the novel. Previous chapters used this calendar for the real world, but this chapter goes into the world of L.N.E hence it has a different calendar system. The current calendar months are as follows:
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Hope you enjoy the chapter!
 P.S: Ensure you watch the video at the end. There's a nice surprise!
 ********
 Aygorzi
 13th Banem 1092
 Deep within the heart of the dwarven city laid the second most protected region in the entire city after the king's palace. A stalwart detachment of dwarven soldiers armored to the teeth guarded  the only entrance to the hidden chamber. Each dwarf's steady gaze held an almost worship-level reverence that belied the honor and pride they felt in guarding that location. 
 The select few individuals who were granted access past the doors would find themselves in a narrow hallway with decorated bronze sculptures of some figures with their names and accomplishments written on steles next to them. Some of these sculptures were of dwarfs but curiously a majority of these sculptures belonged to humes of different races. The humes all wore armor with the emblem of a wolf howling to the moon, and despite their varied poses, they all seemed to be looking somewhere down the hallway.
 Walking down the hallway, the individuals would be greeted by a semicircular chamber which housed a set of massive white doors at the opposite end. This would also mark the end point of the similarly armored statues. Six three-meter tall statues, three on either side of the door took their place, each with an imposing presence that made it difficult to maintain eye contact for extended periods. 
 If any Maggot was present, they would recognize the figures depicted. Leading from the left was Absalon in his mage armor. The calculating coldness in his eyes gave off the vibe of a no-nonsense general willing to do anything for the sake of victory. Next to him was Jade with a playful smirk. Her left hand was coated with a luminescent material that gave it a warm glow while her right hard sparked with vicious energy. Syèl stood larger than the rest with numerous glowing orbs of different forms floating around him. Amidst the chaos stood the halben with a nasty, murderous grin. The tongue on his lips easily brought to mind the image of a deranged man savoring the blood of his enemies.
 A massive drakul led the right side. The stoic yet powerful form marred by blade scars and puncture wounds displayed the brave, undying courage of the tribe for the world to see. Following the drakul was a shrouded figure slightly shorter than the rest. The assassin, whose features were hidden, grasped his blade in a tight grip, his body taut like he was ready to explode forth should the need arise. Finally, at the tail end, was a magnificent prince-like figure, with her hand on the hilt of her blade. Shoko's regal air filled onlookers with a sense of reverence. Gazing on her figure was like being in the presence of a royal; one could not help but hold their breath.

All these statues guarded a five-meters-tall crystal door that reached all the way to the ceiling of the hallway. Carved into the door was the most majestic image of a cold, confident daeben with a teasing smile at the edge of his lips sat on a marble throne. The daeben's right hand rested on the side of a massive black direwolf whose eyes seemed to hold equal parts wisdom and ferocity. The daeben's left hand firmly grasped that of a stunningly beautiful woman whose warm, inviting smile warmed the hearts of all who gazed upon her.
 If by some miracle, the individual was allowed access to the hall, the doors opened to the interior of a crystal dome which was suspiciously sparse except for a bed, piano and workstation near its center. It was almost like the owner of this hall only brought things in as needed.
 Currently, atop the bed, a daeben opened his eyes after five days of sleep.  Kashi winced and clutched his chest as an all too familiar pain flared up. "Damn, those birds didn't say anything about the pain." Kashi's expression softened as the pain ebbed then rose from his bed. He scanned the room, not surprised to find it absolutely empty.
 With a light shrug Kashi donned a casual jacket from his inventory over his top then contacted Lunette. Luckily, she seemed to be online as after only a few short rings, her ever welcome voice graced Kashi's ears.
 "Hey there sleepy head," Lunette greeted with a giggle. "How was your break?"
 "Uneventful for the most part," Kashi replied as he walked to the door. "There isn't much for me to do in the other world. What about you? What've you been up to? Kira with you?"
 "Yeah, she's with me," Lunette confirmed. "Don't have to worry about stalkers with her around. Especially after what she did to the first guy."
 "First guy?" Kashi's brow rose as the doors opened and the sculptures came into view. A part fo him felt honored by the gesture, but a larger part was in awe of how quickly the dwarfs worked. 
 "Never mind that," Lunette interrupted with an awkward laugh. "Point is I've been fine with Kira's protection. In that time, I took a short break then returned to the Emporium at Meilfour. I'm thinking of hosting a musical competition to recruit some more people into the guild's music division. We're holding a few auditions later this evening."
 "That's great. Do what you have to do," Kashi said. "Any funds you need is yours."
 "Doubt Miote will like that," Lunette laughed.
 "Miote will understand," Kashi insisted. "Your music is one of our major sources of income. It's a smart investment." 
 "I hope he sees it that way."
 "He will," Kashi stated. Noticing he was approaching the exit, he bid goodbye. "Say hi to Kira for me. I'll come see you guys soon."
 "I'll let her know. See you."
 Kashi cut the call and greeted the dwarfs at the main entrance with a polite nod. They informed him that Zeing had come by twice in the past two days and he promised to go see Zeing as soon as possible. 
 "Hey! Little Darkling!"
 "Speak of the..." Kashi muttered under his breath as the hulking dwarf he'd just been talking about literally popped out of the earth. "Good..." Kashi quickly glanced at the in-game clock. "Afternoon Zeing, how's it going?"
 "Same old, same old," Zeing complained with a shrug. "Nothing really gets my blood boiling."
 Kashi rolled his eyes as he walked to the flight of stairs nearby. "I'd say that's a good thing. I hate to be around anything that can get your blood boiling."

"Tch. That's just mean," Zeing snorted.
 Kashi laughed, but a sharp pain in his chest cut it off early.
 "Looks like those birdies really did a number on you," Zeing noted with a grave expression. "Nothing we can do about the curse, but there is one person who can help with the pain."
 Kashi let out a wry smile in response. "She would not happen to be a thousand year old wisben grandma, would she?"
 "How did you know?" Zeing froze in his tracks, a frown etched on his forehead.
 "Lucky guess," Kashi carelessly threw over his shoulder. "I've met a dwarf, a human wizard, a hybrid vampire and a beastman. Seemed only right the next member of your little club would be elven. Since we're talking healing here, I leaned more toward wisben." Kashi's words were convincing but his heart was in chaos. With Zeing's confirmation, he was now certain of the identities of five of seven members of the so-called guardians. 
 If Kashi's conjecture was correct, then all seven guardians had some sort of personal relationship with Razznik. Of course, all these relationships ended terribly. No wonder Rider was adamant about him not telling anyone about his relationship with Razznik. With this piece of intel, Kashi was now certain of Fladnag's real identity.
 There was once a mage who dubbed himself as the protector of the sacred tree Yggdrasil and the Treants who lived underneath its branches. Unfortunately, when creating his 12 series, Razznik needed a lot of high quality products, one of which was the heart of Yggdrasil. Suffice to say, the Treants did not agree to his request. 
 Razznik took the heart anyway. 
 As for the treants who fought to protect the core of their home...
 Kashi had considered this angle initially because he was under the impression nothing had survived that massacre. But if he worked from the viewpoint that each guardian had a relationship with Razznik, the similarities between Fladnag and the mage from back then were too much of a coincidence to ignore. 
 Kashi sighed as he recalled the old, wizened wisben from Razznik's lifetime. Of all Razznik's antics, perhaps the only one the madman felt a tinge of reluctance for was the task regarding the old wisben. Kashi shook his head as he tossed the thought out of his head. Whatever, he would cross that bridge when he came to it. There were far too many things to consider at the moment. 
 Zeing felt something was off, but as he could not put a finger on where the issue lay, he promptly tossed it aside. He matched Kashi's pace as they ascended the stairs. "Don't really have a direct means of contact with her, but everyone's meeting up soon. I'll ask her to help you then."
 "Soon huh," Kashi muttered with a grave expression. Yes, there was one major matter he still had to settle. Worse still, the deadline was fast approaching. Only two and half months remained until the destined date of Skyrm's return. Kashi had a feeling that matter would not be as simple as it initially seemed so he had to ensure everything was ready for the inevitable battle.
 Kashi and Zeing spent their time up the stairs chatting about the dwarven state of affairs. Kashi was delighted to hear the dwarfs had almost finished construction on the flying boat prototype. In fact, they would have made even more progress, but there were a few materials which were proving difficult to procure. Kashi was not bothered by this. One simple post on the guild channel and there would be hundreds of Maggots rushing about to gather any materials. 
 This was one of the undisputable advantages of being a part of a guild.
 Kashi and Zeing finally reached the top of the stairs where they met an impatient Otto Knutsen pacing up and down. 

"Otto-san," Kashi politely greeted with an amused glint in his eyes. "What seems to be the matter?"
 "Ah! Kashi-dono! Zeing-sama!" Knutsen instantly brightened upon catching sight of the powerful duo. "Thank the gods you're awake," Knutsen said to the daeben with a relieved sigh. "Was just considering finding a way to barge into the sanctum." 
 "Wouldn't have done much," Kashi laughed as he clasped the dwarf's arm in a vice grip. "Once our kind return to our world, there's no way to contact us from this side."
 "I know that," Knutsen replied with an embarrassed grunt. "You could've returned but be working on some project again. Your lass told us you can get cooped up in your projects for weeks."
 "Haha, it is fine," Kashi returned. "I have yet to begin my next project. Too many choices. Yet to settle on one." Kashi's gaze softened with traces of concern. "So, tell me. What is it that is so urgent?"
 "Mm... This way," Knutsen said as he walked into the complicated, maze-like corridors that were the trademark of all dwarven settlements. Curiously, Zeing silently tagged along a few meters behind. It seemed he was truly bored and wanted to see what surprises this daeben could bring him. 
 As he led them through the corridors, Knutsen recounted the shocking event that had warranted his hasty depature for Kashi's sanctum. "The daeben you left behind. They've shown no signs of resistance, but they refuse to do any work. Their leader is that woman Shadow captured, Larsial. She has said she will only give the order for her people to do as we ask after she has spoken to you."
 Kashi nodded. "That much I expected. She looks the crafty type." Kashi, smelling something fishy about the story, however, raised a brow and challenged, "Why does this bother you though? It should not have been enough to send you running to the sanctum?"
 "Hehe, you caught me," Knutsen admitted. "After she made her demands, I challenged her to show us something of value so we can decide if they're worth our time."
 "Oh?" Kashi's eyes lit up as his interest piqued. "It would seem whatever she showed you was much too enticing?"
 "Haha," Knutsen let out an awkward chuckle. "Yes, it was certainly enticing." With a longing gaze, Knutsen recounted, "She tasked four daeben to construct some runes we had been having trouble with." Knutsen grunted with displeasure as he grabbed his beard. "Those daeben frikking drew those runes as easily as writing ABC's. Even worse, the performance was aat least three times better than ours!"
 "Oh? How sure are you those were not her best people?" Kashi proposed with a hidden glint in his eyes. "Wouldn't it be a shame if the rest of the daeben were piss-poor runecrafters?" 
 "Exactly!" Knutsen exclaimed with a loud shout. "I thought the same too! So I asked her to choose whoever I selected." Knutsen's head drooped low as he let out  a dejected sigh.
 "And?" Kashi inquired with a knowing smirk. "How did it go?"
 "About how you would expect," Knutsen grumbled. "Each daeben I picked turned out to be better than the last. It turns out those initial four were their worst rune-crafters. They were trying to spare my feelings."
 "Heh," Kashi let out a soft chuckle. He patted the dwarf on his back as he consoled, "Don't take it to heart. The better they are at runecrafting, the better for us." Kashi increased his pace as an excited glint shone in his eyes. "Come on then, let's see what she wants."
 Knutsen nodded, increasing his pace to match the daeben's. The duo engaged in light conversation as they walked through the corridors of the underground city. Several dwarfs on their way to and from their various workplaces greeted both men with respect. Kashi reciprocated the gestures with a contented smile. 

Kashi's and Knutsen's discussions took a turn as they neared the dungeons. As a man of the forge, it was only a matter of time before Knutsen began to report the states of the various projects and city construction. Kashi was pleased to learn that all projects were on schedule. The construction of the dwarven city had however hit a snag in its design phase. The council was not sure how to lay out the buildings in the city, or if they should even develop all the land to begin with.
 "Hm, I have some ideas on that," Kashi offered. "If you'll have me, I can present them to the King's Council."
 "Of course, Kashi-dono!" Knutsen vigorously nodded his head, eyes lit up like a jewel in the night. "Whenever it's convenient for you."
 Kashi nodded. "We're here." 
 Knutsen looked up and his gaze clouded over, a mixture of violent emotions flashing in his eyes as he stared at the two ten-meter tall statues that guarded the new gate to the dungeons. The 'gate' as it were, was actually comprised of the business end of two hammers held by the statues. The thousand-ton hammer heads sat next to each other with a nearly invisible seam between them.
 Two dwarven guards stood by the foot of the statues. Upon seeing Knutsen, the saluted and simultaneously pushed down levers hidden in the statues' feet. A soft clicking sound echoed in the cavern, then the statues lifted their hands, which raised the hammers, clearing the way.
 Knutsen thanked the guards, then accepted a torch from one of the guards as he led Kashi and Zeing down into the dungeons. The hammers dropped behind them, instantly plunging the cave into near darkness. Luckily, the dungeon walls were lined with soft, luminous algae-like plants. These algae emitted a soft glow which prevented the dungeon from being pitch-black. The algae, coupled with Knutsen's torch ensured the trio could see where they were going. 
 Well, really it ensured Knutsen could see where he was going. To warriors like Kashi and Zeing, there was no difference between night and day. Knutsen's led them past many cells filled with throngs of silent daeben, all quietly sitting cross-legged at the center of their cells without a care in the world.
 "They've been like this since we brought them here," Knutsen murmured. "There've been no fights, arguments, even shouts. They just sit in their cells. I've never seen prisoners like these. It's too eerie."
 "Mmm," Kashi nodded distractedly, his attention focused on the daebens' eyes. "What tough resolve." Kashi marveled at the strong conviction in the eyes of the daebens. They held nothing of the despair and resignation usually seen in war prisoners. In fact, there was no difference between the strength of their gaze now, and the one they had on the battlefield. 
 "Kashi-dono."
 Kashi's attention turned to Knutsen who had stopped in front of a cell. "This is her cell," he muttered with his face turned away from the cell. Maybe it was the as a result of the torch, but Kashi could have sworn the dwarf's cheeks were red.
 Curious, Kashi walked over to, and peered into the cell. What he saw immediately intrigued him. Unlike the previous cells, the inhabitant of this cell was quite active. Larsial, who only had a piece of cloth wrapped around her waist was engaged in a set of one-handed handstands. Her muscles bunched and twitched each time she lowered herself, her alluring figure emphasized by the dull glow of the runal markings on her skin against the darkness. Her firm, supple breasts brought a lump to Knutsen's throat. He struggled to look away, but every now and then, he could not help but turn around to sneak a peek.
 Unlike Knutsen, Kashi shamelessly stared at Larsial, but rather than lust, there was only interest and curiosity in his gaze. While waiting for Larsial to finish her workout, Kashi examined the runic prints on her skin. Their faint glow might have been invisible in normal light, but here, in this darkness it was like there was a spotlight on her skin, allowing Kashi to easily study the prints.

Like most daeben, Larsial's prints covered every inch of her body, from the crown of her forehead to the sole of her feet. Kashi could recognize some of the runes but some were far too obscure to recognize. The daeben were indeed the leading researchers into runecrafting. Kashi only had to glimpse at the complicated rune structures created from a systematic combination of runes to understand just how far they had come. Kashi had a feeling the daeben were only a few years away from creating arrays of their own.
 Unfortunately for the daeben, and fortunately for Kashi, modern technology had beaten them to the formation of arrays, putting the Hopeful Maggots years ahead in the race.
 "Um, maybe we should come back anoth-" Knutsen, still embarrased, started to say, but when he saw the apt concentration on Kashi's face, he could not finish his sentence. Hmm, seems Kashi-dono is human after all...
 Knutsen would have choked if he knew that behind those eyes, the daeben was not only examining the prints, but was also considering the potential success of modern day underwear for the women in this world. He had a feeling that with the right marketing strategy, it would be another cash cow for the guild. Kashi decided on the spot to delegate the task to the poor Miote.
 "Seen enough?" Larsial's sensual voice interrupted Kashi's scrutiny as she returned to an upright position. 
 Kashi looked away from the prints to the confident smirk on Larsial's face. "Not really," he honestly replied. "I will need to conduct further studies in the future."
 Larsial froze as the corner of her lips stiffened. "Surely you jest."
 "No," Kashi answered, his expression neutral. "I am very much interested in runic markings, especially the kind that can be applied directly to the body."
 "Oh, I see." Larsial regained her composure with a light shrug of her shoulder. "If our conversation goes as I hope, I will have some of our runecrafters explain how these work."
 "That's good then," Kashi replied. "I'll look forward to it." Kashi took a step closer so there was barely any space between him and the bars. "Now tell me, what did you want to talk about?"
  Larsial leaned against the bars, such that her breasts squeezed through, a her lips pressed together in an pitiable pout. "You wouldn't make a lady stand and talk would you?"
 "As you wish." Kashi signaled a nearby guard who promptly opened the cell gates with his key. Kashi entered the cell and nonchalantly took out a set of chairs from his inventory. With Kashi's signal, Knutsen sat alongside him with Larsial opposite. Zeing declined, content to stand and watch.
 "You Summoned and your magic pockets," Larsial murmured. "Is there anything you can't fit in there?"
 "We can't put living beings..." Kashi thought of the beasts classified as pets. "Well most living beings." Kashi's expression turned sombre. "So, tell me what you want."
 "Isn't it obvious?" Larsial stated as her gaze travelled along the walls of the dungeon. "I want out of here."
 "Is that it?" The light in Kashi's eyes instantly died down as a disappointed sigh escaped his lips. 
 Sensing the displeasure in Kashi's cold gaze, Larsial shifted in her seat. She folded her arms underneath her bosom, her lips curled in a sultry smile. "Of course not. I would not call you all this way just for that."
 "Good," Kashi coldly stated. "Let's hear it."
 "Alright, there's no reason to be in such a rush," Larsial teased as she crossed her legs. However, Kashi's hard gaze never left her eyes, leaving her feeling very uncomfortable. Larsial coughed in a bid to regain her composure. 

With an annoyed grunt, Larsial stood up and grabbed a dirty, loose robe from the floor which she used to wrap herself.  "Are you sure you're a man?" Larsial pointedly questioned as she returned to her seat. 
 "Last I checked," Kashi sardonically responded . "Enough games. Why did you call me here?"
 "I wanted to see what kind of man you are," replied Larsial. "I've seen you fight. You're an excellent fighter. But bloodshed is not the only quality that makes up a man, let alone a leader."
 "Oh? And what's your verdict?" questioned Kashi.
 "You are stronger than most. Either that or there's something seriously wrong with you."
 Kashi raised a brow. "It cannot be both?"
 "Heh, why can't it be, really?" Larsial chuckled. "Okay, good. Down to business then." Larsial's gaze hardened, her aura one of confidence and strength. "I am considering joining your guild. But I need to make sure of some things first."
 "Ask."
 "So confident. I like it." Larsial smiled. "So tell me, what is the ultimate goal of the Hopeful Maggots?"
 Kashi took a deep breath. Now that he thought about it, no one had ever truly asked what the guild's final goal was. Most members were content completing daily tasks and dominating leaderboards. Although there were whispers guessing their goal, none of the leaders had ever stated anything outright, as if reaching a consensus that they would only speak after the guild leader. 
 Kashi could feel Knutsen's and even Zeing's gaze on him, both men eager to hear his answer. Kashi had no doubt that his next words would drastically change the situation of the Maggots in the world. But the time had come. For the sake of true progress, he could no longer hide behind the shield of Rosendun and pretend he did what he did just for the sake of the country.
 "Our goal... Our goal is Unity. The unification of all the countries in Destia under one banner." 
 Larsial lips curled in a cynical grin. "Unity? I think you mean World Conquest."
 "Eight months ago, that might have been true," Kashi conceded. "But I have learned and seen a lot since I began this quest." With a shake of his head, Kashi reiterated, "I assure you, I do not pursue Conquest but Unification."
 "What is the difference?" Larsial challenged. "Both paths end up with lots of dead people."
 "Yes they do," Kashi agreed. "It is unfortunate that we live in an era of warring states. In most cases, diplomacy fails to achieve the desired effect." Kashi paused, a glint appearing his eyes. "However, wars without purpose only end up creating larger and more wars. The only reason we have managed to keep the peace this long is because the world is still recovering from the horrors of the last war." 
 Kashi sighed. "You should know very well what I speak of. The various warlords and nations have used these eleven years to groom the next set of soldiers for their dreams of conquest." Kashi's gaze travelled past Larsial to the other cells. "Destia's current state is like a sealed pot of boiling water. No one can see the heat rising within the pot, but it's rising nonetheless. When that pressure reaches a certain point..."
 Kashi met Larsial's gaze. "I do not want another war on the scale of eleven years ago. Too many lives were lost in that maelstrom of madness. It is time someone put an end to the cycle of war."
 "And that someone is you?" Larsial remarked with a cynical grin. "What makes you any different from those warlords?"
 "Approach," Kashi replied with a chuckle. Kashi raised his finger as he explained, "I said we sought unification, didn't I? The major difference between conquerors and those who seek unification is that one seeks to destroy everything and everyone in its path, while the other seeks to improve the lives of as many people as possible." Noticing Larsial's dubious expression, Kashi explained further, "Look at this way. If I were a conqueror, I would do anything to win, regardless of the morality. As someone who seeks unification, all my actions have to be carefully considered if I want to reduce the number of rebels who rise up in the future."

"Fine. Let's say you do accomplish this unification plan of yours," Larsial questioned. "What role do we daeben play in all this? What is our best-case scenario?"
 "Best-case scenario?" Kashi's voice hardened as his aura grew thick and intimidating. "There is only one scenario should the guild successfully complete its mission."
 "Oh?" Larsial felt shivers down her spine but she was a strong-willed woman. Perfectly hiding the unease in her heart, she asked, "What scenario is that?"
 "It seems you haven't been paying attention," Kashi joked, releasing the tension that had begun to suffocate the room. "I said it from the beginning. I seek unification. Unity of all races, tribes, walks of life... everything!" Kashi's eyes warmed. "Naturally, that includes the daeben."
 Knutsen and Larsial simultaneously took sharp intakes of breath. 
 "Kashi-dono!?"
 "That will never work!"
 "That is where you are wrong," Kashi softly refuted. "I come from a world that proves that no matter how terrible the persecution between countries, humes are capable of love and peace when the right conditions are presented."
 Larsial sat upright, her lips pressed together in a thin line. She studied the daeben's expression, but found no hints of falsehood. Feeling a sudden tightening in her chest, she asked in a quivering voice, "What condition can be presented?" 
 "Education," Kashi stated. "We only have enough energy to hate because our minds are too free." Kashi got to his feet, speaking as he walked toward Larsial, "A country of educated minds is less likely to go to war at the random whims of their rulers. Furthermore, education improves the quality of life of the people of a nation. A civilian is less likely to desire war if he has a warm home, family and a comfortable life he stands to lose."
 "You believe you can give the people that kind of life?" Larsial questioned, her lips curled in derision. "Even now as we speak, there are countless in just Merriheim alone without a place to hide from the elements. People are starving, fields and farms have been destroyed by beast attacks and most youths without jobs have turned to banditry. You think you are capable of turning all that around?"
 "Alone? Not a chance," Kashi candidly conceded. "However, I have the best men and women helping to fill in where I lack." Kashi walked over to Larsial's side. He looked down, meeting Larsial's questioning gaze. "With your help, we will be able to hasten that reality." Kashi paused.  "I do not ask you to believe everything I say now." Kashi raised his right hand and spread out his fingers. "Five months. Give us five months of your full aid. At the end, you can decide for yourselves if we do have a chance at this reality." A smile rose at the corner of Kashi's lips, softening his expression. "I only ask that you be honest with yourself. If there is indeed a chance, you will stay with us rather than go back to your people."
 "That should not be a problem," Larsial replied with a sardonic laughter. "To the daeben, a failure on the scale of ours is only redeemable by death." Larsial sighed. "Well, at least it was. The current matriarch, crowned after the previous matriarch perished in the last war, added the option of self-imposed exile for those who wish to escape the death penalty."
 "Hmm? A break away from tradition," Kashi muttered with disbelief. Daeben were notorious for the extreme conservative nature. They never veered from tradition, each daeben required to strictly follow the edicts of their tribe passed down from the very first generations. "I would very much like to one day meet this matriarch of yours. She sounds interesting."
 Larsial shook her head. "For your sake, pray you never get to meet her."
 "Hoh? Sounds ominous," Kashi joked. "So, do we have a deal?"
 Larsial rose from her seat with her hand stretched out. "Six months it is then."
 Kashi accepted the handshake with a firm grip. "I look forward to seeing what you bring to the guild." Kashi was about to go on but he was interrupted by a buzz in his pockets. He took out his Rink and accepted the call.
 "Kashi, you have to get to the forge quick!" Absalon's urgent voice cut through. "Jade and that Jerxas dude just did something crazy and nearly blew up half the forge!"
 "Jerxas!" Knutsen screamed with rage, his gaze a mixture of worry and wrath. "Excuse me Kashi-dono, I have to-"
 "Of course, Otto-san. I will come with you." Kashi made to move out of the cell, but then paused when he noticed Larsial sitting back down. "What are you doing?" Kashi questioned as he took out some clean clothes and a pair of combat boots from his inventory. He placed the combat boots on the ground and tossed the clothes to Larsial "Get dressed and meet us at the forge! Your six-month inspection begins now."
 Larsial caught the clothes, her eyes wide with shock as they followed the daeben's back as he ran down the hallway. She clutched the fabric, stunned to realize it was not just any random set of clothes but a high-grade set of cloth and leather armor. The kind assassins loved to wear.
 "Not once did he look at me like I was a monster," Larsial muttered underneath her breath as she began to change. "If it's him, then maybe..."
 *******
 A/N: Hello Guys! So, this chapter's a bit on the long side, but I still wasn't halfway done with what I wanted to put in this chapter, so I'm breaking it into two parts so I can upload faster. 
 Secondly, and most importantly, Our very own Paragon4x made an animated GMV (Game Music Video) tribute to Suzuki's pre-L.N.E days. Please watch it, give it some likes and comments and encourage him! It's less than two minutes so don't worry bout your data :)
 I personally loved it! Captured I think, everything about Suzuki's anger and solitude. Watch and enjoy! Have a Great Day Y'all!
 

 Video of the Day!
 
   
     
       
       
     
   
   
 

 

Chapter 11: The Definition of Unity

"Get the buckets!" A dwarf cried at the top of his lungs, frantic eyes darting around the burning forge. Several dwarfs ran back and forth, trying to put out raging fires that sprung up around the forge. Mini explosions sent dwarfs scampering for cover and even more running for the anti-flame solutions. A shout drew the dwarf's attention to a bucket with a dark-blue liquid in it. The dwarf screamed his thanks as he grabbed the bucket, then proceeded to toss its contents onto the mountain of pelts.
 Several dwarfs picked up buckets filled with the solution and began dousing the flames. Thankfully, the solution proved to be very effective as the fires soon began to quickly die down, leaving a rotten stench and thick smoke in the air. Strangely though, aside from a few wry grins, the dwarfs' eyes shone with excitement through their soot-covered faces as they collectively gathered around a part of the forge with the most damage.
 It was into this environment that Kashi, Otto, and Larsial rushed. Kashi and Larsial's brows knotted in confusion as their nostrils were assaulted by the pungent stench. Otto briefly explained the smell's source before he pulled over a dwarf to explain what the hell just happened. Strangely, upon hearing the report, Otto's eyes lit up with similar excitement. He would have left Kashi and Larsial behind if the daebens hadn't grabbed both shoulders.
 "Otto-san, care to share what with the rest of us?" Kashi questioned with a teasing grin.
 Otto, whose body shook with the impatience of a child at a playground, returned the teasing grin with one of his own, "This, This you should see for yourself." With those words, he shrugged off the daebens' grips and darted toward the enclosure with the fervor of an explorer at the sight of gold.
 Kashi and Larsial shared a look. Kashi let out a sly grin then rushed after Otto, leaving an exasperated Larsial to chase after his back. Upon reaching the throng of dwarfs, Otto and Kashi abused their statuses to squeeze through the packed dwarfs. With a bit of hesitation, Larsial tugged at the hood of the jacket Kashi gave her so it covered her face, then followed Kashi's lead.
 The trio exited the dwarven cluster to the sight of Absalon dressed in a casual set of red robes and a couple of his liutenants surrounding a large pile of ash and two individuals on their knees. Absalon's eyes were drawn in a tight frown as he glared at the culprits of the fiasco. However, a small smile at the corner of his lips revealed traces of amusement at the situation. 
 Absalon looked up, a relieved sigh escaping his lips as Kashi and co. came to his side. His brow rose as he spotted Larsial, but in the end, he chose to ignore her presence for now. "It is good to see you Kashi," Absalon greeted with a formal salute before taking Kashi's hand in a firm handshake. "I can't begin to express how glad I am to see you here." 
 "The feeling's mutual Absalon-san," Kashi returned with a smile. He looked at the kneeling culprits and with a teasing smile, questioned, "What have we here?"
 Absalon let out an exasperated sigh. "These two were apparently conducting some sort of experiment. Things got out of hand, and here we are." Absalon shrugged. "They've been kneeling in apology since." Faced with Kashi's mocking, accusatory glance, Absalon quickly defended himself. "Hey, they're not soldiers under my jurisdiction. I did not make them do this. They chose this of their own volition."
 "Hm, is that right?" Kashi light-heartedly said. "Well, accidents are an integral part of innovation," said Kashi as he in front the culprits with amicable smile. "So, Jerxas-san, Jade, want to tell me what you two were working on?"
 Jade, understanding she had already gotten the pardon, instantly raised her head, the brightest, animated smile on her face. If there was even the slightest bit of remorse at the repercussions of their previous failure, it was long gone. "So, remember how I and Suzuki created a frost array in the other world?"

Meanwhile, Absalon retreated so he stood next to Larsial. He regarded the daeben rogue with a threatening half-smile as he whispered, "I see you got yourself out of the cell."
 "Your leader has better foresight than he looks," Larsial returned with a cold glare.
 "Hmph," Absalon snorted as he turned to look at Kashi. "You have no idea."
 Kashi could see the excitement in Jade's eyes and wisely chose not to give her the ethics lesson at that particular moment. "Mm-hmm. Were you able to replicate it? Was that what caused the explosion?"
 "Well, yes and no," Jade muttered in embarrassment as she flicked strands of hair over her ear. "I could simulate some higher rune mastery in the real world but I couldn't do that here."
 "That's where I fucking came in!" Jerxas yelled with a loud shout as he took a seat on the ground and slapped it hard. "Haha! Kashi-kun! I knew you were different kinda breed from the rest of these bloody bores, but I had no idea! The ingenuity! The sheer audacity! HA! I can confidently state these arrays of yours will leap our technological advancements at least thirty years into the future!"
 "The honor's all Jade's," Kashi corrected. "She's the brains; I'm only the wallet."
 "Modesty's shit!" Jerxas spat with a cynical chuckle. "She already spilled kid. She got the runes from ya, didn't she?" 
 Kashi sent Jade an accusatory glance which elicited an embarrassed chuckle and nervous head-scratching from the little halben. 
 "Hehe, Kashi, I swear it was the only way to get this stubborn old coot to cooperate," Jade quickly defended with a vengeful glare at her accomplice. "He swore he wouldn't help if I didn't tell him where I got the runes."
 "It's fine," Kashi absolved their guilt with a wave of his hand. "We're not here to point fingers and lay blame." The daeben turned his attention to Jerxas. "So, tell me. What makes you so important?"
 Jerxas chortled as he took out brush from a pouch fastened to his belt. "The Chaos Order are a right bag of shitheads, but if there's one place they've left us all in the dust, it's in runecrafting." Jerxas picked up a bowl containing a mixture Kashi did not recognize from the floor and dipped the brush in it. "During their time here, my research into soul energy motivated the buggers to teach me a couple tricks." Jerxas' brush danced across the ground, creating a perfect circle. With a flick of his fingers, a second circle formed within the first. "Now, look, I'll admit I've never thought of creating these so-called arrays, but I do have more than enough experience merging runes to achieve new, unseen effects." The brush slithered within the confines of the inner circle forming the familiar shape of a six-sided snowflake. " Jade here's got the ideas and the brain, but lacks the required level to try out her thoughts in reality. I, on the other hand, am just a few runes shy of Runecraft Mastery. That's why she needed my help."
 "I understand," Kashi acknowledged with an appreciative nod. "So, what went wrong the first attempt?"
 "We were too ambitious," Jade admitted with a wry grin. "We used top grade materials to prepare the ink. As a result, the energy in the array was far too powerful for the tiny metal board we inked it on. With nowhere to escape, the excess, concentrated energy surged out of the board, destroying it in the process." 
 "Thus the explosion," Jerxas said as he drew a collection of runes between the concentric circles. "If we use the earth as our board however, this is the result." Jerxas' brush drew its final stroke then he sharply got to his feet and shuffled backward. "I suggest you do the same."
 Kashi, intrigued, rose and took a couple of steps back with Jade doing the same across from him. When the trio stood ten meters away from the array, Jerxas nodded at Jade who sent out a steady stream of mana to the array. 

The array lit up, its runes turning obscure as the light brightened. The snowflake diagram greedily absorbed the pure mana, then altered its nature to a colder attribute before distributing it to the runes within the concentric circles. The runes, in turn, absorbed the cold-attributed mana and began transforming the mana according to their respective laws. 
 The spectators gasped as a cool breeze escaped the array. The chilly wind, however, did nothing to cool the hot blood flowing through the dwarven veins as they witnessed a thick sheet of ice form on the ground. The radius of the ice expanded as it crept along the ground, stopping just shy of eight meters. 
 Kashi stared at the thick sheet of ice. He looked across the frozen landscape and spotted Jade's eyes wide with excitement. Clearly, even she had not imagined it would work so well. In stark contrast, Jerxas chest was puffed out with a confident, snarky grin on his lips. He could not have looked anymore arrogant at that moment, but Kashi could easily spot the relief in Jerxas' eyes, and the excitement in the dwarf's rapidly rising and falling chest.
 Kashi pretended not to notice Jerxas' flaws. He shook his head, and with a small smile, walked onto the sheet of ice. Kashi's smile widened to a toothy grin as his skin prickled from the intense cold. "Is there any way to regulate the temperature?" Kashi asked as he walked to the center of the ice-land where the array was located. 
 "Easy," Jade replied. "Nothing a little rune manipulation can't handle."
 "Good," Kashi acknowledged. The daeben took a deep breath then approached Jade, his unbending, strong gaze locking her in place. "Effective immediately, I'm instating you as the head of our Rune-Research Department. You now have full control over any and all projects and funds related to rune research." Kashi stepped out of the icy radius and stopped in front of Jade. Kashi smiled, the warmth offsetting the cool air escaping the frost array. "Think you can handle it?"
 Jade was momentarily frozen, dazzled by the warmth in the daeben's eyes. She had not known Kashi long, but even in that short period, she had never known him to exude such warmth. Jade snappily shook out of it and lightly punched Kashi's left arm. "Naturally. Leave it up to me. You won't regret it."
 "I know I won't." Kashi affirmed. "The daeben prisoners under our guild's supervision will be turned over to you," Kashi stated with a cursory glance sent Larsial's way. Kashi then turned to Jerxas who had begun to fidget in place, unsure of his future role. "Feel free to collaborate with Jade on any projects or research you wish to undertake. If it's all the same to you, I would prefer you remain with the dwarfs. The way I see it, Jade's team will be in charge of researching innovative methods of array and rune manipulation, while we will contract the dwarfs with constructing new machines using the developed arrays." Kashi looked over his shoulder at the sheet of ice, then over to Knutsen with a wide grin. "For starters, modify this rune a bit and we have a new cooling system." He turned back to Jerxas. "How long until the mana inside runs out?"
 "Tiny arrays like this can self-replenish with nature's mana," Jerxas revealed with a proud grin. "Technically, unless stopped, it could last forever after the initial input of mana."
 "It's not the same for larger arrays then?"
 "Nah," Jade replied this time. "Larger arrays require massive amounts of mana to even be activated. Also, they cannot absorb energy from the surroundings without massive repercussions."
 "Putting it in layman's terms, it's like comparing your breathing to that of an ancient dragon," Jerxas explained. "Your breath is tiny. No one notices the disturbance, but I heard when ancient dragons breath, hurricanes can be felt for miles."
 "I understand," Kashi said with a nod. "In that case if we use arrays rather than gemstones in the flyboat, we will cut down on a lot of expenses pre and post-launch. Also, if we combine just convert the gemstones into storage containers for mana, we can still use them in conjuction with those larger arrays that can't sustain themselves." Kashi once again turned to Knutsen with a thoughtful gaze. "Is it possible?"

"It is certainly possible, no doubt," Knutsen firmly replied. However, he then added with a troubled look, "However, it will cause some delays to the schedule. How fast we can finish up the prototype after that will largely depend on how quickly Jerxas and Jade-kun can get us those arrays."
 Kashi nodded and turned back to Jade. "You heard the man. Your current assignment is to get a list of all the functions of the current gemstones and runes in the flyboat right now, and design arrays to replace them. I expect results within a month. Can you handle it?"
 Jade placed her hands on her hips and exposed a wide grin. "Do you know who you're talking to? When my pops hacked the CIA for fun, I developed not one, not two, but three different programming languages from scratch!" Jade boasted with a haughty grin. "Don't worry, I got this!"
 Kashi nodded. "Please, I'll leave it you." He patted Jade on the shoulder, then walked over to Knutsen. With a grateful smile, he said, "I'll be depending on you."
 "Hmph, at this point, we're the ones depending on you," Knutsen disagreed with a teasing grunt. The dwarf's lips spread into a wide, toothy grin. "Go do what you've got to do kid. I'll ensure the flyboat's completed within a month." 
 "You have my gratitude, Knustsen-san," Kashi said with a humble bow. "All right, I'm off Knutsen-san. I will be back soon." He straightened his back, signaling Absalon and Larsial with his eye, then walked toward the exit.
 Absalon kept pace with Kashi, leaving Larsial a few steps behind the duo.
 Kashi caught Absalon's gaze repeatedly travelling to Larsial. With an amused sigh, he suggested, "If you've got something to say, you should just say it."
 Absalon nodded. He sent a wary glance Larsial's way then voiced his discomfort. "Is it a wise choice? Freeing her?"
 "Maybe, Maybe not," Kashi replied with a shrug. "I am no clairvoyant. I can't tell if this will come to bite us in the ass or not." Kashi briefly glanced over his shoulder at the silent Larsial then continued, "One thing we do know is we need the daeben's skill set. For that, we need her on our side. She might choose to betray us later, but that'll only be after she has dug up as many secrets about our guild as possible." Kashi revealed a confident grin, his gaze steadfast and bold, with a little hint of crazed madness. "Don't you think it's an interesting gamble? Will she betray us, or will we be able to convince her to fully work with us?" Kashi once again turned to Larsial, but this time, there was a significant threat in his hard gaze. "What do you think it'll be?"
 To her credit, Larsial refused to crumble under the pressure. "Well, we'll just have to wait and see, won't we?" She replied with the sweetest of smiles.
 Kashi, as if expecting the answer, chuckled as he turned to Absalon. "Hear that? We'll just have to wait and see."
 Absalon let out an exasperated sigh. Man, what kind of guild leader was this. Many times, it seemed like he was just winging it, but... Come to think of it, his situation back then was quite similar. When most had expected Kashi to execute or imprison him, the daeben instead gave him a high position in the guild. It had been a huge gamble, one that had clearly paid off. Right now, wasn't Absalon only asking these questions because he was genuinely worried about the guild he had once considered betraying? Absalon glanced at the oblivious Larsial with pity in his eyes. Poor woman. She has no idea she's already fallen into his trap. There's no way out for you now. 
 Kashi and Absalon engaged in idle chatter until they reached ground level. Kashi whistled as they stepped into the blistering afternoon sun, his gaze locked on the serious constructions taking place. Dwarfs, beastmen and other humes rushed about in a strangely orderly fashion, carrying wood, stone and tools from one location to another. At the moment, the majority of the construction work was focused on developing a network of 'main roads' which should run throughout the entire city. Alongside these 'roads', train tracks were also being built. 

The dwarfs had begun to build with the future in mind. 
 Kashi, Absalon and Larsial made their way through the dense work crowd, weaving through the chaos to get to the stables. On their way, Kashi spotted a building that did not belong in the game. 
 An apartment complex. Ah no, it was more like an entire block of apartment complexes the size of a district. Other than that, he also noticed several long bungalows which formed a district of their own. The difference between the two districts were the large number of dwarven guards posted to the bungalow district.
 Noticing Kashi's gaze, Absalon promptly explained it was his idea. Since he noticed Kashi was avoiding the stick approach, he decided it would not be a good idea to throw the prisoners who had agreed to work into the dwarven dungeons. Keep in mind these dungeons mimicked those of medieval times. There weren't any human rights laws governing the construction of dungeons so the conditions in the dungeons could turn a good person mad if kept there for too long.
 Absalon thus proposed the hall-like bungalow building which had several bunk beds within. This was to be the prisoners' quarters during their stay. The prisoners were delighted because it meant they would not be kept underground and away from the sun. Plus, there was something heartening about seeing a roof over your head. If it were not for the dwarven guards, this would have felt like a camp rather than a prison.
 Absalon's thought process was as such. Following Kashi's wishes, he did not want the prisoners to only form a negative impression of Aygorzi. Rather, he wanted them to view the construction work as something akin to a job, after which they would return home at night with their friends. There was no guarantee it would work, and there was an increased chance of rebellion as a result of the prisoners' closeness to each other, but regular patrols and bedchecks ensured the prisoners did not sneak off at night to hold secret meetings.
 At the moment, things seemed peaceful and the treatment looked successful. Only time would tell if there would be any changes.
 For the meantime, Absalon also introduced the apartment complexes for those dwarfs who wanted to have homes above ground. Currently, they were using two-storey apartment complexes, which Absalon explained was to economize space. Of course, he did not add the other reason. No matter how realistic L.N.E was, in the end it was still a game. And games had certain mechanics that assisted the players.
 One of these mechanics was the population density mechanic. 
 The population of any given city or village in L.N.E depended on certain factors like economy, food source, security and in some cases, entertainment. But the most important factor at the end of the day was always space. The more space there was, the more civilians you would recruit. Likewise the more industries you had in your village or city, they greater the chance a specialist would immigrate to your city.
 Right now, with all the industries the Hopeful Maggots were pioneering, the one thing Rosendun needed was citizens. Hence, the reason Absalon brought in apartment complexes. His aim was to increase the amount of 'space'. Where normally, they would get in one family, with an apartment complex, they could get up to five families. 
 L.N.E's artificial intelligence would then create brand new families to try and fill up the space, if all quotas are met. The process of how this new, generated individuals would integrate into the world with complete backstories and histories dating back several generations was not the concern of the players. 
 Absalon was well aware they could not continue to rely on prisoners as labor force, hence the unusual recruitment method. Of course, contracts had also been given out to those willing to work in construction, with one of the perks being free housing for a year. 

"That's brilliant!" Kashi freely praised. He'd had a similar idea, but there was nothing better for a leader than having subordinates that saw six steps ahead and implemented his vision before he even spoke. It was a sign they understood what he wanted on a deeper level.
 Meanwhile, Larsial went absolutely silent throughout the exchange. She peered through her cowl at the humes going about their daily work. Although, there were quite a number with discontent on their faces, there was no sign of the outright hatred she was used to seeing from the prisoners daeben had taken in the past.
 Larsial noticed something else as she examined the prisoners' eyes. Perhaps it was because of the work, but the light in their eyes were still alive, even if slightly dimmed. She could tell that the threat of rebellion still existed in these humes' minds, but the fact that they had not attempted it yet meant one of two things. There was no opportunity to, or not enough of them were interested.
 Why would they?
 The reasons slaves were quick to rebellion was because they always felt they had nothing left to lose. But these people did have something to lose. Aside from work, they were together with their friends, they had good food and a nice roof over their heads. At night they were allowed to look at the stars, and aside from a couple of places, their movements were not overly restricted.
 This was a simple, easy life. If they attempted a rebellion and lost, they would lose even that. Perhaps they would be sent to the dungeons instead. Very few were willing to risk their comfortable present for a hypothetical future.
 Such was the nature of humes.
 "Perhaps we had it wrong," Larsial muttered under her breath.
 "There he is." A smile spread on Kashi's face as he approached the stable to see a familiar black-furred stallion standing imposingly at its entrance. "I'm back, Drixlia," Kashi greeted with a warm smile and a gently pat on the stallion's neck. Drixlia responded with a haughty harrumph a harsh breath that left Kashi's hair dancing in the wind.
 Kashi chuckled as he jumped onto Drixlia's back with one smooth motion. He turned to Absalon as a nearby stableman brought a free vespa for Larsial. "One last thing. From now on, I want you to focus our military efforts internally. Root out all traces of rebellion and set up security agents in each village. Call them police or whatever."
 Absalon raised a brow. "We're not going to war? Monoch is currently at war with Imperium. It's a good chance to launch a sneak attack on either region. At worst we can increase our territory by a little."
 "No can do," Kashi refused with a shake of his head. He fixed Absalon with a searching gaze, "Do you know why we go to war?"
 "To unite the continent," Absalon easily replied.
 "Unite huh?" Kashi murmured. "If it were only that, we would not be going through as much trouble as we have." Kashi turned his gaze to the scorching sun, the brilliant light contrasting against his skin as if in denying his existence. "We are uniting the lands yes. But the purpose is not to unite the lands."
 "Huh?" Absalon stared at Kashi with questioning eyes.
 "The unification of the continent only serves one purpose," Kashi revealed. "The end of all wars." A small smile spread on the daeben's face. "To achieve this, we cannot use only force to unite the continent. If we do this, the message will be, 'Might makes Right.' It won't take a few years before rebellions spring up all over the place and we are back to square one."
 "Then, what do you plan on doing?" Absalon questioned. "It's not like the other countries will just hand over themselves. Serisis was a major fluke which will never repeat itself."
 "Haha, of course not," Kashi laughed. "That would be boring." The daeben revealed a sly grin as he matched the general's gaze. "Although the country will not hand over itself, who says we can't make the citizens think, 'hey, it won't be so bad if they conquer us.'" 
 Absalon's brow rose. "And how do you plan on doing that?"
 "Technology and Education," Kashi explained. "Think about it. If the citizens of the country next to your are living a life of absolute luxury while you're stuck in the mud, won't you want to move over to that country?"
 "I would."
 "If you were the ruler of such a country, would you allow your citizens to ceaselessly migrate to another country?"
 Absalon's eyes brightened as the picture began to form. "Of course not!"
 "Those citizens who can't have the good life, yet are forced to remain within their country, how do you think they would react to an invasion?"
 "They..." Absalon shivered as realization dawned. As he gazed at the daeben, he no longer saw the amiable little guild leader, but a terrifying, heartless demon cloaked in the skin of a daeben. Absalon gulped as he muttered, "They might feel conflicted or even not care. Worst case scenario, they might even support the invaders."
 "Exactly," Kashi stated with a grin. "So for now, we will solely focus on development within our regions. All the industries we've envisioned must be up and running within six months." Absalon could have sworn he saw the silhouette of a high-class demon behind the daeben's devious grin as he said, "We'll make our citizens so comfortable, they'll never want to go anywhere else. All those other nations will die slow deaths of jealousy. Eventually, they'll have no choice but to attack us first if they want to prevent their citizens from rebelling." Torrents of bloodlust burst out of the daeben, drowning every living thing in a fifty meter radius. "That will be our chance."
 "Or something like that." Kashi reverted to a loose smile, only to see Absalon's pale face, eyes wide in abject horror. Kashi laughed as he leaned down and patted Absalon's shoulder. "Don't worry. All that's still a ways off. For now, just focus on quelling rebellions and training the noobs on warfare strategies. Your time to shine will come soon. Right now, let Jade and the others steal the spotlight for a bit."
 "As you command," Absalon acquiesced with a polite bow. "If I may ask, where are you headed now?"
 Kashi looked to the south. "Meilfour. I've got a meeting with our resident cat."
 "Godspeed."
 "Thanks. See you soon," Kashi said as he spurred Drixlia into a light jog. Once he had cleared the construction zone, Drixlia sped up, leaving a large cloud of dust in his wake.
 Barely keeping up with him (because Drixlia allowed it), Larsial stared at the back of the daeben with equal parts trepidation and excitement. From the short hour or so she had spent with him, he had already opened her eyes to so many incredible things.
 More, More... Reveal all that you are!

 

Chapter 12: Hektor's Resolve

Undisclosed Location
 Squeak, squeak...
 Within a dimly lit system of caverns and tunnels, a rockbiter rat bore its way through dense rock formations, spurred on by the all too familiar stench of blood. The rockbiter rat quickly darted past large skeletons, the stench of rotten bones causing its nose to twitch. Some of these skeletons were large enough to reach the top of the ceilings. One could imagine just how massive some of these creatures had been. But they had all perished here, losing the battle against stronger foes.
 The rockbiter rat meandered through the tunnels, its pace accelerating as the stench of blood grew stronger. The air grew heavy and red with blood mist, the suffocating stench drilling through the rockbiter rat's nose all the way to its brain. The rockbiter rat's eyes gradually turned blood-red and its squeaks grew louder and more frequent as it descended into a blood-induced frenzy. It no longer bothered with cavern pathways. After pausing for a moment, it directly bit into the rocky walls. Teeth and claws sharper and tougher than iron tore through the dense rock like tofu, allowing the beast to take the shortest path to the source of the smell.
 The rockbiter rat drilled out of the rocks into a large, open cavern, where it was not surprised to see thousands of its brethren. A quick glance around revealed several hundreds more pouring out of holes in the caverns walls. The rockbiter rat ignored the others as it charged forward, having already lost its mind to bloodlust.
 Boom!
 A powerful boom aKin to the rumbling of thunder reverberated within the cavern, closely accompanied by massive gusts of wind. The rockbiter rat let out a pained screech as it was sent tumbling back the way it came. The wind felt like a ten-tonne hammer. It left the rockbiter rat disoriented and confused, instantly curing it of its frenzied state. 
 The rockbiter rat shook its head, squeaKing softly as its eyes slowly returned to its natural black. With its bloodlust gone, the rockbiter rat suddenly suffered a cold chill down its spine. It instinctively scurried behind a large boulder just as another blast of wind boosted past. The rockbiter rat stared in disbelief as it saw hundreds of its Kind burst into blood mist. It shivered, a heavy sense of dread pressing down on it as the blood from its Kind condensed into a thick mist.
 The rockbiter rat could not escape its fate. It reluctantly inhaled the concentrated mist, then overcome by the ensuing bloodlust, it charged out from behind the boulder and rushed towards the center of the cavern. It had barely crossed ten feet when another boom blasted out, accompanied by the deadly shockwaves.
 The last thing the rockbiter rat saw was the bone spear of a bloodied figure of a lone man clashing against the claw of a black dragon. The dragon's massive wings were tucked close to its side, gruesome gashes in its membrane. It had lost the ability of fight, but the black dragon was not flustered much. It could still destroy this human with its massive 15 ft body. Despite facing the dragon's imposing frame, the stalwart figure showed no hints of bacKing down. The young man's muscles tensed as he struggled against the enraged dragon.
 Pop!
 Hektor had no time to spare the onrushing rockbiter rats any heed. It took all he had not to crumble under the strength of the majestic beast facing him. His heavily scarred body was a living testament of the trials he had endured. He had learned enough to know that turning his attention elsewhere during battle was enough to get him Killed. His armor and axe were long gone, crushed to bits within the stomach of some monster. The young man had nothing on save the bone spear named [Dragon's Tooth] he had obtained from the belly of dragon and the pants he had found in a treasure chest.
 Hektor gritted his teeth and inched his feet forward. He squatted low, gathered momentum then burst forth with blinding speed. The dragon reared its head in pain as its claw was torn right off. It quickly retreated with deceptively quick steps. 

Hektor, eager to press on his advantage, doggedly followed. The dragon, however seemed to have anticipated this move. It swiftly spun in place even as it retreated, and its tail whizzed through the air with the speed and vigor of a viper. 
 Hektor's eyes narrowed. His grip tightened around the spear's shaft. The cold exterior of the bone spear chilled his palms as he crouched into a low stance. Like a prowling wolf locked onto its target, Hektor's muscles contracted as the dragon's tail approached.
 Clang!
 Once the tail was overhead, Hektor sprang forth like an arrow shot from a bow. His spear shot out with the ferocity of a dragon. The dragon tooth at the end of the spear clashed against the insipid tail. The first clash, utilizing the full strength of both parties resulted in both weapons being blown apart. However, half a second later both parties regained their postures and unleashed a torrent of attacks at each other.
 Hektor stomped onto the earth. He stubbornly held his ground as his spear flew out with the desire to obliterate all obstacles. Hektor clashed with the tail dozens of times within the span of a few seconds. His spear moved with the power of a bear and the agility of a snake, easily cutting off all attack points of the dragon's tail. 
 Unwilling to remain on the passive, Hektor let out a earth-shattering roar as torrents of vengeful, blood-red Ki exploded from his pores. The dragon, caught unprepared, could do nothing as its tail was blasted upward by the Ki explosion. The dragon's horror had only begun as Hektor abruptly reined in the loosed Ki and gathered it into his spear.
 Faint roars echoed from Dragon's Tooth as it trembled with rage. Hektor's feet shuffled in a pattern strangely similar to those of the dragon's. Roiling red Ki surged at the tip of the spear, its ferocious intensity forming cracks on the earth.
 "[Ryuuga Tensaku!]" Hektor growled as he exploded forth!
 The dragon, sensing the imminent danger, let out an enraged roar. It quickly spun around and swiped down at the deranged brat. Hektor, unperturbed by the massive claw, stabbed the spear point against the incoming claw.
 BOOM!
 Red Ki violently clashed against blue Ki, releasing bursts of wild energy and massive shockwaves. Large cracks ran along the earth, and at least three whole feet of earth was disintegrated by the explosive force. Light and sound were sucked into the point between the spear head and the dragon's claw, plunging the cavern into a dense darkness.
 A moment later, the condensed energy imploded! Hektor failed to stifle a pained growl as he was flung skyward, layers of sKin shredded by the violent blast. Hektor quickly righted himself midair, paying little heed to the rivulets of blood that poured from his exposed muscles. He snorted, brows locked in anger as he glared at the beast below.
 Although the dragon had suffered injuries from the blast, its size was much more massive, hence it was able to withstand the pushback. The dragon's hate-filled glare locked onto the youth. With a snide grin, it quickly reared its neck and tilted its head further back. It opened its mouth wide, and several small particles of blue light gushed to the opening. The swallowed mana particles concentrated at the base of the dragon's neck. Its neck instantly swelled up as a the density of the mana particles reached critical mass.
 All this occurred within the span of a second. Before Hektor could react, the dragon's head shot forward. A blood-curdling roar erupted as torrents of flames from the dragon's mouth drowned out Hektor's form.
 The dragon stomped its feet against the earth, roaring and grunting in pleasure as the flames enveloped the young man. However, its joyful celebration was soon cut short. The dragon's faltered in its steps as the sea of flames began to act weirdly. 

As if pulled by an invisible force, the flames began to slowly rotate in place. The scattered embers clumped together to form a massive tornado. Deep, menacing growls rumbled from the rotating pillar of flames. The dragon's eyes widened in shock. A panicked cry escaped its jaws as a section of the pillar of flames flew out in the form of a serpentine dragon. Within the blink of an eye, thousands of flaming dragons burst out of the pillar, exposing the red-haired young man within.
 Hektor's fiery gaze reflected the raging flame, red hair billowing wildly amidst the loose embers. The young man gripped the spear shaft with tense determination. Hektor channeled Ki to his feet, the flame dragons responding to his spear by aligning themselves in formation next to him. 
 The imposing profile of a certain daeben commanding a thousand shooting stars to light up the world flashed through Hektor's mind. "I'm coming!" Hektor roared as he detonated the Ki accumulated at the soles of his feet. The young warrior shot to the earth with the harrowing speed of a bullet! The fiery dragons blazed an angry trail as they chased after the young man.
 A sense of impending doom struck the black dragon. It attempted a quick retreat but Hektor was too fast. 
 BOOM!
 ROOOAR!
 Hektor struck the dragon's belly with the force of an artillery shell. His spear crushed the dragon's protective scales and successfully pierced through, cutting a straight line down to the ground. Hektor detonated the Ki suffused around his spear as he cut through. Once he hit the ground, he quick retreated to the side. 
 The dragon wailed in torment as the raging Ki savaged its internal organs. It barely had time to register the massive hole at the side of its belly when it was bombarded by the flame dragons. The cavern trembled terribly from the ensuing explosion as massive rocks fell from the ceiling to shatter against the hard earth. 
 Hektor silently rotated his Ki for one final attack as he briskly dodged the falling debris. He kept an eye on the screaming dragon as it was buried under hails of stone.
 BOOM!
 As expected, the dragon stormed out of the debris with a massive explosion that scattered a salvo of flaming rocks to the far corners of the cavern. The wretched dragon roared in rage and pain as it directed its hate-filled glare at the young warrior. The black dragon ignored its damaged scales and heavy blood loss. It had decided it would Kill this human no matter the cost! 
 Massive globs of black, hateful mana adhered to the black dragon's body, forming a massive shield as it dashed across the ground. The dragon's mana chaotically fluctuated mirroring its madness and intense rage. 
 Faced with the gargantuan charge, Hektor took a deep breath. His Ki changed nature, turning black in color. However, where the dragon's aura was murky and angry, Hektor's aura was calm, cold even. A faint silhouette of an imposing black direwolf materialized at his back as he took a step forward. 
 Whoosh!
 Hektor once again detonated Ki collected at this soles. He charged at the dragon with seemingly reckless abandon, spearhead pointed at its snout. The direwolf silhouette coalesced into a visible projection that enveloped him within as his speed increased. 
 The dragon roared in displeasure and rage at the human who dared to meet its challenge head-on. It ran across even faster, eager to obliterate the human with its superior ability.
 The charging wolf, as if incensed by the dragon's audacity, snarled and siminlarly increased its pace.
 The dragon glared at the wolf's eyes as it made to crash against it. This is where you die!

Whoosh!
 WHA!? 
 The dragon missed its footing as the wolf abruptly disappeared from its sights. Every muscle in its body had been primed for the clash so when its target went missing, the dragon could not react on time. Its instinct flared and it immediately raised its neck. It proved to be the right choice.
 It barely dodged the charge of a the black wolf who flanked it from the side. The wolf's frightening agility came into effect at that moment. The wolf came to a hard stop, spun in place and lunged at the dragon's exposed neck.
 CRUNCH!
 The dragon let out a crazed, pained roar as the wolf bit off a large chunk off its neck. Its cries instantly cut off as a red light zipped through its neck. 
 Hektor dropped to the earth as the dragon's head fell. A smile spread on the young man's face as he examined the fallen head. Ever since training began, this had been his toughest fight yet. Over the course of training, he had studied dragons to the extent he probably kknew more about them than most scholars on the mainland.
 Through his studies, he picked up a few sKills by mimicKing the movement of dragons. After getting blasted with dragon Ki more times than he could count, he also managed to develop his own dragon Ki. Finally, he learned how to manipulate Ki by watching dragons fight each other and himself. He steadily refined his abilities, but soon discovered a downside to the dragon Ki he learned. Maybe it was because it wasn't pure, but the dragon-Ki he learned changed his temperament to fiery and impatient like the dragons he fought. This resulted in him sustaining more injuries than was necessary during fights because he was always hot-headed.
 To rectify the situation, Hektor hought long and hard about what he could do. It wasn't until five days ago that inspiration suddenly struck. At that time, the guild emblem on his chest flared up, sending a steady stream of cold yet powerful Ki through his body. Hektor did not know what could have caused such a reaction, but he could feel the unwavering pride transmitted through the emblem.
 At the time, Hektor seized this feeling and began to practice with the Ki. LucKily, by the time the resonance ended, he could generated the Ki himself. He named it 'Wolf Ki' because something about its cold, prideful nature reminded him of Kira.
 Right now, Hektor had two Kis, Wolf and Dragon, Black and Red respectively. Dragon Ki lent an explosive attribute to his Ki, which when infused into flames, could seize control for a short period of time. Wolf Ki on the other hand, boosted his agility, improved his judgment and enhanced his perceptiveness, allowing him to pick up on things he might have missed. 
 Hektor was glad because they balanced themselves out personality wise. At the very least, he would not turn unnaturally violent any time soon.
 Hektor groaned as he stabbed his spear into the dragon's head. "Guess it's roasted dragon again." He glanced at a corner of the wall where a large door stood. As expected, after the dragon's death, the door began to open up on its own. "Seven floors to go..."
 Hektor's eyes traveled from the door back to the dragon's corpse. "I wonder who made this dungeon." He thought back to a book he once read while he served in the military. If he recalled correctly, that was about the time when the war was at its worst. He and a bunch of his friends from military school were drafted to the frontlines despite being only eight years of age. Although he spent most of his time doing logistic work, there were two occasions were the daeben infiltrated their supply camp and he had to pick up a weapon to fend for himself.
 Hektor lightly shivered as he thought back to those days. An eight year old in a warzone, forced to watch one soldier after another return dead, and in a lot of cases incomplete. It was truly a harrowing thing to imagine, but such was the daebens' dominance, that other countries were forced to take such drastic measures or face extinction.

Hektor shook his head as he corrected his train of thought. The book he read was given to him by Paris when he was lucky enough to be drafted into the young man's regiment. Back then the future king was still a rambuctious youth filled with the vigor and desire to impress in battle. 
 The book detailed out the three main kinds of dungeons that could be found in the world. The first were man-made dungeons. There was nothing special about these type of dungeons. Once a person cleared out the bandits or cult that occupied such dungeons, that was the end. 
 The second type of dungeon was what was known as a monster dungeon. The dungeons usually consisted of multiple floors of progressively more difficult monsters. These type of dungeons had a monster 'core' that was responsible for giving birth to monsters at a fixed rate. If these dungeons were not cleared regularly, the monsters within would spill out, resulting in a beast tide which would attack the closest human settlement before spreading out across the lands. These type of dungeons were a steady source of income for adventurers and explorers looking to make it big.
 These monster dungeons had no limit on the number of people that could enter it at one time. People from different organizations, guilds and parties could enter these dungeons at the same time to compete for resources. Monster dungeons, like man-made dungeons could be permanently cleared. Once the core responsible for creating monsters was destroyed, there would be nothing to respawn the monsters. 
 Countries paid special attention to monster-dungeon clearers. This was because only specified dungeons could be cleared legally. As these were massive sources of income for countries, those who cleared dungeons without permission would be met with severe punishment.
 Finally, there were 'instance dungeons'. These type of dungeons only existed when the Summoned were around. 'Instance Dungeons' were created by the gods. Ferulic taught his children how to manipulate dimensions, allowing them to create small dimensions which existed at the same time in parallel planes. These dimensions could be modified as the gods wished, after which they would place the entrance on the earth.
 Summoned could then enter these dungeons in a group of specified numbers to try and find unique treasures ( there was also a pride component to beating a dungeon with the fastest time). A key feature of these type of dungeon was that when different parties entered, they were transported to different planes of existence running parallel to each other. Hence, they would never be able to interact or interfere with each other. Another feature was that the monsters respawned only after the Summoned either cleared or exited the instance. 
 The dungeon Hektor was in was strange because it had aspects of both Monster and Instance dungeons combined. On one hand, whenever he left the dungeon, all the monsters instantly revived, a unique characteristic of Instance Dungeons. But on the other hand, if he spent too much time in the dungeon, the floors he cleared were repopulated with new monsters, a unique characteristic of Monster Dungeons.
 Also, so far, Hektor had yet to find any treasure chests and the only reward he'd found after clearing ten floors was the tough spear [Dragon's Tooth]. In fact, the more Hektor cleared the floors, the more it felt like this was not a dungeon, but an overgrown training hall. He was certain he would not have been able to learn dragon ki anywhere else. 
 Hektor cut out a large portion of meat and brought it to his lips. His expression remained neutral as he chewed on the tough meat and drank its blood. It would not be long before the body disappeared. He had to make sure to fill his belly...
 The young man's gaze narrowed as he bit off another chunk of flesh. Wait for me. I'll be back soon...

 **********
 A/N: So, this chapter was supposed to be a prototype for something I want to try. Shorter chapter, but with more frequent releases. What I originally thought would be 1500 words tops turned out to be a fully fleshed out chapter with over 3,000 words.
 Anyway, this attempt failed but hey, what do you guys think of shorter chapters around the range of 1500 to 2000 words? I feel if I'm targeting only that amount, I'll be able to release chapters at a much quicker rate than how I've been.
 Let me know what you think.
 ********
 Video of the Day
 So, it's no secret by now I am a massive anime and gaming fan. What happens when the sweet soundtrack of one of my favorite anime blends into the gameplay trailer of one of my favorite gaming franchises... This:
 
   
     
       
       
     
   
   
 

 

Chapter 13: The Bank

13th Banem 1092
 It was the dead of night by the time Kashi and Larsial pulled up near the outskirts of Meilfour's territory. Even under the cloudy, moonless night, Meilfour's splendor shone through for miles, its colorful lights a magnificent beacon to adventurers far and wide. Warriors and merchants laughed and chatted amicably as they walked, or galloped past Kashi and Larsial, either on their way to or from some glorious adventure. 
 Larsial in particular, stared in wonder as the female warriors passed by in stylish garments and colorful accessories. She could tell just from looking, that despite their beauty, these outfits were created for practicality, and would provide more than adequate protection. Even the men had stepped up their fashion game. Form fitting clothing and strategic armor placement emphasized their handsomeness without sacrificing protection.
 Even heavy knights with full plate armor were not spared the aesthetic treatment. Gone were the plain iron plating. Immaculate, unique designs were carved onto each plating, which were then dyed with imaginative color combinations. This led to a situation where the vain Summoned were no longer satisfied with just the higher stats weapon or armor. 
 This was one of the effects of VR. Since gamers could actually see and interact with each other, fashion took on a whole new importance.
 Kashi knew this, hence why he pushed for the rapid reform of Meilfour. As the capital of art on the continent, there was no other place on the continent with such a high density of skilled artists eager to ply their trade. The Hopeful Maggots took full advantage of this to scoop up this large piece of pie before anyone else saw the potential. Now, merchants from far and wide were eager to get their hands on the new designs coming out of Meilfour so they could sell them at a significant mark-up to eager customers at their various towns and cities.
 Unbeknownst to Kashi, Miote had gone a step further to ensure their monopoly continued for a long time. The chesch introduced the concept of brands to the artists and adamantly demanded they place a brand on any and all products they sold to the public. These branded clothes would ensure the populace would continue to buy from the 'original' makers instead of those who wanted to copy the styles.
 Miote did not just stop there though. To ensure that the populace 'knew' that only products bought from Meilfour were those worth buying, he took advantage of the Merchant Alliance that was recently formed. When Joanna Frye's mercenaries escorted the merchants and their transported goods to cities, they wore clothes and armor made in Meilfour. These mercenaries would then brag to colleagues from other companies, who would in turn spread the word to the populace, further emphasizing the point that the clothes made in Meilfour were those worth buying. Of course, in return, the merchants escorted by the mercenaries would tell other merchants that Frye's mercenaries were the best in the business, thereby boosting her revenue too.
 With the excavation of the mines, Marlo Coop's precious stone business also experienced a major revival. Coop's company already had artisans experienced with jewelry work, so, with a number of designs from Miote, his company began to process precious stones excavated from the mines into beautiful jewelry. It soon became a thing among women to wear a Meilfour produced outfit with jewelry from Coop. The outfits had become a symbol of status just as Miote intended, which in turn highly boosted sales.
 Kashi was not privy to all these details, but he just had to take a look at the busy roads to know that Miote had outdone himself.
 "It's beautiful," Larsial accidentally muttered as they approached the city's gates. Unlike the bland gates of other cities, these emerald-green gates had a number of artists and instruments carved onto them. Larsial forced herself to look away as she recalled the once beautiful and majestic halls and roads of her hometown before they lost the war. 

A pair of guards at the gates saluted Kashi as he and Larsial passed, instantly recognizing Drixlia's mighty frame and black fur. Kashi returned the salute with a polite nod then trotted into the city. 
 Kashi was forced to slow Drixlia to a slow walk as the streets were overly packed with people, carts and other horse riders. A smile crept up his lips as he took in the bright street lights and bustling streets. A couple of weeks ago, this place was completely deserted. There was no further validation of the Maggots' actions than the excited, smiling residents.
 "Is that the famous Emporium?" Larsial stared at the massive ring-like structure that peaked above buildings in the distance. 
 "You've never been?" Kashi asked as he came to a stop in front of Rine's Bar. A smile spread on his lips as he appreciated the rapidly repaired building. No traces of the Adjudicators' attack remained, leaving the building looking brand new.
 "No, only read the reports," Larsial revealed with a wistful sigh. "They certainly do not do the real thing justice."
 "Heh, most things are better experienced in person," Kashi muttered as he hopped off Drixlia's back. He thanked an eager, young, mertian mercenary who led the horse and avespa to the stables after Larsial had dismounted.
 "You seem to be really respected," Larsial remarked when a number of patrons raised their flagons in greeting as they entered.
 "Perks of being a guild leader I suppose," Kashi responded with a light shrug. He gave a casual nod to the patrons as he made his way to the bar.
 As usual, Muko manned the counter, an ever infallible smile on his lips as he attended to his customers. He easily spotted Kashi and Larsial as the daebens entered the establishment. By the time Kashi reached the counter, a large flagon of cold Yarcon Juice awaited him. "How're you feeling?"
 "Aside from a little pang now and then, everything is fine," Kashi revealed with a lackluster smile. "By the way, this is Larsial. She'll be shadowing me for the foreseeable future."
 "Hoh? A daeben huh?" Muko pulled out a glass and placed it on the counter. "What'll you be having?" 
 "Do you have Liquin Spirit?" Larsial respectfully inquired. She decisively chose to ignore the subtle hostility in the man's tone. If she reacted to every scorn she received, she would not have enough lives to get anything done.
 "Liquin Spirit? High class taste," Muko said with a teasing smile as he picked a crystal bottle from a shelf. "I've had this bottle for a few months, and no one's requested it. It's expensive stuff."
 "Kashi'll pay for it," Larsial shamelessly stated. "I'm broke."
 Muko turned to Kashi who shrugged with a helpless smile. "Well then." Muko replaced the glass in front of Larsial with a string of small shot glasses. "Care to share the story of how you two met?" He inquired as he filled the shot glasses.
 "Definitely," Larsial unceremoniously bent her head back and downed a shot. "He defeated me in the battle for Aygorzi and took me prisoner." She downed two more shots in rapid succession. "We struck a deal to save my people from slavery, and now I have to follow him around for six months." Larsial gulped down two more shots and let out a deep sigh. "This is good spirit. Straight from the capital?"
 "One of my rare collections," Muko revealed with a complicated frown. "You hold your spirit well. I've seen bigger men drop after only three shots. "
 "I've cultivated a high tolerance over the years." Larsial grinned. She was about to ask for another shot, but Kashi quickly rapped on the table.
 "You can get drunk some other time," Kashi said, with an amused shake of his head. Turning to Muko, he asked, "Is Miote down there?"
 "Nah, he and the other merchants had a new headquarters built not far from The Emporium on Bass street."

"Thanks, I'll find it," Kashi placed a few gold Syros coins on the counter, ignoring Muko's protests that it was way over the price. He beckoned to Larsial with a casual wave. "Time to go. We're off to see the financial juggernaut of the guild."
 "Hey," Muko called, his brows locked in a slight frown. "This should be a dumb question, but you've met up with Ms. Falsetto right?"
 "Uh... I'll get to that eventually," Kashi said, confusion apparent in his eyes.
 "Oh, okay then. Friendly advice," Muko offered. "As far as she's concerned you went straight to meet her after coming into town."
 "Why?" Kashi questioned, perplexed. "I have important guild matters to attend to. She will understand that."
 "You know, you're right," Muko admitted with a sigh. "She just might understand." Shaking his head, he lightly exhaled. "You do not deserve her."
 "Yes, he certainly does not." Larsial nodded her agreement.
 "Whatever." Kashi ignored their remarks. He waved Muko goodbye then exited the building with Larsial in tow. He considered for a moment before ultimately deciding to continue on foot. The streets were so packed that it was actually faster to walk, plus he would draw far less attention to himself if he were on foot. 
 Kashi looked up. The cloudy sky threatened rainfall, but the distance wasn't too far. Even if they did get caught in the rain, it would not be too bad. 
 With his mind made up, Kashi raised his neck of his shirt up to his nose, so only his red eyes were exposed. Lately, the population of Summoned daeben had increased so he wouldn't stick out like a sore thumb as long as his face was not revealed.
 Preparations complete, Kashi set out...
 ****
 Chamber of Commerce (Merchant Alliance Temp. H.Q)
 Brass Close.
 Even within the hustle and bustle of Meilfour, there was one street that stood in stark contrast to other streets, quiet and orderly as if it existed in a separate pocket dimension. Mercenaries bearing the wildcat insignia of Joanna Frye's 'Burning Pyre' mercenary clans silently stood guard at either ends of the street, keeping a careful watch on all who entered. 
 Affluently dressed merchants entered and exited the streets in a steady manner, often carrying bags or boxes filled with sheets of parchments. Most exited with large, satisfied smiles, with only an unfortunate few sent back to rectify an issue with their documents or something. The registration process for the newly formed Merchant Alliance was especially stringent, and incoming merchants quickly learned that this was not a place they could bribe their way through.
 Several of these merchants congregated around the magnificently large building that occupied the entire street on either side, which when viewed from above, had an upside-down U shape. The Thorny Rose flag of Rosendun, flew proudly above the building's rooftop, along with the flags of the Hopeful Maggots, and those of the other council members' respective guilds/affiliations. The heaviest security could be found at the furthermost wing, which also served as the main reception area, and the location of the core of the entire building, the War Room.
 Understanding that the building's purpose was to serve as an attractive symbol of wealth to the world, Damah Dumm spared no expenses while designing the entirety of the Chamber of Commerce, and there was no place in the entire building that exuded this extraordinary opulence like the War Room, within which the current alliance heads of the Merchant Alliance sat around a massive, circular, marble table with numerous tiny inlaid gemstones that subtly glittered in the light. 

The walls and pillars were coated with solid gold, the ground beneath their feet constructed with the most expensive white marble from Elysium Cove. Gemstones large enough to buy several buildings hung leisurely overhead in chandeliers, the sheer extravagance enough to intimidate anyone who walked into the room.
 However, that was not all. To counteract, the hard, cold energy from all the gold and gemstones, Damah had the intelligent plant Kornut, found only in Ederwood planted along the walls of the chamber. Kornut roughly translated to 'Humble Wall-Plant' in the common language, and just like its name, Kornut was a famous plant because of its ability to grow along the interior walls and floors of buildings. Furthermore its enhanced intellegence meant it could be instructed to grow into certain ways or patterns. 
 This was the reason why despite sitting indoors, the guild members could enjoy their meeting within the company of beautiful shrubbery and a delightful scent that exuded from the Kornut's leaves and branches.
 The Alliance Heads had already spent hours in awe of everything in the building and the room in particular. But currently, they all had their attention the golden chesch sat at the table, explaining his latest ideas even further.
 Each of the alliance heads had massive stacks of paper on the table, and they had tirelessly perused through all the documents as Miote explained, each word somehow leaving them in greater shock than the last. Even if they took nothing from what Miote said, just the way he designed contracts was a thing of beauty beyond anything they had ever seen! They could all imagine that if such methods were used to draw up contracts in their various ventures, the amount of attempts by clients to swindle their way out of paying what they owe would severely reduce till it were almost non-existent. 
 "So, what do you think?" Miote ended his presentation with a short clap and a smile.
 "Impressive." Damah Dumm nodded. "This, 'bank' of yours is something so simple, yet we had not thought of it for so long. Indeed the future belongs to the younger generation," Dumm teased with a short smile. "However, I do have a question. Say, I deposit a sum at one bank. Is it possible for me to regain that same sum at another bank?"
 Miote's brow rose in appalled delight. No wonder this man was the richest merchant in all of Destia. Even his questions had such forward thinking to them. "Theoretically yes, but you must understand that not all banks would be designed to hold vast sums of money, nor are banks meant to be used this way either. The idea is, you deposit a large amount of funds in the bank, which allows you to collect funds as you need it, as opposed to depositing and emptying your account every single day. Naturally, after opening an account at one bank, you can withdraw from any other bank in the country as long as they are one of ours." 
 Miote tapped on the table. "As explained earlier, to entice customers to leave their gold in the bank, we will grant them a small interest every month their total sum remains untouched." The chesch crossed his hands at his bank. "In the meantime, the bank will use those funds to grant loans to new promising businesses, of course with significantly marked-up costs as explained under the chapter titled, 'Fractal Banking.'"
 "This whole idea of creating money that doesn't exist..." Damah Dumm muttered with glazed eyes. "While it does sound like an excellent way to profit for bank owners, it seems dangerous for the consumers. What guarantee can we give them? Furthermore, there is a finite amount of gold in the world. In this system of yours, if someone deposits 100 syros, and someone comes right behind her to loan 200 syros, where do we get the extra 100 syros to give the second person?"
 "Nothing great was achieved without risk," Miote softly countered. "However, you are right. If left unchecked, the bank is an institution that can grow to challenge the nation itself." Miote raised his hand to his lips. "We'll just have the government... ah, sorry, the royal palace create a division dedicated to monitoring banks. And who better to watch the activities of a merchant-owned bank, than personnel trained in the art of economics."

"You sly bastards," Marlo Coop spat. "So that's why your guild is pushing for this 'Academy' thing. You're creating situations where the general populace will have no choice but to come to you to learn. It's the only way they'd be able to make sense of all these nonsense business about contracts and banks and whatnot."
 "Money isn't what motivates us, Marlo-san," Miote denied with a soft chuckle. "We only want to improve the future of the next generation."
 "Hoho, I guess all the apprenticeship fees don't hurt either," Coop pointed out with a snicker. "Hey, since you're so philanthropic, why not make the Academy free?"
 Boom!
 Violent aura exploded from Miote. His pupils contracted into slits, his fingernails dug into the table as he slowly turned to Coop with the most ferocious glare. "Free?" He tasted the unfamiliar phrase and immediately spat to the side. "Don't ever mention that word again." For a merchant, there was no word more disgusting. The only time it was remotely acceptable, was when it was used in a buy-one, get-one free scam - er, sorry promotion. 
 "Hehe, then don't bluster," Marlo grunted and displayed a satisfied grin.
 Miote snorted and retracted his aura. His trademark soothing smile returned to his face, restoring his harmless, welcoming image. Turning back to Damah Dumm, Miote continued his explanation. "In regards to the matter of creating an extra 100 syros, there are two solutions." Miote raised a finger. "In the short term, we would rely on the sum deposited by larger customers to subsidize the daily withdrawal of the smaller customers. This way, we are free to loan out syros to local businesses. The marked up interest on our loans by the end of the month or year will allow us to not only replenish any funds loaned out, but also make an increased profit."
 Damah Dumm nodded. "I see how this can work. What's your long-term solution?"
 "We will introduce something called the credit-system." Miote took out a rectangular piece of colored paper and laid it on the table. "Gold, silver and bronze are finite in nature, and extremely limiting to the growth of an economy. The second we exhaust our gold mines, the currency itself stalls. In the future, this tiny piece of paper will substitute for gold and silver coins. It will function as a sort of IOU acceptable at any bank."
 "Wait!" Fox interrupted as he bolted upright on his seat. "So what you're saying is, instead of bronze, silver and gold, we would use this paper? That's insane!"
 "Maybe it is," Miote agreed with a shrug. "But if we want our economy to experience exponential growth, it is the only logical conclusion. Hard gold is too limiting. We cannot replicate gold to keep up with an advancing economy, but paper, paper we can manipulate."
 Damah Dumm stared at the rectangular piece of paper on the table. "Hmm, you will have to give us some time to think about this. This is just too radical, even for me."
 "I naturally expected that," Miote acquiesced with a smile. "We still need to run this by the Crown anyway. We cannot casually replace the currency of a country without the government's input. Besides, we need to ensure we are placed under strict regulations imposed by the government before we begin, or we will destroy ourselves with greed."
 "A merchant with honor and integrity," Damah Dumm commented with a glint in his eyes. "What a rare combination." He looked at the chesch and gave an approving nod. "I look forward to the formation of this bank of yours. I shall ensure I am the first depositor."
 "I agree with Mr. Dumm," the cerulian textile giant, Jon Fox stated. "However there is one glaring issue we have yet to discuss."
 "As Fox aptly put, there is indeed one glaring issue," Joanna Frye stated with a shake of her head. She tapped her considerably long fingernails on the stack of papers and questioned with a hard glare. "What're you going to do about security?" 

Marlo Coop stroked his beard, his gaze searching the chesch's eyes. "Folks aren't going to feel safe stashing their coin in your bank if it's all gonna be stolen by some random gang of bandits."
 "i understand your concerns," Miote admitted. "Currently we have three safety measures in place. The first of which..." he said as he gestured at the mercenary leader, "...are bodyguards consisting of mercenaries from both my guild and Ms. Frye's guild. The second, is the considerable arm of the law itself. The last, and most reliable of all, is-"
 "Me."
 The merchants turned in unison, their eyes wide with shock as two figures seemingly appeared from a pillar's shadow. Their dark skin immediately gave away their identities as daeben. In a panic, Frye swiftly rose from her chair, her body poised and ready to strike.
 "How did you get in here!?" Frye roared. Though her voice was strong and loud, caution remained in her gaze. The fact these two could so effortlessly infiltrate their meeting meant they were no slouches. It would not be wise to blindly confront them without knowing their origins.
 "How I got in is of no importance," Kashi stated, taking off his cowl as he walked to the table. "What is important is, I am the solution to your security problem."
 Damah Dumm rose from his chair, recognition in his delighted eyes. He walked up to the Maggot Guild-Leader and extended a hand. "I fear we are in the presence of the great Kashi of the daeben." He added with a bright smile, "It is a great honor to finally make your acquaintance."
 "The honor is all mine," Kashi responded with a smile of his own. "I have heard many great things about you, Mr. Dumm." Gesturing to the table, he added, "Please do take your seat." Kashi nodded as Damah Dumm returned to his seat with an excited glint in his eyes. He then turned to the other merchants. "Miote has said great things of you all." With a polite bow, he stated, "It is an honor to finally meet in person." He then gestured at the silent Larsial. "This is my associate Larsial. She's a recruit learning the ropes."
 "Heh heh," Marlo Coop chuckled. "To think I would ever receive a bow from the great Kashi-dono. My kids at home will finally acknowledge how awesome their father is."
 Joanna and Fox were a bit more reticent in their acknowledgment, choosing only to nod politely and mutter a few greetings. Kashi's reputation preceded him. It was no surprise they were wary at his abrupt appearance at their meeting. Until they knew his intentions, they would not relax their guards.
 "Kashi-kun," Damah Dunn called as Kashi moved to stand beside Miote. "What is this solution you speak of?"
 "Please, Kashi is fine," stated the daeben. With a series of hand motions, a scroll appeared in his hand. Kashi injected a bit of his mana into the scroll and it immediately jumped off his hand. A light surge of mana burst out of the scroll as it magically transformed into a large painting that floated over the daeben's. "The name of this painting is Takahara. It is also a dimension I have complete control over."
 Kashi pointed at the painting. "Currently, there are five keys that can link to this dimesion. Meaning, you can establish five banks which will have access to this dimension. All funds collected will be stored in this dimension, which by the way, can only be accessed by those I choose, which right now are only my guild members." Kashi tapped on the table. "I can easily change those entry requirements to be those belonging to the bank. Maybe have some tattoo, or seal to determine approval.
 "The dimension only has five entrances, except for this particular painting, which I keep with me at all times. Your security is assured." Kashi scanned the stunned faces. "Any questions?"
 "Yes actually," Damah Dumm stated, as he struggled to contain his shock. "How did you come by this dimension painting?"
 Kashi grinned. "I painted it."
 "What!?" Marlo Coop screamed with shock as he shot off his table. "So, you can paint more of these!?"
 "Theoreticall-"
 "Fifty Million Syros!" Jon Fox screamed at the top of his lungs as he too shot up to his feet. "Fifty Million Syros for the next one you paint! I don't care if it's the size of a cottage! Just get me one of those!"
 "Fifty Million? Jon dear show some sincerity," Joanna scolded with a shake of her head. "100 Million Syros from me!"
 Kashi's eyes jumped in shock. The fuck!? He was here to talk about their security. Why the hell did this turn into a bidding war. Also, 100 million? The fuck? Did money grow on trees for these people? 
 "Yo fearless guild leader, how about dropping the bow and picking up a brush. For the sake of the guild of course."
 Kashi instantly backed away from Miote whose eyes had turned to Syros signs. Obviously, rather than Kashi, he was looking at a natural money-making printing press.
 "They're not that easy to make!" Kashi shouted over the din of the bidding war. The hall quieted down, allowing Kashi to continue in a calmer tone. "When I do have time to create another, I will let you all know. In the meantime, I take your reactions to mean you are satisfied with the security suggestion?" Rapid nods confirmed his conjecture. "In that case, I suggest you rapidly begin construction of the banks. We should be operational in a month's time." Satisfied with the response, Kashi turned to leave. "I would love to stay and talk some more..." He really wouldn't. "...but I have an appointment I must keep."
 With those words, Kashi donned his cowl and escaped the room before anyone could raise an objection, Larsial close behind.
 Miote chuckled as he watched the daeben rapidly fleeing back. Indeed, it was as Leila said. Kashi hated the administrative side of running a guild. Well, as long as he kept providing miracles such as that blasted dimension, it was all good...


 *********
 A/N: Hey Guys, Been a solid month since the last update eh... Well, this time I do have a good excuse. Had to do some intensive research into how banks and insurance companies work exactly, and not the cookie cutter wikipidea shit. Most of what I ended up learning ain't outlined clearly in this chapter because a) it's boring as fuck all, and b) it would end up making the chapter an entire book of its own. 
 So, good news is, with this month of research, I shouldn't spend too much time when introducing other financial concepts in the future. Yay. Research for the win.
 A lotta word building in this volume. It's that point in the guild's existence where they focus on internal issues rather than external. Don't worry though. There'll still be plenty of action peppered here and there throughout, as well as an explosive ending that's been setting up through the last three volumes.
 *********
 Picture of the Day
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 

 

Chapter 14.1 - Snow

           
 ???
 Huuuu...
 The wind maliciously shrieked as it rushed past the rocky terrain of a cold, snowy mountain. The late-night blizzard simultaneously bit at the skin of every living thing while burying the world in white. Dense, rapid winds rendered it almost impossible to see past a few feet ahead, the few rays of moonlight that struggled through, the only solace to any creature stupid enough to remain outside during the terrible blizzard.
 Despite the fact that it was certainly suicidal to remain outside during the blizzard, three silhouettes could be seen seated close to the mountain's summit. The silhouettes, one large and two small reacted differently to the tormenting wind. The large silhouette was calm, without a single shift in its muscle, whereas the little silhouettes trembled, often curling up in a futile attempt to conserve their body warmth.
 Upon closer inspection, the silhouettes were revealed to be that of a bare-chested young man with his eyes closed, accompanied by two young kafu cubs. The young man's scattered hair danced freely in the wind, occasionally revealing a gnarly scar that ran down his face. The scar lent credence to the cold, unfeeling aura that chilled the already frozen tundra around himself. The cub by the man's left's beautiful white fur blended with the snowy blizzard , whereas the cub to his right bright brown fur was barely visible through the snow collected over him.
 The white cub, teeth chattering, looked up at the stoic man with fear in his eyes. He'd managed to hold back so far out of fear of retaliation, but at the moment, his desire trumped his fear. "R--R-Razznik-san." The stoic man's eyes snapped open. A pair of irritated blood red eyes fixed on the little kafu. The cub's spine instantly chilled beyond anything the cold winds could bring. Paradoxically, despite the cold, the cub's fur instantly soaked with thick sweat.
 Indifferent to the little kafu's plight, Razznik coldly demanded, "What?"
 The cub hiccupped, his answer caught in his throat as Razznik brows slightly furrowed. Still, despite his fright, the cub was aware that if he did not speak up, he would most likely not live through the night. Mustering up his courage, the cub stammered, "I-I-I'm cold."
 Razznik glared at the young cub, then turned to his right to inspect the other kafu, only to realize the brown cub was even worse off. Sheets of ice had formed on the kafu's fur, the young cub too weak to even shake off the ice. However, despite the deathly trembling, and sickly pallor, the young cub had a ruthless stubbornness in his eyes. It was obvious he had no desire to rest despite the torment.
 Razznik looked from the brown cub to the white. With a slight shake of his head, he lightly tapped the earth. A large mandala spread out from his fingertips to occupy an area of roughly 20 square meters. A dome-like, stone structure rose from the earth, and enclosed the trio within. Razznik got to his feet, and tapped the roof of the dome. Another mandala spread itself over the walls. With a red flash, it blended into the walls. A second later, the walls began to emit heat, instantly warming the inhabitants of the dome.
 Razznik glanced at the white cub who had quickly snuggled up against a wall. He walked over and nonchalantly grabbed the cub by the scruff of his neck. He unceremoniously dropped the cub at the center of the dome next to his brother. Razznik glared at the white cub. "Cathek, what is your brother's condition?"
 Cathek glanced at Razznik with question in his eyes before taking a good look at his brother. As expected, just like Cathek himself, his brother suffered a severe shiver. Upon closer inspection however, Cathek's heart nearly leapt to his throat. His brother's situation was far worse than his own. 
 His brother's fur had begun to gray at its roots, belying the terribly high fever of the little kafu. Cathek's brother's violently chattering teeth rendered him incapable of speaking a coherent word. Even worse, the young cub's eyes were glazed over and unfocused, as if he could not see anything. However, even though the cub looked like he was only a second away from death's door, the stubbornness in his furrowed brows revealed his obstinate resolve to power through, through sheer force of will.

Cathek shrieked in fright as the reality of his brother's state dawned. Tears poured down his eyes as he grabbed Razznik by the hem of his trousers and pleaded, "P-please save him! Don't let Barthul die please! You can save him!"
 Razznik looked down at the snot-nosed kafu. It seemed fear was a strong motivator for this one. First, it was the fear of his own death. Then the fear of losing his brother. Though, judging by how he was grabbing Razznik's pants, the fear of losing his brother was a stronger motivation. 
 "No." Razznik coldly rebutted as he brushed off Cathek's grip with a light kick. Razznik's cold eyes bore into the young cub's terrified, pleading gaze. Razznik grunted and turned his back to the devastated kafu. "Do not fret. Your brother shall survive."
 Cathek's eyes widened, sparkling like large goblets filled with water. "Really!? He'll live? He'll be fine?" Cathek questioned excitedly as he looked to his forever stubborn elder brother.
 "This Time," Razznik grimly stated. He turned around and glared at both cubs. "If you two are to survive this period, you must learn a few things." Razznik gaze fixated on Cathek. "First, you. Your talent far surpasses that of your brother, but you are mentally weak and you often cower 
 behind fear. With that attitude, you will not survive long in the world. Your fear also mandates you remain so self-absorbed, you failed to realize the plight of your kin until it was too late." Razznik glanced over both cubs. "You must understand this. I am not your babysitter. If you do not watch out for one another, you will surely perish."
 "In your case," Razznik said as he looked at Barthul, who struggled to keep his gaze fixed on the larger man. "I can understand your drive to be strong. Even more so when you have a brother as talented as yours. " Razznik gave a rare, approving nod. That quickly turned to a hard frown. "Your willpower is exceedingly strong. This, if not handled well is a doubled-edged sword. It is imperative you learn the difference between tenacity and stupidity or you will end up either dead or crippled with nothing to show for your efforts." The future demon lord crossed his arms. "I could heal you, but I shall not. Suffer. Remember this pain. It will guide you while you seek your body's limits."
 Razznik looked at the silent children. Both had so far managed to maintain eye contact, but he could tell it was only because they were vehemently fighting the subconscious pressure he exuded. Still, for children their age to be able to meet his gaze for so long, it could be seen just how seriously their mother took their training. 
 With a snort, Razznik made a series of gestures with his hand and a bag appeared in his hand. He threw the bag onto the floor then turned to leave. "You will find food in there. Eat, then sleep. We leave at first light." Razznik touched a section of the wall and it crumbled to the earth to form a small open door. The blizzard never got a chance to enter the shelter however, as a timely translucent mana shield occupied the little doorway. The shield was designed to keep the blizzard out, but let in fresh air every few minutes.
 Cathek sat by his brother's side as he watched the intimidating frame walk into the blizzard, doubtless to continue his training. The young cub looked at his brother, at the stone dome, the food satchel on the floor, then to the doorway. A small smile lit up the side of the little cub's shivering lips. Indeed, although that back was scary, it was just as, if not more reassuring when it protected you from the world's terrors.
 This was a back the little cub was certain he would follow for a long ti-
 --
 "No! Come Back! Don't leave us!" 
 Within the snowy blizzard, a weak, shaking, white-furred arm reached out to a familiar silhouette. The arm owner's vision dimmed, his world slowly turning dark. He let out one last desperate cry at the cold, fading back before he slumped to the earth and succumbed to the darkness.
 ****
 ???
 Within the corridors of a certain palace, the eyes of a white-furred kafu sprung open with a start. Cathek, dressed in a modified, white priest armor raised his head and pushed off against the wall he had been leaning on. 
 "I must be getting old," Cathek muttered with a resigned smile. "To think I would dream of him again. Must be because the time is near." The kafu shook his head then proceeded to walk down the corridor. 
 Cathek observed the cracked and broken walls with mirth. The cracks and holes in the palace walls told the story of a place besieged numerous times over the centuries, yet somehow holding its ground. Most of the visible cracks were more recent however, as recent as a few decades to a decade ago.
 However, perhaps because of the paintings placed next to the cracks, or the sculptures along the corridor, Cathek found something about the palace inviting, warm even. The kafu greeted a number of warriors and priests along his path, most of whom were daeben. Despite the daeben being the cast majority of the population, the warriors and priests from the other races only had wide, satisfied smiles on their faces when chatting with their daeben counterparts.
 Here, strength was key. No one discriminated based on race. The strong were respected and acknowledged. In some select places, a few orkhs could be seen chatting with other warriors, without the suppressed inferiority often found in their kind's eyes. 
 Cathek often wondered what it would be like if the Chaos Order actually achieved their ambition. Would the world be like this island, completely rid of discrimination and war? Would all the bloodshed and lives lost be worth the couple centuries of peace they would have bought? 
 Cathek did not have much time to ponder further as he came to a halt in front of a massive double door. The door had a mural of a gargantuan drider, the patron goddess of the daeben tribe. The drider species were beasts with the upper body of a human (often female) and the lower body of a spider. The species were cunning vicious creatures adept at shapeshifting, and traps. Skills they often used to lure in unsuspecting prey before sucking them dry.
 A pair of ruby gemstones placed in the mural's eyes shone with a red light. The red light scanned the entity that stood before it. Finding no problems with the identity, it flashed once again and the doors slid open.
 Cathek looked down at the red carpet with the drider sigil. He took a deep breath, then stepped on the carpet and made his way to the throne at the end...
 

 ************
 A/N: I'm testing out these shorter chapter, quicker update style. The hope is that it'll let me update faster, cuz sometime when writing long chapters, you can get stuck at a few spots, and it'll drag on for a long-ass time even if you've already written two normal (wattpad) length chapters. So, let's see how it goes eh?
 Thanks.

 

Chapter 14.2: Fall of the Daeben 

Cathek looked down at the red carpet with the drider sigil. He took a deep breath, then stepped on the carpet and made his way to the throne at the end. The atmosphere instantly warped as soon as he walked past the threshold. The air was heavy with an innate suppression forced upon all within the halls by an unknown entity.
 Cathek was fortunate in that the suppressive atmosphere had no hold on him. He was far too strong for anything on this material plane to suppress him. He had the luxury of freely examining the throne room, a deep melancholy in his eyes as he looked at the crumbled pillars and cracked walls.
 Traces of the beauty that once was could be seen in the beautiful marble floors, with finishing so exquisite, with the right amount of light, they could reflect the entire room perfectly. Unfortunately, pale green light from will-o-wisps lanterns were the only source of light in the throne room.
 Cathek's gaze narrowed as he looked up. A mural of a colossal spider occupied the entirety of the ceiling, eight will-o-wisp lights ominously watching over the proceedings within the room. Cathek shook his head and turned his attention to the throne itself. 
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 The daeben were a matriarchic community, a fact duly affirmed by the young woman who laid on a sinister throne fashioned from the husk of a dead drider. The dark throne evoked ghastly images of it would look like if a person 'laid' within the abdomen of a drider. To the daeben however, it was a talisman that promised their rulers, and in turn, their kingdom would always be in the embrace of their patron goddess, Arachne.
 Arachne, unlike Gerber, Mera and the others was not a progeny of Ferulic and Aethir, hence she was not a real goddess by the strictest definition. Instead, she was one of the demons created by Ferulic during his 'little jealous tantrum.' Arachne was created to embody the treachery, cunning and wickedness of humes, her horrifying lower body meant to be a play on the humes' penchant to follow anything beautiful. In this case, following her beautiful upper body would land humes within her lower body's mandibles. 
 "It never ceases to amaze me how you always appreciate this art despite being older than this entire building." 
 A soft sultry voice drew Cathek's gaze down to the beautiful daeben who laid on the throne, clad in a sensuous, revealing cloth black cloth armor. The young queen's ashy black skin had a subtle glow, dull yet inviting beneath the green will-o-wisps. Long locks of snow-white hair, indicative of pure-blooded daebens rested on her exposed midriff, the queen's penchant for individuality subtly revealed in ruby red highlights made to match her steamy gaze. Dark red lips curled up in a smirk as she regarded the powerful kafu. 
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 

"Some things are better appreciated over the course of time," Cathek replied with a warm smile. He came to a stop five meters from the throne. "Your Majesty," Cathek greeted with a polite bow. "I, Cathek request a private audience."
 The queen's lips curled up in a smile. She nonchalantly waved and ordered, "Leave us."
 It was very faint, but Cathek's sharp ears easily picked up the instantaneous sounds of feet hitting the floor. A trained eye would have noticed the darkness in the areas not reached by the will-o-wisps shift ever so slightly. 
 Moments later, certain that the shadow guards had retreated, the queen rose from the throne and walked to Cathek's front. A mischievous smirk formed on her lips, and before Cathek could react, she wrapped her hands around his waist and buried her head in his chest. "Uncle Cat! Where have you been? You haven't come to see me in weeks!"
 If any of the daeben were present, their eyes would pop out with shock. Gone was their regal, mysterious, tough leader, replaced with an ordinary young woman excited to see her Uncle. 
 Pa!
 "Ouch!" The queen recoiled in shock and pain, both hands on her smoking forehead.
 "Queen Alia Tatjana Thorraid, I strongly suggest you mind your behavior as queen," Cathek harshly scolded. However, the smile in his eyes revealed the truth.
 "Tch, stingy," Queen Alia retorted with a pouty grunt. Massaging the strike zone on her forehead, she lamented, "Ah-ah, I hope this doesn't swell up."
 "Not to worry," Cathek soothed with a teasing smile. " I have had the better part of a millennium to practice the forehead flick so it leaves no mark behind. That includes swelling of course."
 Queen Alia glared at him. "Another one of your useless skills. For a thousand-year old man, you're really boring, you know that?" Queen Alia raised her hands in protest, "A thousand years, and you haven't learned anything about a maiden's heart?"
 Cathek shook his head with a wry smile. "And what purpose would that serve?"
 Queen Alia's gaze narrowed. "You thick-headed relic. At the very least it serves a better purpose than that useless forehead flick thing."
 "Quite the contrary, your Majesty," Cathek jovially rebutted. "For one," Cathek stated as, much to Alia's bitter resignation, he patted the queen's head. "I get to discipline unruly royals without leaving a trace." 
 "Ah! Stop it!" Queen Alia exclaimed as she pushed Cathek's hand off her head. "I really wish you would stop treating me like a child. I'm already twenty-one years old. I'm an adult!" 
 "Twenty-one is it?" Cathek murmured with a smile. "Time really flies by when you get to my age. What has it been? Ten, Eleven years since your parents passed in that final battle?" Cathek's gaze grew heavy as old memories surfaced. "I still recall it like it was yesterday. The beaten and defeated daeben army rallied around a ten year old girl, who against impossible odds, was able to command a safe retreat for her people to their country, and launched a staunch defensive that shook the allied nations to cut their losses and retreat." Cathek's eyes warmed as he habitually ruffled the queen's hair. "To think that little girl has grown into a fine young woman. Ah, indeed, time moves far too quickly when you get old."
 "Cut it out," Queen Alia reprimanded with a short laugh as she ducked out of the range of Cathek's troublesome hand. "More importantly," she said as she raised her right sleeve to reveal a dull, glowing spider web tattoo on her upper shoulder. "What do you think?"
 Cathek approached, then examined the tattoo. A while later, he nodded approvingly. "Your runecrafters are showing rapid progress. There're no mistake here. The embedded runes as so minute, yet precise. Only someone who knows to look for them will even realize this tattoo is such a complex rune." Looking up from the rune, Cathek questioned. "This is your seventh rune marking, isn't it?"

"Yes," Queen Alia confirmed with a nod. "The crafters did say at my current mental strength, I can still handle at least seven more. I've scheduled for the next rune to be drawn in two months." 
 "Good," Cathek nodded his approval. "Your body needs time to acclimatize to the new rune channels." A hint of melancholy drifted through the kafu's eyes as he recalled the tragedy of the previous generation of daeben. "If only your parents had heeded my advice as you do, they would not have been driven mad by the conflicting rune channels."
 Queen Alia's head dropped, as she too recalled the slow descent into madness. "My mother was under too much pressure from the ministers and the war faction. Runecrafting did appear to be the answer to all our problems. Every soldier could have the marks without the need for any special talent, and it doubled, no tripled the strength of our military prowess. " Shaking her head, she bitterly said, "If only they knew the cost. The madness, and unwanted arrogance." 
 Queen Alia lamented, "The daeben army was feared during warfare, not for our performance in battles, but for our extreme cunning and deadliness. Battles were won without armies ever marching out, commanders, strategists and captains found dead in their camp beds. No one knew where we laid our traps, where we would spring up from next." With ground teeth, the daeben queen recalled, "Yet the hubris from those marks rendered our commanders and leaders stupid and inept. Rather than promote our subterfuge and sabotage, they quickly began to abandon their strongest points in favor of open battles, to revel in the 'glory' of battle." 
 Queen Alia's hand shook with rage, her clouded eyes hidden from sight. "It's no wonder we lost battle after battle. How could we beat the allied nations at something they had polished to perfection with mere brute strength? We lost, lost and kept losing, until that final day. The final battle in G'orath. I will never forget the despair in the soldiers' eyes as thousands of pillars descended from the skies, only to land in the allied army. We had both used summons, but none of the Summoned had answered our call. We were seemingly doomed to extinction that day."
 Cathek smiled. "But then the pillars did come."
 Queen Alia's head rose, her eyes shining with light. "Yes, yes they did. All twelve of them in total." She clenched her hands as she traveled back to that blood-soaked battlefield, the silent despair, and the euphoria when the first pillar of light appeared at the front of the daeben army. "I will never forget that first man. Blue shirt, dark pants, and boots. The mantle fluttering silently in the wind. His firm, unwavering grip on his sword. That bold, unflinching first step." Queen Alia sighed. "Even when the other Summoned landed, all but one flinched at the sight of the enemy's army. Only that beast-like little girl followed the man as he charged into the enemy's ranks without so much as a backward glance.
 "The girl was terrifying no doubt, but it was that man who gave us the strength to do what we had to do. The way he surgically cut through the enemy's ranks, seeking out and eliminating commanders and captains without worrying about the regular soldiers reminded us of what we daeben were feared for. I will never forget the horror in the enemy commanders' eyes when that man picked up a bow from a fallen soldier. The speed at which captains dropped was just too terrifying. But it was that terror that saved us." Queen Alia's soulful eyes dimmed as she grasped her left arm. "My mother, granted a rare moment of clarity, removed the Wreath of Spiders and bound it to me. My mother, the generals, the soldiers, they all looked up to me. They wanted their next orders, even though we all knew what it was going to be."
 "Attack," Cathek stated with a sigh. "No matter what it takes, strike down as many commanders as possible." 
 "Do not return until they are all dead," Queen Alia murmured. "I willingly sent my mother, her generals, many of whom practically raised me and thousands of kinsmen to their deaths."
 "And saved thousands more," Cathek consoled. "You made the right decision that day. In a perfect world, sacrifices are not necessary. Unfortunately, we live in an imperfect world. As uch, we must continue to make hard decisions every day."
 Queen Alia let out a wry smile. "I know that. You've repeated it so many times, I could not forget it even if I wanted to." With a wistful sigh, she added, "I just wish I could meet that Summoned once. I need to thank him in person for saving us."
 "Last I heard, he was captured by the allied forces and put in a jail to rot for life," Cathek stated. "No one knows the location of this cell. Apparently, the order letter was burned immediately it was carried out."
 Queen Alia sighed. "At least we managed to find the little beast-girl. Though she's gone missing since Froy was killed. I at least hope he was able to help her regain herself even if by a little."
 "I am sure he did as you ordered," Cathek affirmed.
 "Yes, I am sure," Queen Alia said with a smile. "Now, tell me, Uncle Cat. Why are you really here? It cannot be to just reminisce about the past, surely."
 "Of course not," Cathek replied. "The deathsworn boats are finally ready. We can depart at a moment's notice."
 Queen Alia nodded. Her gaze wavered, revealing a moment of weakness. "We are doing the right thing, right, Uncle Cat?"
 "There is no right or wrong," Cathek stated. "What we do now will be judged not by us, but by generations to come. They will decide if our actions are just or not-"
 "-By then, we'll be too dead to care," Queen Alia finished. "Another one of your little quotes you've repeated to death." Queen Alia folded her arms and closed her eyes. Moments later, she opened them, slight exhaustion evident in her creased brows. "A storm will come tomorrow and last for two days. We leave after that."
 "As you wish."
 Queen Alia looked up at the ceiling mural, her gaze meeting those of Arachne's. "At last, I can return to the world..."


 ********
 A/N: Just above 2200 words. I like this new format. 


 *****************
 Picture of the Day
 *****************
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Anyone know how to change her hair from black to white? She's my image of Alia's mother, but the hair color's off. Pure-blood daeben (in this novel) all have white hair.

 

Chapter 14.3: A Fan Meeting

           
 The Emporium,
 13th Banem 1092.
 The Emporium, fondly referred to as the 'Jewel of Merriheim' by Residents who had visited, certainly lived up to its name. The circular, spectacular structure, the largest of its kind in all of Rosendun was brightly lit up at night with several, varying colored lights drawing the gazes and admiration of tourists from miles away. 
 Its rapidly soaring popularity had forced the Maggots to create more entrances around the building. However, even with these measures, the area around the building was always tightly packed, and long queues had become par for the course. The hype and craze, deemed unnecessary and crazy by some skeptics was immediately justified upon stepping a foot into the building. 
 Visitors were greeted by gaudily dressed characters in exaggerated poses. Every day, each member of the welcoming staff would put on a new costume designed by local artists. These colorful cast of characters immediately set the scene for what was for most, an unforgettable crazy ride. 
 Tourists and locals could never find themselves bored in this building. Not when every corner was packed with unique activities and events. A person could enter the building, get his portrait drawn, have a sculpture of himself fighting a dragon, watch the performances of local and upcoming bands and musicians and still catch a play or two reenacting glorious moments in history, including some recent one of course. A favorite of most tourists was the reenacting of the Battle for Riven. Especially the part where Kashi the daeben makes his entrance. 
 By now, there was not a soul in all of Rosendun and most of Merriheim who did not know this name. However, since the rise of Summoned impersonators, and the fact there were so little who had actually met the daeben in person (and knew it was him), most could only turn to these plays to get an inch closer to the legend.
 All these activities and more, coupled with clever merchandising shops, and restaurants with food from so many different regions dictated that Residents who had never known a place like this were more than willing to pay whatever it took to maximize their stay as long as possible. It was no wonder then, that while tourists entered empty handed, they almost always exited carrying various bags filled with merchandises.
 This kind of 'want-spending' was new to the Residents, who had always been content with spending on their basic needs. Somehow, the Emporium had become a sort of status symbol among Residents, especially the locals. Men who wanted to impress their intended beau needed to have at least taken them once or twice. 
 This in turn had created a chain reaction in the labor market. Men and women who would normally laze around the house, rushed out into the streets eager to land well-paying jobs. Furthermore, even though the mines paid well, the existence of  Emporium meant that a faction of citizens had become to develop the addictive drug called 'ambition.' They wanted better paying jobs that would allow them to enjoy themselves even more. Some wanted better pay for the sake of impressing their romantic partners while others sought the power that came with wealth.
 All in all, the bottom line was, Residents had slowly begun to graduate from a primitive thinking of satisfying only needs, to the insatiable nature of pleasures and wants. The desire for better paying jobs pleased the upper echelon of the Hopeful Maggots, because it meant when the Academy was finally built, it would not lack individuals looking to learn specialized jobs with better pay.
 All of this, however, had nothing to do with a certain daeben who awkwardly stood outside a door with "STAFF ONLY" written boldly. Kashi scratched the back of his head as he looked at the mertian security guard glaring at him, baton in hand.  

The security guard looked to be a retired warrior in his late forties, standing at about 190cm (6'2ft) with a broad, muscular frame that boasted his strenght. A large battle scar down the right side of his neck might have been the reason for his early retirement. A lot of adventurers and mercenaries chose to hang up their blades after experiencing such close shaves with death.
 Larsial cupped her hand over her mouth in a bid to stifle the chuckle that threatened to rise up her throat. "It seems the great Kashi cannot get into his own building."
 Kashi chose to ignore the obvious joy in Larsial's teasing voice. Unwilling to make a scene, once again pleaded his case. "I swear I am Kashi, Guild Leader of the Hopeful Maggots."
 "Sure; and I am King Parissius," the guard scoffed with disdain. "Already met four of you posers today. Look at you, at least the other three took the effort. See those skinny arms. I bet they couldn't even crack a walnut. You think the great Kashi would look like you? At the very least, return after working on your muscles."
 Kashi looked at his arms in shock. Muscles? He was a Summoned! By default, Summoned were incapable of building muscles getting fat regardless of how much hardwork or lack thereof they put in. 
 Larsial, who by this point was struggling to stand upright, forcefully suppressed her laughter just enough to ask, "Out of curiosity, how does the real Kashi look?"
 "I've met him before you know?" The security guard remarked as he puffed his chest in pride.
 "Oh, you have, have you?" Kashi muttered in equal parts amusement and irritation. He shook his head as he took a sip from a drink he bought at a nearby store.
 "Of course!" the guard affirmed with a thump on his chest. "Was about a fortnight ago." The guard had clearly told this tale a thousand times. His voice dropped to a low whisper to build up suspense. "It was a dark night. I was hunting for some red scorpions for the wife you see. She loves them fresh. Says the ones sold at the market are all days old. Gets the little ones' stomach running. So, anyway, that's when it happened. I was just about to kill my third for the night, had it in my sights and everything, when the ground suddenly starts shaking something fierce. Now, I was mad, right? I mean, all that shaking scared my prey underground. But, I'm a brave guy. So, I decide to see what's going on. So I walk for a bit right, and climb this cliff close by. I look down, and what do I see?" The guard's eyes widened, hand spread wide to emphasize the largeness of the situation. "One daeben fighting against thousands of sand demons!"
 "*Cough* What!?" Kashi coughed and spluttered, nearly choking on the drink. "Did you say thousands?"
 "Yes!" The guard exclaimed with admiration and worship in his fervent gaze. "The lord's strength! Ah, you should've been there. The sand demons exploded with every punch. He would raise his hands and dozens would just burst to ash! In all my years, I've never seen anything like that!" The security guard's gaze suddenly turned compassionate as he turned to Kashi and patted the daeben's shoulder. "I know you're a fan, but instead of impersonating him, you should do something productive to help our lord. Like me. I have given my life to protecting this little place as a show of my support for the lord."
 Kashi let out a sigh. No wonder this guy misunderstood. Kashi knew the flames must have distorted his form so he appeared larger than he actually was. Also, the explosions were as a result of the gems in those sand ghouls going off. Kashi could not get mad at someone who was just doing his job. Even more so, when that person just spent five minutes waxing lyrical about Kashi's own greatness. 
 "Hey, out of curiosity," Kashi, taking a page out of Larsial's book started. "If Kashi were to actually come here, what would you ask of him?"
 "Hehe, to get into the Hopeful Maggots of course," the security guard replied with a sheepish smile. "But if that's too much, I'd take an autograph for the kids. Little tykes would worship me for a whole year, hehe."

"I hope your wishes come true," Kashi said, with his hand held out. "By the way, what's your name?"
 "Me? I'm Lekan Varta." The guard grasped the daeben's hand in a firm handshake. "Ready to tell me your name now?"
 "I already told you." Kashi grinned. "I'm Kashi of the Daeben."
 "Of course you are." Lekan rolled his eyes. "Come ba--" Lekan quickly stepped aside as the door behind him cracked open.
 "Kashi?" A little blue head poked through the tiny crack. However, upon seeing the smiling daeben, the door swung wide open and a figure rushed into the daeben's embrace, almost tackling him to the ground in the process. 
 Lunette greedily buried her head in Kashi's chest and took in his scent. Smiling softly, she said, "Welcome back."
 Kashi's grin softened to a warm smile. Gently patting her head, he muttered, "I'm back."
 "Y-y-you're actually him?!"
 Kashi glanced at Lekan, whose jaw had dropped, eyes wide in fear and shock. He exposed a teasing smile. "I did tell you."
 "Um-Uh..." Lekan stuttered, his body visibly shaking. "I meant no offense, please."
 Kashi laughed as Lunette released him and glanced at Lekan with curiosity. "None taken, Lekan-san," the daeben reassured. "In fact," he said as he took out Rosario's Brush. "Do you have anything I can sign on?"
 "Huh? Sign? You mean-you really? Sign? Oh Sweet Mera!" Lekan spluttered and stuttered as he rapidly pat himself down till he finally found the notebook in his breast pocket. He quickly opened it to the front page then held it out with both hands."H-h-here, Kashi-dono! Please sign this!"
 The depths of Kashi's eyes brightened as he ran Rosario's brush across the front page. "Done."
 Lekan nearly shuddered with joy as he hugged the notebook to his chest. "I... I will cherish this."
 Kashi cracked at a teasing smile as he pointed at the door. "So, may I pass now?"
 Lekan froze. His eyes widened in shock, unable to believe what was happening. Was his great lord actually joking with him? He immediately caught himself and vigorously nodded. "Of course, of course!"
 "Thanks for the hard work," Kashi pleasantly said as he passed by Lekan with Lunette and Larsial in tow. 
 Lekan had yet to get over his joy when Kashi's head popped back out. "Oh, and one other thing. Welcome to the Hopeful Maggots, Varta-san. Hard work is always appreciated in our guild. Someone will come by later to make things official." 
 Lekan's eyes almost rolled to the back of his head as he fought to steady himself. Wow! He could only imagine his children's reactions when he got home. Hehehe... he could almost imagine the jealousy on his friends' faces when he told them he was now part of the esteemed Hopeful Maggots.
 With Kashi gone, Lekan opened the notebook to the first page.
 From Kashi,
 To Lekan and the Cute Little Ones
 Underneath was a signature, the Hopeful Maggots' guild emblem, and a set of obscure images, which any mage would recognize as protection runes. Lekan had no idea at the time, but that notebook would become a family heirloom passed down through generations of his family...
 

 ***********
 A/N: So, not much going on here storywise, but a little humanizing chapter. Gotta show Kashi's interaction with everyday people to show he's still a human underneath all the badassery. I also find these little snippets of character interactions to be the best way to show character development as opposed to a line said during, say, combat. 
 It's just more believable if signs of change are shown in eeryday scenarios as opposed to some guy suddenly believing in the "Power of Nakama," because he's getting his ass handed to him by the BOSS.
 

 ******************
 Picture of the Day
 *****************
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Daeben Aristocrat. Hopefully, he should play a role later on in the story, when we expand on the daeben political system.
 Also, I Wanna start doing something I shoulda been doing all along, including the sources for my images. Just cause I think it's important the original artists get their due credit Thanks to the Youtube Nightcore comments section for enlightening me to this.
  Source: Faerzzen Tlabbar by iara-art.deviantart.com

 

Episode 15: Just Relax/Have Fun

            
 "Look at you being so nice to a total stranger," Lunette teased Kashi with a knowing smirk as he shut the door behind him. "Our Kashi's all grown up."
 "C'mon I'm not that bad," Kashi rebutted with a wry smile as he brushed his way past her.
 "Uh-huh," Lunette clucked. "You've already forgotten how we met, huh?" She pointed out as she caught up to and matched his pace. Her eyes suddenly went wide, right hand covering her mouth in mock-shock. "That's not it, is it? Is he part of some dastardly plan?"
 Kashi froze in his tracks, forcing Lunette to likewise come to halt. His head mechanically turned to face her. With a raised eyebrow, he questioned, "What do you take me for?"
 "Hmm..." Lunette tapped her chin, deliberately letting her lower lip jut out. Moments later, she concluded. She began listing off her fingers, a cheeky grin spreader wider with each word, "Self-absorbed, World Dominator, Overlord, Evil mastermind, Trickster, Fraud, Cunning—wuwuwu."
 Kashi chuckled, enjoying the shock on Lunette's face as he pinched and pulled her cheeks. "That's what you get for being cheeky," Kashi joked as he released his hold, then continued down the hallway.
 Lunette raised her hand to her cheek, rubbing the sore muscles in a daze. She turned to look at Kashi's back, wide eyes displaying the upheaval in her heart. "Hold! Hold it right there," Lunette shouted. She ran up to Kashi and grabbed his arm. "That. Do that again!"
 "Huh?" This time, it was Kashi who recoiled in shock. "What the hell?"
 Lunette could see the sanity-questioning gaze in Kashi's eyes, but she could not care less. With a serious, deadpan expression she stated, "Who knows when next you'll do something like that again. I want to properly enjoy it!" 
 "Enjoy it?" Kashi almost coughed blood. "You do realize that was meant to be a punishment, right? Besides..." Kashi looked over to his right where a stone-faced Larsial stood, silently watching the drama, thinking god only knows what. "We're in public."
 Lunette snorted. "Dealing with a man like you, a girl's gotta take her chances, public or not. That said," Lunette said as she turned to Larsial with a sweet smile. "Forgive my manners. I was so excited to see him, I forgot to introduce myself." Holding out her hand, she greeted, "I'm Lunette Falsetto, but you can call me Lunette. It's a pleasure to make your acquaintance, Miss..." 
 "Larsial J'rain," Larsial politely introduced as she took Lunette's hand in hers. To Lunette's shock, Larsial dropped to a knee and kissed the songstress' hand. "The pleasure is mine." Larsial released Lunette's hand and rose to her feet. She observed the songstress' reaction, instantly recognizing the perplexed look on Lunette's face. With a wry smile, Larsial bowed her head in admittance of her guilt. "My apologies. Force of habit."
 "Ah, no, don't worry, it's fine," Lunette immediately reassured her with a wave of her hand. "If anything, I am honored. I imagine you do not make it a point to kiss the hand of any random girl you come across. There must be a good reason behind it. Perhaps, it's a cultural thing?"
 "Yes, it is," Larsial patiently explained. "We daeben are trained to give utmost respect to women more powerful than ourselves."
 "I heard about how you fared in the war," Lunette stated. "There's no way I'm stronger than you."
 Larsial revealed a dry smile. "There're are different forms of power. At the moment, there is no doubt you are more powerful than I am."
 "I suppose you are correct," Lunette admitted with a laugh. Once again, she held out her hand with a glint in her eyes. "You are a formidable woman. I look forward to working with you. On equal terms of course."

Larsial hesitated, brows furrowed in confusion. Was everybody in the Hopeful Maggots like this? Show some damn restraint? She was only one of the masterminds behind the previous war. How could they just turn around and be fine with working with her? Were they not afraid she could just be playing the long game. Despite all these thoughts in her head, facing Lunette's sincere gaze, she could not bring herself to lie. "I cannot promise anything."
 "I didn't hear a no," Lunette observed with a hearty smile. "That's more than plenty for now." With that, she turned around and dragged Kashi down the hallway. "Come, come, let me show you around before you go running off on another adventure."
 Kashi scratched the back of his head with a guilty smile. "How'd you know?" 
 "Anyone would know," Lunette stated with a mocking snort. "So, where are you headed next?"
 "Just plain leveling," Kashi revealed with a light shrug as Lunette dragged him down the hallway. "I've got a lot of killing to do if I don't want to be left behind. Also want to look into finding an evolution path for Drix. He needs to evolve if he's going to keep up with us."
 "Just admit you don't want to abandon him, you big softie," Lunette teased with a light punch. "Do you have any clues?"
 "I have a rough idea," Kashi revealed, gaze constantly on a swivel as he took in the various intriguing sights. A lot of rooms had their doors wide open, allowing him a clear view of everything inside. In one room, he saw actors practicing a scene; in another, a troupe of dancers were performing a routine. "There's a small tribe of centaurs North of Rosendun. Absalon's troops had a small run-in with them on their way to Aygorzi. They offered to evolve his horse in exchange for stopping a Blight invasion."
 Concern shone in Lunette's eyes. "Did he?"
 "Nah," Kashi replied. "They were in too much of a hurry to join us. He could not afford to get into any sort of protracted battle or lose any men. So, I'll go take a look-see for myself. With any luck, there's still plenty of blight left."
 Lunette shook her head with a wry smile. "Only you would see that as luck." Lunette's expression brightened however, upon seeing a particular door. "Hehe," she chuckled as she increased her pace, almost running into the room with Kashi in tow. "This is my practice room. What do you think?"
 Kashi gave the room a once-over, a small smile playing at the edge of the lips as he appreciated the graffiti of musical notes and birds on the sky-blue walls. A large piano sat a corner of the room, surrounded by various string and wind instruments. Other corners had large, black, box-like items which, judging from the loud music, was the latest version of the new 'speakers'.
 Kashi looked away from the instruments to the seven people at the center of the room, all of whom gaped at him in shock. Unlike the security guard, most of these people were either part of, or had dealings with the Hopeful Maggots. They all knew what Kashi really looked like, and even if they were not certain at first glance, there was only one-person Lunette would hold like that.
 At the head of the group stood Shadow, dressed in a loose-fitting singlet, slacks and what Kashi would've sworn were sneakers. The little assassin approached his guild master, expression cool as always. "Kashi," Shadow greeted with a short nod.
 "Shadow," Kashi reciprocated. "What's with the get-up?"
 "Lune's got a performance in two hours," Shadow said. "We're finishing up on the dance routine."
 "Oh? You dance?" Larsial walked out from behind Kashi, a snarky glint in her eyes.
 Shadow gaze narrowed. He turned to Kashi and questioned, "What is she doing here?"

"If you want to know, you can just ask me," Larsial berated before Kashi could answer.
 Shadow glared at Kashi, but the daeben only shrugged, not even bothering to hide the amusement in his eyes. Shadow could only grudgingly turn to Larsial. "What are you doing here?"
 "Would you believe me if I said I came to look for you?" Larsial said as she pulled down her hood. Shadow replied with a hard, silent glare. "Okay, cool boy. I'm in the middle of negotiations with your boss. Part of our deal is I have to shadow him everywhere for a few months."
 Shadow looked to Kashi. Upon receiving confirmation in the form of a nod, he turned his attention to Lunette. "We have a problem."
 Lunette felt sorry for Larsial, especially after noticing her darkening expression. But she knew her brother. Once he made up his mind about something or someone, no one could change it except he himself chose to do so. So, she sent an apologetic smile Larsial's way before replying, "What happened?"
 "Comet just logged in to tell us he won't be able to make it," Shadow reported. "His mother's got him cleaning up the home. Most likely won't be done for another real-world hour."
 "That's five hours," Lunette muttered, expression downcast.
 "This Comet guy, is he important?" Kashi asked, concerned by Lunette's heavy gaze.
 "Yes," Shadow answered. "He's the core of today's routines. We cannot perform without him."
 "Don't you have a replacement?" Kashi questioned. He looked pointedly at Shadow. "You can't do it?"
 "No. Tonight's routine has two cores," Shadow revealed with a shake of his head. "I'm the second. As for replacements, this whole dance thing is still new. We've only got three Summoned. The rest are Residents."
 "Oh, and the Residents still need some training." 
 "Exactly," Shadow confirmed. "Any ideas?"
 "Nope, none," Kashi stated. "You guys can't perform without the dance routine?"
 "Lune definitely can," Shadow agreed. "But she's been planning this for a while now. It would su--"
 "Hey, I have an idea!" Lunette suddenly shouted, glitters shining in her eyes as she looked up at Kashi.
 "No!" Kashi instantly refused, goosebumps rising all over his skin. The daeben fearfully made an X with his arms across his chest. "There's no way I am going to dance. Forget it."
 "Stingy," Lunette clucked her tongue.
 "Like I was saying earlier," Shadow's low voice started, drawing Kashi's attention. "Lune's been planning this for weeks. She would be really devastated if this falls through. Her fans might even boycott her following performances. Nobody likes a liar."
 As if on cue, Lunette's head dropped, lips trembling as she adopted her best 'sad puppy' face.
 Kashi glared at Shadow, but the assassin's cold expression did not so much as shift. His eyes seemed to say, 'I've given you the facts. Now you decide whether you'll be an asshole or hero.' For the first time, Kashi experienced the benefits of having a powerful neutral expression. If this were Suzuki, he would have been able to keep pressure on Shadow's neutrality with his own, but Kashi had long since lost that neutrality.
 After a couple of moments of looking from Shadow to Lunette, Kashi's guilt finally overcame his resistance. "Just warning you, I can't dance," Kashi very reluctantly warned.
 Lunette squealed in delight as she jumped onto Kashi and wrapped her arms around his neck. "Told you you're a big softie." She rewarded his generosity with a kiss on the cheek. "And don't worry. Dancing isn't that difficult. You can definitely learn the routine."

Shadow took out a black wolf mask. "We'll be using masks, so your identity will be safe." 
 Kashi accepted the mask, only now grudgingly accepting his fate. "Alright, let's get this over with." 
 "Oh, I will enjoy this."
 Kashi's eyes widened as he looked over Shadow's shoulder at one of the dance crew members. The young cerulean teenager held a black puppy in her arms, distractedly stroking its fur as she watched the proceedings.
 "You're still pretending to be a puppy?" Kashi instantly countered. On the outside however, he nodded to Shadow and said, "Who's leading? I'll try my best to copy."
 "I am not pretending to be anything," Kira stated with an angry growl. "This is for training."
 "I'll lead," Lunette announced, lips parted in excitement. The songstress walked up to, and grabbed the daeben's left arm with her right, then wrapped her left hand around his back before he could back away. Right on cue, a song from a soft violin tune drifted through the room. 
 Lunette took a few tentative steps, trying to match the rhythm without performing any maneuvers too complicated for a beginner. Unfortunately, Kashi seemed to be even worse than a beginner, as he constantly botched his steps, often times accidentally stepping on her toes. 
 Frustration began to seep in with each failed attempt, the frown on Kashi's forehead growing deeper and larger by the second. His footsteps became rushed as he tried to correct mistakes before they had even happened and predict where the next spot his feet should land. However, even with that, it seemed the harder he tried to fix himself, the harder he failed. Kashi was about on the verge of giving up when he heard a voice in his ear.
 "Stop thinking so much."
 Kashi looked up from his feet to see Lunette's warm smile.
 "You have to learn to let go and just have fun," Lunette said with a light chuckle. "Dancing is not a strict set of movement patterns. It's freedom. A way to express yourself in ways words alone cannot suffice." Lunette placed her hand on Kashi's chest. "Like right now. I am happy. I am so happy, no amount of words are sufficient to explain how I feel." She looked up into Kashi's eyes, a small smile playing at the edge of her lips. "Do you understand?"
 "Not at all," Kashi openly admitted, causing several brows in the room to cringe in pain. "What I do know, is that when I'm around you, everything seems brighter." Almost instinctively, Kashi wrapped his right arm around her waist and pulled her in close. "I do not understand this feeling completely." One Step. "But I do know I want it as often as possible." Two steps. "I know that I long for it when it's not there." Four steps. "And I am at peace like no other time when it is." Kashi, unknowingly, at some point, not only led the dance, but was doing so with a grace and ease that in no way belonged to a beginner. "I do hope to fully understand what this feeling is one day."
 "You and I both," Lunette muttered under her breath. She only then realized that Kashi had been leading for quite some time now without any mishaps. Stunned, she questioned his earlier claim. "I thought you didn't know how to dance?"
 "Ballroom dancing's the only thing I know," Kashi replied with an embarrassed smile. "And even that was a long time ago. I completely forgot everything for a moment."
 "Oh," Lunette murmured. "Who taught you?"
 "Uh..." Kashi hesitated. Up till this moment, he had never had to explain the distinction between himself, Suzuki and Razznik. That burden always fell on Suzuki's unwilling shoulders. "I suppose you could call them, 'my brothers.'" Kashi let out a chuckle as he recalled the moment. "Now that I think about it, Suzuki said something similar back then didn't he?"

****
 1 Year Ago
 Aruno Park
 "What exactly is that supposed to be?" Suzuki harshly scolded from the comfort of his park bench. He glared at the teenager dancing on the grass with her arms held out like she was in the embrace of someone.
 "Dancing," Adachi icily replied. She was used to Suzuki's blunt tone and had learned to ignore it. "I'm scheduled to perform at a gala in three weeks."
 Suzuki snorted. "How boring." He looked down at his sketchpad and frowned. "Hurry and finish. You're ruining my shot."
 "Boring? What would you know about boring?" Adachi coldly retorted. "You have no interest in dancing."
 "I know enough to know there's nothing of you in that," Suzuki replied, jabbing his pencil in her direction. "It's too mechanical. Did one of your hundred thousand-yen tutors teach you that?" Shaking his head, he shooed her off with his hand. "I'm drawing nature here. I do not need your mechanical bullshit spoiling the shot."
 Adachi glared at him with clenched fists, only managing to resist the urge to bash in his skull in. She suddenly thought of a perfect revenge plot, causing an evil smile to blossom on her face.
 Suzuki shivered as a chill rushed down his spine. He warily looked at Adachi. "Whatever you are thinking, the answer is no."
 Adachi's evil smile only deepened at Suzuki's futile effort at resistance. "You are the one who said my dance is boring. It only makes sense you practice with me till I am no longer boring."
 "There is absolutely no logic in that," Suzuki staunchly argued.
 "You've got guts." Adachi closed the distance between them, then bent over and placed her arms over Suzuki's shoulders onto the bench. She brought her face within a hair's breadth from his, the evil smile as strong as ever. "Are you trying to argue logic with me?"
 Suzuki's bland stare revealed his complete indifference to the proximity. "Are you posing that argument as a friend or as a teenage girl?"
 Adachi's grip on the park bench tightened. However, her expression remained the same as she challenged, "Both."
 "Fine, you win." Suzuki surrendered with an exaggerated shrug. 
 "Heh, you should have agreed from the start." Adachi retreated with a self-satisfied snort. "When do we st—"
 "You should practice with Razznik." Suzuki mercilessly cut her off. "The time difference is stupidly large, so you can probably get in a couple months of practice. Besides, I'll learn everything Razznik learns. Everybody wins."
 "Sure, I will practice with Razznik," Adachi stated, but then she grabbed his arm without warning and yanked him off the bench. "However, that does not mean we will not practice. You know as well as I do it takes a few runs in reality before we can fully assimilate something we learn in the game."
   
 Suzuki could only give up and shake his head as she gleefully took his hand in hers. "At the very least, Razznik will suffer longer."
   
 Later that Day,
   
 Razznik glared at the human in front of him. As he took in the teasing smile of his hated rival, Aileera, he could only spit out an angry curse, "Traitorous son of a bitch!"

  
 Present Day,
 Larsial looked at the dancing couple, thoughts hidden behind a sly smile. She looked at the other practicing partners before looking at the silent assassin next to her.
 Sensitive senses ensured Shadow could not ignore the constant stare. Having crossed the limits of his tolerance, he spat, "What?" 
 Larsial's smile did not shift despite the obvious venom in his voice. "The numbers, they do not match."
 Shadow frowned, unable to understand her meaning. "What?"
 "The numbers," Larsial reiterated as she pointed at the dancers. "I see a 50:50 split between the men and the women. But, both you and Comet were meant to be part of this dance. The numbers don't match." Larsial said under her breath, "There's no such person as Comet is there?" 
 "What do you want?" Shadow did not bother defending himself. Indeed, when he saw Kashi, he immediately conjured up a plot to craft some intimate time between the daeben and his sister. Luckily, Lunette was quick to catch on, saving him a lot of stress.
 "Nothing right now," Larsial replied. "But you owe me one."
 "Uh-huh."
 Time was no friend, and soon enough rehearsals were done, and the performers had to take to the stage. The dance number involving Kashi was scheduled for last, allowing the daeben to view and appreciate the immense hardwork backstage that went into each successful performance.
 Kashi imagined a guild to be something like that. It was the endless contributions by each guildmember that allowed a guild to grow in strength and stature. At the end of the day, most people would see the powerful guild, and never know of the hardwork that went into building the guild's strength behind the scenes.
 Eventually, it was Kashi's turn to perform. The daeben, dressed in a black European style ballroom jacket with red trimmings ensured the wolf mask was on before stepping onto the stage. He barely had time to realize he was the only one on stage, before he was bombarded by a large roar that almost had him reaching for a dagger tucked in his waistband.
 Kashi stared at the crowd in shock. The multitude of happily cheering faces left him feeling awkward. Angry faces, and murderous glares. These were the normal things the Suzuki trinity were used to. Anything else, especially from a multitude of this size felt fake.
 Kashi's discomfort was given no time to settle as, accompanied by an even greater cheer that shook the grounds itself, Lunette walked onto the stage. 
 To Kashi however, the very moment he laid eyes on the songstress, the emporium seemed to have gone completely silent, all sound instantly washed away. 
 Lunette was dressed in a starry, light-blue dress that clung to her upper body like a second skin. The dress opened from the waist down, with a single knee-high slit that teased the songstress' beautiful legs with each step.
 Kashi's heartbeat quickened as Lunette walked up to his side. It was at that moment he understood what people meant by the power of make-up. What should be highlighted was highlighted. What should be hidden was hidden. It was a transformation that left the daeben speechless.
 Kashi did not hear Lunette introduce him as her 'dear friend who would assist her with this dance.' What he did hear though, were the thunderous shouts and boos from the crowd as a chuckling Lunette took his hand in hers.
 Kashi turned to the booing crowd. He spotted a lot of his dear friends, scowls, death glares and scrunched noses. Ah, how familiar, Kashi thought to himself, the collective hatred finally allowing him time to calm down.
 With his mind in the right place, Kashi accomplished his part to perfection. In fact, was so good, that by the time the number was over, most of the boost had turned to loud cheers. An indescribable emotion engulfed the daeben as he stared at the crowd.
 "The euphoria. It's indescribable, isn't it?"
 Kashi trembled. He turned to look at Lunette. "Indeed, I cannot describe this." Kashi looked at the cheering audience. "Today, I experienced many things and felt many emotions I hadn't felt before." He looked back to Lunette with a smile. "Thank you." Kashi bowed and to the shock and delight of the crowd, he took Lunette's hand in his and kissed the back of her hand. "I'll be going now."
 "You do what you have to do," Lunette said with the happiest grin. "I'll be waiting when you get back."
 "Don't worry. I will not take too long," Kashi promised. "We still need to start our trip to Drakase." 
 "Remember to stop by Suvron's Gate. The people working in the basement levels reported they found something important."
 "Got it," Kashi said. "Later, then." The daeben waved one last time at the crowd, then walked off the stage. To his surprise, Shadow, fully clad in his assassin outfit, stood backstage with a puppy-sized Kira in his arms.
 "I'm coming." 
 Kashi nodded and patted Shadow's shoulder. "Wouldn't have it any other way." 
 Later that day, the sun began its slow rise on the horizon, casting its fiery glow over three riders and one direwolf as they fervently raced south.
 

 *******
 A/N: Holy Crap! Holy Crap! Holy Crap! I got into the top 800 for Wattys2018... Now, I know there's next to no chance of me winning this thing, but I cannot express how grateful I am to you guys for helping me reach this milestone! I've been on this site for just over seven years, and I've been writing Parallel for about four of those years. In all that time, I've never gotten on the longlist, so thank you, thank you, thank you! 
 Love You Guys!
 Anyway, this chapter was one of the longer ones. Had to be as I did not want to break this particular experience into parts. It just had to be experienced as a whole. 
 We return to some more action in the next couple of chapters. Let's all have some fun!
 *********
 Picture of the Day
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 img source: https://twitter.com/Bosslogic/status/1035933144749199360 by BossLogic
 This is easily the saddest picture I've ever seen. As someone who has followed Marvel from the very first Ironman, it hit too close to home. Don't tell me that everyone will definitely come back and all that. 
 I live my movies, shows and novels through the characters. Tony Stark does not know that Spidey will definitely have to return because he still has another movie to film. That is the way I prefer to watch my shows. If not, I won't be able to enjoy show cuz I already know the protagonist will win. It's just a matter of how.

 

Episode 16.1: Eggs

          
 Suvron's Bridge
 14th Banem 1092
 The most famous bridge in all of Destia certainly lived up to its billing. A host of adventurers, tourists and merchants constantly crossed Suvron's Bridge, often stopping at stalls to stock up on necessary items before heading out into the wild. Those who set up stalls on the bridge were usually merchants too poor to pay for spaces inside Suvron's Gate. As a result, their products were usually a lot cheaper than those in the tower.
 Naturally, these cheaper products also paled in quality to those sold at the tower. It was a system that ensured every adventurer regardless of their degree of wealth, left or entered Merriheim satisfied.
 On this day, like every other day since, the sun shone overhead. Like every other day, the bridge was packed with hundreds of people. However, unlike every other day, the bridge was eerily silent, the eyes of every soul on the bridge directed at the quartet at the bridge's foot.
 It was to be expected, as the group comprised three of the most notorious figures in all of Rosendun and Merriheim.
 Kashi sat atop Drixlia, led Shadow, Larsial and a full-sized Kira up the bridge. The daeben was unruffled by the attention as a good number of the staring eyes contained the good-fashioned hostility he was used to. Compared to the adoring fans at Lunette's concert, Kashi felt more at ease among the hatred and killing intent.
 Despite their murderous thoughts, no one dared to make a move on the daeben. This was not just because they were deep in Maggot territory. The greatest deterrence was the massive direwolf that stood shoulder to shoulder with the stallions. Those ferocious blood-red eyes and teeth as large as fingers promised a gruesome death to anyone foolish enough to cross her.
 So it was that Kashi led his group past the bridge without incident. A smile blossomed on the daeben's face as he gazed at Suvron's Gate in the distance. Significant portions of the tower's walls had been replaced with sturdy glass, such that residents within the building had a magnificent view of the world from above. The modern architecture stood out in this world, drawing thousands of tourists and adventurers eager to experience this for themselves.
 "Kashi-dono, it is a pleasure to finally meet you."
 Kashi looked down to see a dark-skinned mertian. The heavy-set bald man looked to be in his late forties. A set of formal, sharp business attire and the host of servants following behind suggested he was a man of considerable influence.
 Kashi nodded, acknowledging the greeting. "You are?"
 "Ah, where are my manners." The mertian politely bowed at a sharp 90 degrees angle. "I am called Gregor. Master Miote left me in charge of operations here at Suvron's Gate."
 "Of course he did," Kashi murmured. Inwardly, however, he let out a sigh as he realized just how little he knew about his guild. However, with an indifferent shrug, he completely abandoned that train of thought. As long as Leila was around, he did not need to get into all these administrative stuff. "Gregor-san, Lunette informed me of a problem you encountered?"
 "Yes, of course," Gregor acknowledged as he gestured to a little ways off from the entrance to Suvron's Gate. "If you would follow me."
 Kashi got off Drixlia, and after instructing the stubborn stallion to behave itself, Kashi, along with Shadow, Larsial, and Kira followed after Gregor. Kashi noticed their path significantly led them away from the entrance to Suvron's Gate. "This problem. I was informed it was in the basement?"
 "Yes, it is," Gregor explained. "Master Miote insisted workers leaving through the tower's entrance was not a good look, so he commissioned a tunnel to be built nearby that connected to the basement. That is what we currently use."

"Smart," Kashi complimented.
 "Indeed" Gregor agreed. "When it comes to making money, Master Miote possesses exceptionally keen insight."
 "That accent, you did not grow up in Merriheim, did you?" Larsial noted.
 "The miss has an excellent ear," Gregor conceded. "I did indeed spend my childhood up to my rebellious young adult ages in Imperium. As a matter of fact, I was once esquire to a knight during the Great War. Unfortunately the squad I was enlisted in suffered a terrible ambush during one of our campaigns here. I was the sole survivor. I was too lazy to move back, so I stayed and opened up my own business. Luckily, Master Miote found me recently, and after proving myself, handed me this prestigious job."
 "Oh? As someone who has been through the Great War, what's your honest opinion on Rosendun and their conquest?"
 Gregor proved why he was deserving of his position. Aside from a slight twitch of his eyebrows, his expression remained largely the same. "My honest opinion? There were already too many skirmishes in Merriheim amongst warring factions. It was only a matter of time before one side won and took over the others. I never expected an outsider to be the one to stop the fighting in one swoop." Gregor sighed. "In times like these, you can only pray that the person who eventually takes over will not be the greatest of tyrants. That he will care for the people. In this regard, Rosendun has far exceeded any prayers we dared to have. So, in my honest opinion, I am all for Rosendun's conquest. Our other route was an endless cycle of orphaned children and armed teenagers without a goal in sight."
 "An astute analysis," Larsial stated. "You have been asked this question before?"
 "The locals often discuss this amongst ourselves," Gregor openly admitted.
 Larsial's gaze flashed. She looked at the unassuming daeben then back at Gregor. In the end, she only muttered, "Interesting." She remained silent for the rest of the trek.
 Gregor stopped in front of a small settlement. Gregor introduced the little hamlet as the temporary lodging for the construction workers. The settlement was built around a building which upon entering, was revealed to be the entrance to a flight of stairs that descended to a tunnel.
 A guard stood at the head of the stairs, verifying the identities of the workers before letting them pass. He greeted Gregor as the mertian passed, sending a curious glance at the strange party following behind. It would not be until later that night while drinking with friends that he would realize who he just met.
 Gregor, meanwhile, led Kashi and company down the stairs, which bottomed out to a brightly lit tunnel. Gregor explained they had been fortunate enough to find some rare gemstones while creating the tunnel. He pointed out some branching tunnels where he stated miners had found some rich lodes of gemstones. Immediately the tunnels were declared safe, they would have miners come down to dig up the minerals.
 The group walked for another twenty minutes, often descending deeper into the earth through carefully constructed sloping tunnels. Eventually, they reached the end of the road, where the tunnel opened out to a massive cavern.
 "Kashi."
 "Yeah," Kashi acknowledged. His gaze traveled from the massive lake at the center of the cavern to large pieces of crystals scattered on the strangely, grass-covered floor. "It's the place we fought Krakul." Kashi was understandably surprised. He had assumed the cavern would be buried when the tower rose. In fact, he had only asked that people explore below Suvron's Gate in the hopes that some of the scattered crystals would be found. Maybe with those, they could figure out some of their secrets and utilize them for the guild.

Never would he have guessed the cavern would be completely intact. Only now did Kashi understand why Lunette had used the word 'basement' when talking about the problem. Indeed, this was the tower's basement. It was just, who had ever heard of such a large basement!?
 Kashi quickly reeled in his shock as he turned his attention to a crowd gathered at the shore. "I assume the problem is over there?"
 "Yes, Kashi-dono," Gregor confirmed as he led the way to the back of the crowd. A quick cough and a path opened up to the center as soon as the workers realized who was behind them. "How about you all get back to work?" Gregor suggested with a smile, but the speed at which the workers scampered off suggested there was far more to him than the harmless persona he displayed.
 "This, Kashi-dono is the problem I mentioned," Gregor said as he gestured at two massive stones standing next to the shore.
 "What are those?" Larsial asked confusion etched in her brows.
 "They-"
 "They are eggs," Kashi interrupted, eyes wide in shock. "I can hear their heartbeat. It's faint, but it's there." He stepped past Gregor and placed a hand on the eggs. He turned to Shadow. "Come up, you can feel it. They're pretty strong."
 Shadow did exactly that. "How are they still alive in there?" He questioned as he tapped on the hard stone-like exterior.
 "Their mother provided them with plenty of high-quality mana." Kashi and co turned to see who had spoken. A wisben wrapped in loose-fitting fur clothing approached them, shifty green eyes regarding them from behind a pair of glasses. "It's too bad it will soon run out. They will not survive past a couple of days."
 Kashi turned to face the strange character. "You are?"
 "Kashi-dono, this is Doctor Abnier Newt, a highly decorated beastmaster," Gregor quickly introduced. "Before you arrived, we had sent out a summons for qualified beastmasters to assess the situation. He is the best among those who stepped forward."
 "Mmhmm," Kashi nodded. He held out his hand and greeted, "Pleased to make your acquaintance, Doctor Newt."
 "The pleasure and honor is all mine," Doctor Newt returned the greeting with a handshake of his own.
 "So, if you please, would you inform us what you mean by they will not last long?"
 "It's truly a pity," Doctor Newt lamented as he adjusted the glasses on the bridge on his nose. "I cannot be sure of their species, but their progenitor was a really powerful monster, possibly one of the apex species. However, no matter how great the species, they must still succumb to the same rules of reproduction as every other species." He glanced at the stones then continued, "In the case of reptilian creatures, it is important the conditions during incubation are kept constant. In the case of these eggs, our tests have shown that compared to the environment and position, the determining factor for their hatching is the quality of mana they have been imbued with. Unfortunately, we are incapable of replicating that quality, hence the embryos have begun showing signs of deterioration. If we do not find a replacement for the mana, these eggs will become nothing but oversized rocks." Doctor Newt cleared his throat. "I have an associate who was lucky enough to restrain a dragon. If you'll allow me, I can have the eggs delivered to him. A dragon's mana might not meet the quality needed, but it's the best chance we have."
 Kashi raised a brow. "So, what you are saying is, if we can replicate the quality of mana, we can save these eggs? They do not need a lake environment?"
 "Huh?" Doctor Newt was completely thrown off by the question. What's with that nonchalant way of mention the quality of mana. That was the entire point of his whole speech! There was no way they could replicate its effects! Still, he had to answer the question. So, he stammered back. "Uh... yes. In theory. While a lake environment will definitely be helpful, it is not that important."
 "Good. These eggs, I'll be taking them," Kashi proudly declared. Before anyone could process the meaning of his words, he placed a hand on each egg. A second later, they both disappeared.
 "What are you doing!?" Doctor Newt screamed with undisguised hysteria. "That inventory of yours is a void! It will instantly kill the eggs!"
 "Don't worry doctor," Kashi laughed and patted the confused beastmaster's shoulder. "We are not allowed to put living creatures into our inventory for that exact reason. The eggs are not in my inventory."
 Doctor Newt's eyes went wide. "Th-then where are they?"
 "I'm a Dimension Artist." Kashi sent the doctor a knowing glance. "Where do you think?" The doctor stared at him, mouth agape but Kashi did not care. He turned to Gregor. "Your problem's been handled. Thank you for your hard work." He also thanked Doctor Newt for his help, but the beastmaster was completely unresponsive. It seemed the shock had been too much for him.
 Kashi only laughed and exited the tunnel with Shadow and company. He had to hurry to Rosendun before the Blight wiped out the centaur tribe. Kashi, Shadow, and Larsial retrieved their respective horses then galloped past Suvron's Gate towards the heart of Rosendun.
 When they were a good distance away from the tower, Kira suddenly came to a halt. As a result, Kashi, Larsial, and Shadow also stopped a few feet away. They turned to face her, curiosity on their faces.
 "What's wrong? Tired already," Kashi teased.
 "Shut up and get off," Kira instantly berated, red eyes blazing in unbridled rage. "You forget we are connected. You can fool anyone except me."
 "Heh, guess I could not get it past you," Kashi muttered. His grip on Drixlia's reins loosened. He slumped forward on the stallion's back. He vaguely noticed a panicked Shadow jump off his horse before he blacked out.

 

Chapter 16.2: Chaotic Eggs



 "What happened!" Shadow shouted as he jumped off his horse. He lunged toward Drixlia, aiming to catch the falling daeben. However, he ultimately fell behind Kira who appeared by Drixlia's side like she had been expecting the fall. Kashi dropped onto her back, unconscious, but ragged breathing revealed the internal struggle he was suffering.
 "Thanks," Shadow said in appreciation as Kira lowered her frame, allowing him to pull Kashi off her back. Shadow carefully propped the daeben against a boulder. He examined the daeben, brows drawn together in worry when he could not find any external cause. Helpless, he turned to Kira, "Do you know what's wrong with him?"
 Kira placed a paw on Kashi's chest and sent Shadow a troubled gaze. She opened her mouth, but no words would come out. All she could do was whine helplessly as she constantly pawed at the daeben's chest. Never in her life had she hated her inability to speak as much as this moment.
 "Does it have something to do with those eggs?" Larsial asked. Her question was innocent enough, but both Kira and Shadow turned to glare at her with unbridled hostility. In their panic, they had forgotten an enemy was within their midst. Larsial inadvertently reminded them of her presence, causing them to immediately adopt a defensive stance. Who knew if Larsial would take this opportunity to attack the defenseless Kashi?
 "Don't worry. I have no plans of attacking," Larsial declared with raised hands. "I gave my word I would follow him for six months, and I intend to fulfill that promise." She knew her words would not assuage their suspicion, so she didn't bother with convincing them any further. Instead, she pointed at Kashi. "You keep pressing his chest. Is the problem over there?"
 Kira's eyes involuntarily brightened, but she still kept her guard up.
 "I may have an idea as to what's wrong with him." Larsial's keen eyes caught the change in the direwolf's expression. She slowly made her way over to Kashi's side under Kira and Shadow's strict watch, keeping her hands high in the air. "I heard him say something about being a Dimensional Artist before he took those eggs. Unless everything he said was hogwash, I imagine he has a personal dimension of his own. Something must've gone wrong when he put the eggs in there."
 Kira raised her head and howled as if to express her agreement. She pawed at Kashi's chest, whimpering as she nudged him.
 Larsial slowly reached over and placed a hand on Kashi's chest. Her expression twisted somewhat as she felt the impossibly rapid heartbeat. Any other hume with such a heartbeat should already be dead. How the hell was he still alive? She glanced at Kira and asked, "Is it here? The dimension?"
 Kira red eyes lit up as she nodded.
 "This is serious," Larsial stated, her expression bleak. "I don't know what is happening, but he can't last long like this." As if on cue, Kashi suddenly spasmed violently, coughing up a large chunk of blood in the process. "Hold him down!" Larsial ordered, but moments passed without any help. "What the hell are you do—" Larsial started to shout, but immediately stopped when she looked up.
 Kira and Shadow were frozen in place, staring at the convulsing daeben, shock, and fear apparent in trembling eyes. Kashi had always been an insurmountable figure to these two. No matter what happened, he always pulled through with a confident, sometimes slightly cocky grin. Even when completely overpowered by the Adjudicators, Kashi still managed to seize the momentum. The duo - no not just these two - probably the entire Hopeful Maggots guild had never considered a possible future without Kashi. His back was just that huge.
 But now, to see that invulnerable leader completely helpless like this, to the extent he was violently coughing blood. There was no word to describe the terror that seized Kira and Shadow.

Shadow was a little better. Larsial's shout managed to get him back to his senses. He dropped next to the thrashing daeben, struggling alongside Larsial to hold him down. This was the first time he felt Kashi's inhuman strength for himself. Shadow thanked their lucky stars this was only an instinctual thrashing, hence Kashi was not using his full strength. Or else, as assassin classes, both he and Larsial sorely lacked the muscle power to hold him down.
 Unfortunately, the stalemate did not last long. As if reading Shadow's mind, Kashi's efforts to free himself suddenly tripled, the exertion causing Kashi to cough up even more blood. At this rate, the daeben would surely die of blood loss!
 There was only one person here strong enough to firmly hold down Kashi,
 "Kira! What are you doing!?" In a rare moment of rage, Shadow let out an exasperated shout. "Get over here! He'll kill himself if he keeps this up!"
 Kira however, remained frozen in place. She just stared at the extremely vulnerable Kashi. Her heart beat chaotically, so loud she was sure the entire world could hear it. But even this could not snap her out of her stupor. The young direwolf had never realized just how much she had come to depend on Kashi's presence. Ever since her mother's death, she had been with this hateful man all the way.
 They had grown strong together, faced all kinds of impossible situations and dangers right by each other's side and they had always found a way to get through it. But now, she did not know what to do. She could not think of any way to help Kashi and the thought of permanently losing him terrified her more than she could have ever thought possible.
 Just when did the hated daeben become this important?
 "Kira!"
 Shadow's subsequent shout managed to reach Kira. She listlessly looked over to the assassin. "I know you are afraid," Shadow said with a grunt as he struggled against Kashi's increasing efforts. "I am too. But this is Kashi we're talking about. He'll definitely recover and laugh at us for worrying so much. Help us stabilize him first so he doesn't harm himself." Shadow looked her in the eyes and solemnly stated, "Everything will be fine."
 Who knew if Shadow actually believed those words or if he was just saying them to convince Kira... or maybe himself?
 Regardless of his intentions, Shadow's words managed to spark a little life into Kira's listless eyes. She walked over and stood on Kashi so that her four limbs were on Kashi's. Her considerable strength showed as Kashi's efforts to move were instantly rendered futile. Only Kashi's head could move, but Larsial was more than enough to hold that part down.
 Kira stared down at Kashi. Only at this moment did she remember that no matter how great he may seem, in the end, Kashi was just a hume. He could die. If he died, he would be gone forever. He would leave her. She would be alone. Kira reared back her head and let out a sorrowful howl, pouring out all the pain in her heart.
 Pa!
 The howl seemed to spark something in Kashi as his eyes instantly snapped open. Kira felt the movement and instantly cut her howl short. She met the daeben's gaze, but before she could let out a thought, she cried out as a single message bombarded her mind over a thousand times in the span of a second.
 "GET IN HERE!"
 Kira felt a torrential aura envelope her body. That aura forcefully tried to pull her somewhere. Against her best instincts, she didn't fight the force. A second later she disappeared and Kashi's body went still.
 "What was that?" Shadow muttered.
 Larsial did not forget to quickly check Kashi's pulse and breath. She only relaxed when she noticed Kashi's vitals rapidly stabilizing. She nodded at Shadow. "Don't know. But whatever she did, it's working."

Shadow looked at Kashi's chest. "What's going on in there?" He turned to look at Larsial. "Thank you. If you didn't react when you did..."
 "He might have killed himself," Larsial harshly finished. She glared at Shadow. "What the hell is wrong with you? Do you think your leader is some sort of god? Kashi has completely spoiled the lot of you." She glanced at Kashi. "This is his fault as a leader too. He's too used to handling everything by himself so the rest of you have begun to see him that way." She stood up and dusted herself off. Fixing a hard glare at Shadow, she advised, "If you do not want to be the cause of your leader's death, become a force he relies on and not the other way around. That way, you will always take Kashi's vulnerability into consideration in everything you do."
 With a sigh, Larsial added, "You're strong, but you do not know how to analyze situations beyond the battlefield very well. With this ability, you would have easily deduced the most probable cause for his condition. You should consider joining the Assassin's Guild. They're not as powerful as they used to be, but it's a good place to learn the fundamentals of what it really means to be a person's Shadow."
 Shadow's sat in a seiza by Kashi's side. His expression remained neutral through Larsial's tirade, but he acknowledged her critique with a determined, "Thank You."
 Larsial sighed and shook her head. She looked down at the daeben. Really, what was going on in there?
 ****
 Minutes Earlier
 "Fuck!"
 Kashi let out a tirade of curses as he glared at a pair of stone-like eggs. His inner world was a complete mess and these two were the culprits! Tsunamis and floods crashed against sturdy mountains and hills. A sea of flames burned over the mountains, constantly fighting against the flood, but at the moment they were at a stalemate.
 This was a battle between the bloodlines of these eggs against the joint forces of the dragon and Yggdrasil. Kashi initially had no clue as to how his inner world functioned, but probably as a result of this incident, information related to his world began flowing into his head.
 It was only at this moment that Kashi realized that his so-called 'inner world' had not yet reached the status of a world. At best, it was only an embryo of a future world. There was only one way to build this inner world of his, and that was to introduce the six elements of creation: Fire, Water, Wind, Earth, Metal, and Lightning. Furthermore, the magnitude and strength of the world depended greatly on the type of materials used in their creation. So far, the fusion of Kashi's inner dragon (fire) and Yggdrasil (Earth) managed to create the first patch of earth for the inner world.
 Furthermore, as far as earth elements were concerned, there was nothing with the same quality as Yggdrasil. Unfortunately, as Kashi had not yet managed to acquire all the branches from the guardians, it was not yet at full strength. Still, it's high-quality aura managed to create and stabilize Kashi's inner world such that he did not need to gather all the elements.
 The inner dragon contributed fire to the inner world, hence why there was a 'sun' overhead. In the end, Yggdrasil was still a tree. The sun increased the speed at which it evolved. The only unfortunate reality was that, as an Elder Dragon, Kashi's inner dragon's fire element could only be considered as 'very good'. It definitely did not match the premium quality of Yggdrasil, hence the boon it provided Yggdrasil was quite minimal.
 However, the dragon benefited greatly from Yggdrasil. Yggdrasil was known as the 'Tree of Life' for a reason. All life that stayed under its branches often evolved multiple times past their own bloodline limit. Every second spent under Yggdrasil improved its strength. The dragon was certain that even if Kashi did nothing but sleep, sometime in the future, it would evolve past being an Elder Dragon.

This fragile balance was maintained because both auras belonged to Kashi, hence there was no disharmony as to who should lead and who should not. They cooperated for the sake of making Kashi stronger.
 However, it was into this fragile ecosystem that Kashi unceremoniously tossed, not one, but two Hydra eggs. By themselves, these would already be huge threats as Hydras were an even better source of water element than Elder Dragons were of the fire element. However, these were no normal Hydra eggs.
 First, their mother was a Hydra that had lived for over a millennium and had been personally selected by Razznik to guard a god. The purity and strength of such a bloodline were already terrifying enough on their own. The two other secrets that Kashi was not aware of were even more damning. First, while their mother had been a Hydra, their father was a Kraken. Razznik, in a bout of boredom, had one of his servants artificially impregnate the Hydra with a Kraken's seed.
 These eggs were so powerful that they had taken over eight hundred years to form. It had also been over two hundred years since they were laid, but they were unable to hatch for one terrifying reason: their powerful mother was unable to supply the quality of mana needed. Hence, she could only substitute quality with quantity. She had spent over two hundred years nourishing these eggs, but in the end, she died right before the eggs were ready to hatch.
 The lifeforms within the eggs struggled to conserve the remaining mana accumulated over time, but without constant replenishment from their mother, the mana was quickly running out. They knew they would soon perish if they did not get some high-quality mana. Hence, the moment they sensed the rich mana emanating from the combined auras of Yggdrasil and the dragon, they greedily attempted to forcibly absorb it all for themselves.
 This was a terrible enough scenario on its own. The mana drain would certainly leave Kashi weak until it stabilized, but it was not fatal. However, things took a rapid turn for the worse when the dimension recognized the eggs as a potential source of one of the missing elements needed for its creation: Water. Furthermore, it was such a high-quality source of water too. The dimension automatically attempted to seize control of the hydra eggs and place them under submission. The idea was to establish a continuous cycle between the eggs, the dragon, and Yggdrasil that would benefit all the parties involved.
 Unfortunately, immediately the Hydra eggs felt the pull on their remaining aura, they pegged the environment as a hostile place that wanted to kill them by sucking out the rest of their mana. The eggs burst out in full retaliatory force, their combined auras seeking to crush the world around them.
 Yggdrasil and the dragon recognized the threat to the already fragile world and immediately worked to counter and suppress the eggs. Unfortunately, Yggdrasil was still largely incomplete and the dragon's bloodline was not up-to-par, forcing them into a stalemate with the eggs.
 The battle between the elements raged chaos within Kashi's world, causing tears to appear in the 'sky' and 'ground'. The world could no longer handle the clash and would soon implode if left unchecked.
 Kashi would have liked to communicate with the eggs, but no matter how ancient, these were still just eggs. All their actions right now were based on the basest of animal instinct. There was no mode of communication. Kashi's brows had already begun to knit in worry when a loud, sorrowful howl tore through the world.
 The wolf cry was so unexpected, it brought a momentary pause to the conflict.
 Kashi, meanwhile, stared in shock at the silhouette that had appeared in the sky as a new piece of information entered his mind. Using all of his willpower, Kashi willed himself to wake up, just long enough to give Kira the signal not to resist.
 Kashi's attempt was successful, and moments later, a confused Kira appeared next to Kashi in the sky. Despite her confusion, Kira pounced on Kashi immediately she laid eyes on him. The daeben did not have a chance to say anything before she nestled her head on his shoulder. Initially shocked, he eventually regained himself and patted Kira's head. "Sorry for making you worry."
 "Hmmph." Kira snorted and released her grip on his shoulders. She instantly regained her proud demeanor, the scared little wolf nowhere to be found. "I told you before. You're not allowed to die until I kill you."
 "You did say something like that, didn't you," Kashi admitted with a short laugh.
 Kira ignored the smug grin on Kashi's face. She looked at the chaotic battle and questioned. "What's this?"
 Kashi gave a quick summary of what he understood of everything that had happened so far. At the end, he added, "I'm going to need your help."
 Kira sent a determined gaze Kashi's way. "Just tell me what to do."

 

Chapter 16.3: World Tree



 Kashi looked at Kira. He did not know what had caused the great change in her attitude, but he was thankful for it. In this world, there was certainly no one who knew and understood him as well as she did. Likewise, there was no one in this world he could trust as much as Kira. Although there was certainly a bonus from living so long in each other's heads, Kashi was certain that even without their connection, he would still be confident in putting his life in Kira's paws. Kashi smiled and said as he patted Kira's head. "Just don't resist and everything will be fine."
 "Don't resist? What will I be resisTIII—" Terror engulfed Kira's mind as an overbearing force seized control of all the mana in her body. Kira instantly understood why the Hydra eggs reacted the way they did. No living being would take kindly to having some unknown force take control of their body, let alone one that sucked out something as vital as mana.  Despite Kashi's explanation, it still took everything she had to not struggle against this tyrannical force. 
 Kashi keenly felt Kira's panic. His brows locked together in worry. Had he made the wrong decision? Were things really as the information in his head suggested? The daeben suddenly began to doubt himself. He did not want to risk Kira's life on a gamble. He had initially been completely sure, but Kira's panic and fear opened his eyes to the possibility of being wrong. What if he was wrong and something happened to Kira? Kashi could not imagine a world without Kira.
 Kira had been with Kashi for so long, he had begun to take her presence for granted. Even when they were leagues apart, a part of Kira was always in his head. This ensured that no matter what, Kashi never truly felt alone. One of the major reasons he was so confident when Froy captured him was precisely because of this connection to Kira. It was funny really. Because he had to leave the game from time to time, Kira did have moments where Kashi was not in her head. The opposite, however, was not true. Ever since Fladnag established the connection between them, Kira had always been in Kashi's head, an ever-present presence that assured him he was not alone in this world. 
 "Hey, Kira—"
 As if sensing the daeben's hesitation, a bright light suddenly descended from the 'sun', enclosing Kira within. Kashi's eyes were forced shut as a massive gale burst out from Kira's position. The initial blast flung Kashi several meters back. He managed to land on his feet, but it took all he had to remain upright as the wind picked up.
 Kashi activated [Dragon's Eyes]. Thin layers of mana-films protected his eyes which had transformed to dragon slits. Under the protection of the mana-films, Kashi opened his eyes and searched for Kira.
 Kashi did not exactly find Kira. Instead, to his surprise, he saw the light cocoon containing Kira hovering under Yggdrasil. Horrid tempestuous wind gushed out of the cocoon into the flames above. 
 The flames roared with renewed life. They burned even brighter and angrier, buoyed by the sudden influx of high-quality wind element injected into them. The raging flames instantly sought vengeance against the tyrannical flood. They directly engulfed and suppressed the flood, swallowing it up at an alarming rate.
 Within moments, the combined forces of Kira, the dragon and Yggdrasil effectively suppressed the eggs' auras. The eggs recognized their loss and stopped their futile struggle. They reluctantly allowed themselves to be enveloped by the world's power, which manifested itself in the form of a bright light. The eggs were then transported beneath Yggdrasil's branches.
 Kashi let out a sigh of relief as he saw the situation stabilize. However, things did not remain calm for long.
 With the four elemental lifeforms docile and compliant, the dimension could finally begin forming for real. The dimension once again sucked out the auras from all the lifeforms. This time, there was no resistance from any of them. The released auras converged in the clouds above, where they mixed into a complex amalgamation of mana that took the form of a tornado in the sky.

Kashi looked on in interest as the tornado abruptly expanded. It exploded, sending mana scattering across a vast area. Kashi's eyes went wide as a stretch of vast plains formed in front of his eyes. Small creeks and rivulets cut across the plains, and Kashi could see that at the ends of the plains was a massive body of water whose ends he could not see.
 At the center of these plains was the massive Yggdrasil. The dragon laid on the earth beneath its branches, whereas Kira's cocoon still hovered in mid-air. The eggs found a new home in a small pond, also located beneath Yggdrasil branches. If the eggs had voices they would have squealed in delight as, compared to the mana that was sucked out of them, the high-quality mana from Yggdrasil was more than enough to satisfy their needs. Furthermore, because of the intermingled Elder Dragon and Zephyr Direwolf auras, there was a chance their bloodline could mutate even further.
 That's right, Kira was a Zephyr Direwolf. Kira's existence as a Zephyr Direwolf was only revealed to Kashi when her howl pierced into his dimension. Although Kashi had always known that Kira's bloodline was special (Her mother was a freaking god!), he never knew what her exact species was. The game interface simply listed her as a direwolf, and since Kira herself did not know what species she was, both parties flung the matter to the back of their heads.
 The ArchGriffin they released in the mines reminded them how special her bloodline was, but since then, there had been no chances to explore that further. They once again forgot about it. This time, however, the truth of her bloodline finally came in the form of a demand from his dimension. It needed an extra element to balance the situation. And after noticing the purity of Kira's bloodline, and the fact that her wind element would greatly influence the stalemate, Kashi was bombarded with the relevant information. 
 The world continued to stabilize, as the different auras began to form a cycle between each other. Yggdrassil's earth element formed the basis for everything. It's unique ability to provide life energy further boosted the bloodlines of all the beasts under its branches. The improved bloodlines would, in turn, boost the respective elements of these beasts. In the case of the Hydra eggs, their water element allowed for the growth of plant-life like the grass on the plains. The water element also provided nourishment to Yggdrasil, replenishing its mana, and aiding in its growth. 
 The Elder Dragon's fire element did not need to be mentioned. Without the fire element, the entire world would be frozen over, and life would be unable to exist. The surprise addition was the effect of Kira's wind element. Her element brought air to the world. Initially, this was a world only suitable for spiritual bodies, or those that only needed mana to survive. However, wind's inclusion introduced oxygen and other gases into the world. Living beings could now breath in the world.
 This was the first time the world could be considered a 'real world.' The world wasn't complete yet. Four elements had been gathered. Two were left. Kashi had no idea where the hell he was supposed to get Metal and Lightning, but he did not really care. These type of things were encountered, not sought after.
 After the world stabilized, Kashi landed beneath Yggdrasil's branches. This was the first time he actually stood next to the tree, and only at this moment did he realize just how large this tree really was. While it had yet to reach the colossal height Razznik had encountered, the tree was still over 200 meters (656 ft) tall, with a ridiculous trunk width of just about 20 meters (65ft). Kashi looked up at the multi-layered canopy formed by the tree branches. He was not completely certain, but he was quite sure at least one baseball stadium could fit beneath the canopy.
 Kashi recalled the city-sized Yggdrasil Razznik mercilessly cut down for its core. Maybe it was because this tree was a part of him, but he now felt he could understand why the Treants had fought Razznik so valiantly. This tree was a thing of beauty. It exuded a peaceful fragrance that not only calmed the minds and souls of everything close to it, but also seemed to uplift their spirits. It was terribly difficult to harbor evil thoughts while beneath this tree.

Kashi looked away from Yggdrasil to the cocoon that encased Kira within. "Hey, Kira. Thanks for the help. You really saved my life this time." The cocoon remained silent. "Uh... Job's over. You can come out now."
 No answer was forthcoming.
 Kashi's brow furrowed. "Kira?" 
 The quiet rustling of grass and leaves were the only sounds in the world.
 "Kira!" Kashi shouted. His frown deepened as he began to panic. "Hey! Stupid Dimension! You don't get to keep her! She isn't some power source for you!" 
 Still no response.
 "I said Release Her!" Kashi screamed with clenched fists. The silence continued. Kashi unleashed a tirade of curses. He began considering much more violent solutions when a cool breeze washed over him. Kashi had no idea how he knew what he did, but somehow, not only did that wind stabilize his emotions, it also somehow delivered a simple message: "Everything will be Fine."
 Kashi turned back and glared at Yggdrasil. "You. You're the one aren't you?" A slight breeze brushed past. "Uh-huh. You're also the one who told me about Kira, am I right?" There was that slight breeze again. Kashi's eyes narrowed. "So, what exactly are you and what's happening to her?"
 The breeze brushed by once again. Kashi was now certain. It was definitely Yggdrasil that sent the information about Kira. This was because he could feel the familiar influx of information into his mind. There was no way to explain how it felt. One second, he did not know anything about this tree, and the next he had all the information he needed.
 Perhaps a neurologist would question how this was possible, and how it could be applied in the world, but Kashi... Kashi only cared about the information. It took him a moment to sort out the information, an evil grin spreading on his face the deeper he got.
 According to Yggdrasil, it was the 'seed' of this world. In most myths, Yggdrasil was referred to as the 'World Tree'. Kashi felt this description severely underestimated just how powerful this tree was. Apparently, the Yggdrasil Razznik saw was only a 'branch' of the tree. Yggdrasil was a colossal tree that served as a gateway between all the dimensions Ferulic created. The hopeless romantic designed the tree so he could easily take Aethir anywhere she wanted.
 Aethir, in turn, fell in love with the magnificent tree and personally blessed it. This blessing was [Boon of Life] which granted Yggdrasil with the ability to create and disseminate life energy. This energy was capable of boosting the bloodlines of every living thing. There had even been rare cases where concentrated doses had resulted in immortality.
 In Kashi's case, however, all he had was a 'seed' of this magnificent tree. The seed had already fused with his soul, so it existed in tandem with him. If Kashi perished, it would too. So, it was in its best interests to do everything to keep Kashi alive. Since Kashi was not the type to take up farming or knitting and live in peace, it had no choice but to find ways to make him stronger.
 Unfortunately, while the world remained in its 'embryo state', Yggdrasil's range of activities were severely limited. Luckily, the introduction of the Hydra Eggs had finally provided the world with an additional element that could improve the situation. But, it had not accounted for the eggs' hostility.
 In order to stabilize the situation, Yggdrasil rapidly needed an additional non-hostile element to stabilize the situation. It was at this moment that Kira's howl pierced the realm. It instantly detected her real bloodline. After all, it was a seed of the Great World Tree. It would be shameful if there was a lifeform it did not recognize. 
 When Kira entered the world, Yggdrasil forcibly boosted her bloodline with most of the life energy it had stored up. It was a temporary rise, but it was enough to activate the powerful wind element in her blood. The temporary boost was enough to suppress the Hydra eggs and bring them under submission.
 However, Yggdrasil did not release Kira because the boost was only temporary. Should it release her at the moment, her bloodline would instantly revert to its previous state. The backlash would be severely damaging, and it might affect her future evolution. Yggdrasil instead kept her in the cocoon. This way the life energy would be trapped in there with her. It would slowly assimilate into her bones and blood until the situation developed. Only at that moment could she be considered to have truly 'evolved'.
 Yggdrasil also made it clear that Kashi should not expect this kind of rapid evolution to be a regular occurrence. Aside from the fact that such forceful evolution sapped far too much life energy from a sapling like itself, Yggdrasil was still a tree of balance and nature. It would not interfere too much in the mortal realm.
 However, it was not all terrible news. Yggdrasil did reveal to Kashi that as it was a part of him, and this was his world, there were some benefits. It was these benefits that had Kashi grinning like a mad devil. 
 First, as the dimension existed in his soul, Kashi would have access to every element within. It wasn't to the extent where he could summon rain and thunder with a wave of his hand. More like, Kashi could now enchant anything he touched with the elements in his world. At the moment, he had access to the Wind, Earth, Fire, and Water. 
 Second, the existence of Yggdrasil provided Kashi with a constant source of life energy. He could use the energy to heal himself and others. Yggdrasil was quick to stress that Kashi was not immortal. The amount of energy it was capable of sending to him was not that much as most of it was needed to maintain the dimension. When it came down to numbers, Kashi found that his health regen rate had tripled. Yikes! Kashi suddenly felt like a roach. It would truly be too difficult for everyday riff-raff to kill him even in his sleep now.
 That was not to say he was invincible. Characters like Shoko had terribly high Damage take could more than half his health with the right strike. Furthermore, most high-level warriors and mages had some sort of skill that tampered with self-regen. In the case of warriors, it was usually done by infusing the enemy with explosive or corrosive Ki. Alchemists used poisons, while Mages used debilitating spells.
 All in all, having high-regen was not a reason to get careless. However, that said, how often would someone run into a player with both High Damage and self-regen hindering skills? Ninety-nine percent of the time, Kashi would be able to stomp his way through most battles. This was especially satisfying. This was even more so considering that with the debuff, he would be forced to fight even tougher monsters if he wanted to match the leveling speed of the other great Summoned. 
 The final boon was a direct increase in his strength itself. The world increased his base strength by 20%. That number would increase as the world itself stabilized and increased in size. 
 The information ended with the two methods to expand the world. The first was to find the best elemental materials or beasts to serve as the core of the dimension. The long-term method, however, was to populate the dimension with life. Animals were a good start, but the life energy they produced paled in comparison to that of Humes. 
 The life energy generated by these life forms would be absorbed, then enhanced by Yggdrasil. This would allow it to slowly expand the world so even more people could join. It was entirely possible that one day, Kashi could create an entire universe of his own... Uh-huh...
 Kashi digested all of this information with an excited grin. He looked up at Yggdrasil, then at the cocoon containing Kira. The white light wriggled every now and then, a sign of the life within it. In Kashi's eyes, it somehow resembled a maggot or caterpillar. 
 "I'll be waiting," Kashi promised with a smile. Moments later only the rustling of grass remained. Kashi had returned to the real world with an urge to destroy—er, test out his new powers.

 

Chapter 17.1: Order in Chaos

          
 Nama Woods
 14th Banem 1092
 Ever since trees rose around the forest to form an impenetrable barrier, its boundaries had become a natural tourist spot. Adventurers from far and wide often traveled there to test their strength against the rumored impenetrable wall. Some eager adventurers had even begun a game of seeing who could cut deepest into the trees. The freakish regenerative ability of the trees meant there would forever be opportunities for someone to give it a go.
 This morning, hundreds of adventurers gathered outside Nama Woods like always. However, only a handful was examining the tree-wall. Most of the adventurers stared at plumes of dust that rose to the sky from beyond the wall with fear. The dust clouds were often accompanied by loud explosions and loud creaking and crashing sounds of falling trees.
 These onlookers were seasoned adventurers. They instantly recognized the sounds of battle. But, if that was the case, what kind of monsters were these, that were capable of damaging this cursed forest? Furthermore, the collisions sounded like sticks of dynamites concurrently going off.
 The adventurers were grateful for the wall. There was a good chance those monsters would have made it to their leveling grounds if it wasn't for this wall. They could only pray those monsters left the confines of the forest.
 BOOM!
 Within the forest, the beings referred to as monsters flitted chaotically amongst the treetops. At first sight, it seemed to be a case of one chasing and the other fleeing. However, closer inspection revealed that though the pursuer seemed to be in control of the situation, none of their attacks ever actually hit the fleeing party.
 The pursuing figure let out a frustrated roar and kicked hard kicked against a tree trunk. It shot out like a bullet, quickly closing in on the fleeing figure. Contrary to what one would expect, it swiped at the air before it reached its target.
 Large scythe-like wind blades shot out. The fleeing figure quickly took a step back then kicked itself onto a tree behind it. The jump took it over the wind blades. The smaller figure did not care that its attack missed. It rapidly rotated in place with a loud shout. Dozens of wind blades erupted randomly, slicing up anything in their path.
 The larger figure did not panic under the dense, net-like bombardment. It seemed to shake in place, and the wind blades harmlessly passed through its body. The shaking movement was actually as a result of its feet shifting rapidly within a small radius. Its movements were so quick, it left several afterimages in its path. It was these afterimages that were attacked by the blades.
 The little figure did not seem shocked by the result. A silhouette of a man-sized lion's head appeared behind it as it quickly let out a massive roar. A massive shockwave boomed from her mouth.
 The larger figure could not dodge this large-scale attack. It raised its hand in response. The epicenter of the shockwave crashed against the outstretched hand. Boom! The ensuing explosion sent rubble and dirt flying in all directions. The large figure leaked a smile as it took a step back and leaned its head backward.
 Swish!
 The dodge could not have come at a more perfect time. Taking advantage of the dust, the little figure had rushed underneath the larger figure. It used this opportunity to swipe upward, aiming for the exposed chin. Unfortunately, its movements were read. The little figure spun in place, her jump leaving her suspended in the air for a moment.
 The world seemed to slow down as the 'monsters' regarded each other.
 "You've improved," Rider remarked with a smile as he examined the little werewolf.

Zuri, dressed in a simple T-shirt and shorts was hardly recognizable. The little girl had completed the bloodline inheritance and its effects were beyond anything Rider had imagined. Zuri's unique ability [Beast Soul Possession] was even more tyrannical than Rider had estimated. Beast Soul Possession suppressed and mutated the bloodline to suit Zuri.
 In Rider's initial calculations, the werewolf gene would overwrite all the beast souls Zuri currently had. This was normal because werewolves were cursed to be unable to use magic. But this was no big loss. In return for the inability to use magic, werewolves had an absurd amount of natural ki. This ki, if utilized well could achieve just as much destruction as any magic-based attack.
 To put it in perspective, take [Meteor], one of the most iconic large-scale magic attacks. In the right hands, [Meteor] was capable of wiping out an entire city in one swoop. This was the undisputed deadliness of magic. Its only downside was the long cast-time. On the other hand, a warrior with the right amount of ki could unleash a torrent at attacks at the same time on the very same city. The destruction would take a little more time, but there was no wait time between attacks. This was the terror of Ki.
 [Beast Soul Possession] took all the good parts of being a werewolf: ki, reflexes, strength, speed, ferocity and discarded the magic penalty. As a result, a contradictory existence was born: a werewolf with the ability to cast magic. Of course, in Zuri's case, she lacked the discipline to study magic. Hence the advantage showcased itself in her maintained ability to channel souls.
 The werewolf gene did not only manifest internally. Its effects could also be seen in Zuri's external physiology. Most noticeably was her hair, which had turned snow-white. Initially, Zuri had been very upset because of this. She was sad because she did not look like Kashi anymore. It had taken a whole day of cajoling from a weary Rider before she finally cheered up. Even then, it was only because he said that Kashi already had a black wolf by his side. This way, she could be his special 'white wolf.'
 Zuri's hair was not the only change. She had also grown a few inches taller and her muscles had become more defined. Angled features boosted her natural untamed, ferocious aura, making her appear more dangerous, yet even more so beautiful. There were rumors that the werewolf and vampire genes had an effect of beautifying their kind. This rumor appeared to be true, at least in Zuri's case.
 However, the most striking difference appeared when Zuri activated the werewolf gene and transformed. Snow-white fur sprouted on her skin, covering her arms, chest and abdominal region. Little tufts of fur also formed around the back of her calf. Her hands and feet predictably grew a size larger, turning bony and long with claws at the end. Zuri's facial features largely remained the same except for subtle tweaks to her bone structure that made her appear even more brutal.
 It was this brutal form that Rider was currently looking at. He raised his hand as Zuri spun in place. Her surprise kick struck his palm. Zuri was not deterred by this. She quickly unleashed a chaotic storm of punches and kicks. The random attacks were easily blocked by Rider. Without warning, his hand clamped around her arm.
 Zuri froze. Clearly, she had not planned on what she would do in the event her attack was interrupted. With a flick of his wrist, Rider slammed her onto the earth. The ground cracked beneath the force of Zuri's back. The poor daeben struggled to gasp for air as she had the breath knocked out of her.
 Rider stood over her, arms folded. "You're still too chaotic," Rider admonished. "Random attacks are good for confusing the enemy. But there's no use if even you don't know what's coming next." Rider watched as Zuri scrambled to her feet and pulled away from him. Aside from the initial shock, she was completely fine. A smile tugged on the corner of his lips as he recalled another woman with a similar pose. "Someone once told me, "Order without Chaos is Stagnation. Chaos without Order is Extinction." It is fine to be as chaotic as you want, but you yourself must always have something you are looking to achieve with your attacks or else you won't know what to do when someone breaks your attack."

  
 Rider shook his head. "To think I would ever quote that man." Rider looked at Zuri, suddenly awash with nostalgia. Ah, really she was too similar. "Do you want to hear a story?"
 ****
   
 Over a Millennium Ago,
 NetherRealm.
 The battles within the Netherrealm were never-ending. Countless brave warriors on both sides often made their names through spectacular battles known only to perish soon after. It was quite shocking then, when a previously unknown trio took the Netherrealm by storm. They slaughtered anything and anyone in their path with frightening ease, lending them the nickname of the 'demon trio.' It was telling that although the trio was officially on the side of light, none of the warriors on the side of 'light' ever sought them out for a team-up.
 The trio's dominance in the Netherrealm was even more puzzling when one considered the fact that they were lead by a human. However, none in the Netherrealm dared to underestimate this human. The red-haired monster was the most feared of the trio. Not a single soul who met his blade had lived to tell the tale.
 The stronger figures in the Netherrealm had begun to take note of these rising stars. The weaker combatants consoled themselves. Now that the demon trio had captured the eyes of the higher-ups, it was only a matter of time before they were eliminated. It had been the same with all the previous rising stars. Nothing would be different this time.
 The demon trio, seemingly oblivious to the commotion they had caused in the Netherrealm was lounging at the top of a mountain. The red-haired leader, the famed Razznik Y'Terlow, 'Terror of Zytra', sat at the highest point of the mountain, on a large boulder, casually polished the edge of his sword with a dragon's tooth.
 Below Razznik, resting against the boulder with his nose buried in a book, was a similarly red-haired, handsome cerulean vampire. The man was Lucius Ludarac, the famous hybrid son of Dracula, King of Vampires, and Alice, sister to Lucian, King of the Werewolves.
 The third member, Zeno, daughter of Skyrm danced around on the mountain, recklessly punching and kicking. Evidently, this was supposed to be some form of kata, but she did not have the patience to go through the traditional, systematic, slow method. Her mana and indiscriminately blasted all over the mountaintop. However, both Lucius and Razznik had placed a barrier around themselves so her attacks did not disturb them.
 Some moments passed, then Zeno, overcome by boredom, appeared next to Razznik. She bent over, looking at the sword in his hand. "What are you doing?"
 "Sharpening my sword," Razznik replied.
 "You've been doing that for over an hour," Zeno complained. "Aren't you bored?"
 "Important things always take the longest time," Razznik stated. "This is also a form of mental training. You should try it sometime."
 "No way!" Zeno adamantly refused. "That's too boring."
 Zeno knew all too well that talking to Razznik any further was a dead end. She jumped down and landed next to Lucius. She pushed down on the notebook so she could see Lucius' face. "Hey, what're you reading?"
 Lucius looked up from his book. "Genesis," he said, pointing at the golden print on the red cover.
 Flames enveloped Zeno's right hand as she glared at the smug hybrid. "I can read shithead! I'm asking what the book's about."
 Lucius chuckled as he shut the book and sat up. "It tells a riveting tale about a rebellious youth, who in his quest to right society's wrongs, is forced to perform some truly despicable acts. There's a bit of romance in there too, but I especially enjoy the poli..."

Pfft!
 "I'm sorry!" Zeno rapidly apologized as she rapidly tried to stifle her laughter. Unfortunately, the harder she tried to control it, the worse her laughter got. She eventually gave up trying to control herself. She gave in to the laughter, clutching her stomach as she crouched in front of Zeno, and continually patted his shoulder. "Ah, sorry, sorry! You're just too cute."
 Dark clouds hung over Lucius's head. "What amuses you?"
 "Rebellious youth? Isn't that the same plot of the last three books you read?" Zeno laughed. "Do you love yourself that much? Little rebel Lulu?" Zeno teased as she got to her feet. She walked away from Lucius, as she let out a cheerful sigh. "You're so predictable. It's no wonder you're so predictable in battle."
 "I resent that," Lucius shouted as he shot to his feet. "I am not predictable! Certainly more so in battle."
 "Heh, you don't even realize how predictable you are," Zeno challenged with a shrug of her shoulder. "You fight like you're reading a manual. I can block all your moves with my eyes closed." Zeno looked up at Razznik. "I'm not wrong, am I?" Razznik grunted. "See, Razz agrees with me."
 "He grunted!" Lucius pointed out. "That could mean a thousand things."
 "It means 'Lulu's an open book'," Zeno confidently postulated.
 "I'm not going to argue with you," Lucius stated with a snort. "I battle with order and form. I battle with a plan, something you and your chaotic form will never understand. I've seen you fight. All your attacks depend on luck to land. Sure, you have managed to bully all the weak grunts we've met so far, but any decent warrior with a good form will crush you to pieces. Right, Razznik?"
 Razznik grunted once again.
 "Hear that?" Lucius teased with a snarky grin. "Now, that is a grunt of approval."
 "It was the exact same thing!" Zeno shouted. "I knew you would say that! Like I said, predictable. You might say I need to depend on luck, but my enemies never know where the next attack will come from. Unlike you."
 "Hmph, the world is ruled by Order," Lucius argued. "Everything must follow the rules. Fighting included. Attempting to go against order will only create chaos."
 "Shows what you know," Zeno retorted. "Everything began from chaos. Chaos is the natural form of the world. Trying to suppress chaos is stupid."
 "There is no need to argue so much," Razznik interrupted. Blazing red eyes coldly regarded the arguing duo as he placed the dragon tooth back in his inventory. "You are both wrong."
 Zeno scoffed. "What gives you the right to say that?"
 "I..." Razznik pointed at himself. "...am stronger than you both," he finished, pointing at both of them.
 "Those fools calling you leader must have gone to your head." Lucius cracked his knuckles. "To think you actually believe yourself stronger than me."
 "Belief is not necessary when fact exists." Razznik rose to his feet, balancing the sword on his shoulder. "Both of you come. I will be generous and teach you the errors of your respective paths."
 Lucius turned to Zeno. "I do not know about you, but I have wanted to smack those eyes black and blue for quite some time."
 "For once, we agree," Zeno said with gritted teeth. "Let's knock some sense into him."
 Razznik stood on the boulder, glaring down at the duo beneath him. He raised his left hand. With a short wave, he commanded, "Come."
 BOOM!
 The mountaintop exploded as three gargantuan aurae burst into the sky, heralding a battle like no other.
 

 ****************
 A/N: Hey Guys! Haven't done one of these in a few chapters. That's mostly cuz with my new schedule I mostly end up finishing these chapters around 11-12 at night. So, how are y'all finding the faster releases? I'm really enjoying it myself. Feels good bringing out about three chapters in a week. Funny thing I noticed. The previous chapter 16 came to over 8000 words in total. Previously, my average chapters were around 3,500 to 4000 words. So, these shorter chapters are allowing me to put out approximately two of my previous chapters out per week.
 So, for those who prefer reading the longer chapters, you could (although I would personally prefer you didn't, lol) always wait till the end of the week and read the full chapter in one go. It would satisfy the long chapter urge.
 Alright, that aside, how do you guys like the new book cover? I'll put it down in the Picture of the Day for those who can't really see it that well. I love the first one, but it was for the Henri saga. I've been meaning to update it for a while, but couldn't find the right picture. Found one today, and I quickly designed a new cover for this current mini-arc. Hope you guys like it.
 ******************
 Picture of the Day
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 *sigh* I need to get back to FFXIV  Realm Reborn Online. That game was/is so awesome. That and Guild Wars 2 are the only online MMOs I've ever fully enjoyed... oh, wait there was a short stint at Elsword. But I played that mostly for the PvP. Twas mad fun!

 

Chapter 17.2: Chaos in Order

BOOM!

 The mountaintop exploded as three gargantuan aurae burst into the sky, heralding a battle like no other.
 Bzzt!!!
 Dark clouds gathered overhead as three oppressive aurae burst into the skies. Dense mana and ki charged the atmosphere, rendering it thick and heavy. Peals of lightning flashed in the sky, illuminating the trio levitating in the air.
 Razznik brandished his sword, a hard gaze leveled at the two opponents. Lucius was certainly not an easy foe by any means. The hybrid clearly took this seriously as he had adopted his werewolf form. Thick, snow-white white fur covered his back, abdomen, and sections of his arms and legs. Unlike other werewolves, however, his facial features did not alter much, preserving his calm, noble demeanor.
 Zeno, on the other hand, adopted her draconian form. She grew a pair of beautiful purple wings and a deadly tail. A pair of curling horns on her forehead gave her a ferocious vibe boosted by a sardonic, toothy grin that screamed bloody murder.
 Razznik did not pay any heed to their transformation. "I said co—"
 "Watch me!" Zeno roared with excitement. She disappeared.
 Razznik instantly shifted to the left and placed the flat of his blade on his right side. Bang! As expected, Zeno appeared at his right, a powerful right kick blocked by the blade. Zeno was not shocked by this block. Such a simple attack would never phase Razznik. As her leg bounced off the sword, her right hand, wrapped in pulsing dragon ki smashed down.
 "Block this!" The dragon laughed.
 "Too easy," Razznik snorted. He shifted the sword out of the path and caught the blow with his left. Boom! A hurricane erupted behind the swordsman, shattering mountains in its path. Razznik's angry red eyes blazed as he squeezed the fist.
 Zeno pulled back, instantly retrieving her hand from Razznik's grip. "How about this!?" She suddenly erupted with a thousand punches and kicks. She was too quick, often appearing above, behind or below Razznik. She delivered hundreds of blows in the span of a few seconds, but Razznik's sword easily kept pace with her.
 The clashes evoked images of Armageddon, each blow emitting thunderous sounds that echoed for several miles. The sparks from their clashes sparked a massive wildfire in the forest below, but neither of them cared.
 "Too wild." Razznik snorted. He suddenly tossed his sword to the front and punched at it. Surprisingly, Zeno appeared just in front of him, already throwing out a punch. Her fist smashed the sword's face, but Razznik's fist hit the other side at precisely the same time. Roiling ki traveled along the swordsman's arm. Somehow, the ki channeled through the blade without harming it in the slightest.
 BOOM!
The ki exploded upon collision with Zeno's dragon ki. The restless dragon was sent flying back by the force. "Not yet!" Zeno roared and took a deep breath. Half a second later, a fireball the size of a football field launched out of her mouth with the speed of a bullet.
 Razznik did not have the time to retrieve his sword. This was of no consequence. He twirled his fingers and the blade rapidly rotated in place. The blade had his ki embedded in it at all times. The blade's ki confronted the fireball, instantly shattering the fireball into large clusters of embers.
 Razznik's brows did not relax despite blocking the fireball. A microsecond after the fireball was dispersed, with the embers still flying out, a fur covered hand smashed against the sword. In the next microsecond, the owner of that hand confronted Razznik directly.
 Razznik cocked his head to the right. Lucius' right hand brushed Razznik's cheeks as it burst past. A heavy gale blew out, instantly killing the forest fire everywhere it passed. In return, however, trees and rocks were instantly uprooted and pulverized to dust.

Unlike Zeno, Lucius already had a thousand moves planned out in the event he missed. The hand that brushed past Razznik's cheek opened up and clawed its way back. His left knee also shot up at exactly the same time.
 Razznik ducked. Lucius' right hand missed him, but he put himself directly in the path of Lucius' knee. It was too late to dodge. Razznik's palms crossed over his chest. Lucius' knee crashed into his palm. The force blasted Razznik upward where he was met with Lucius' left arm, charged with glowing wolf ki.
 Razznik managed to spin in place and once again block the blow with his palms. However, the force still sent him crashing to the earth.
 BOOM! BOOM! 
 Razznik hit the earth at the same time as his sword. A massive crater formed around the swordsman at the epicenter. The sword cleaved the mountain in two and crashed several dozens of meters beneath the earth.
 The sword's energy obliterated everything within three miles. This set off a catastrophic chain reaction that ultimately resulted in the awakening of a dormant volcano. Unbeknownst to everyone on the surface, rivers of lava swiftly funneled their way up the path cleaved open by the sword.
 On the surface, Razznik. He raised his head to meet a large, clawed hand reaching for his face. "Predictable," Razznik admonished. He grabbed the arm with his right hand.
 Bam!
 Lucius did not have time to experience his shock before he was slammed onto the ground. The ground caved beneath the force and Lucius was forced to gasp for breath.
 "Order Without Chaos is Stagnation."
 Lucius barely had time to process what that phrase meant before a dark sole consumed his vision. "Shcuck!" The proud vampire swore and rolled to the side. Just in time too as Razznik's boot struck the earth.
 Boom!
 The earth shook like it had been hit by a megaton earthquake. Unable to withstand the strian, it split in two, forming a mile-long ravine.
 Lucius was blasted away by subsequent shockwaves. This bastard is striking to kill! Lucius angrily slammed the ground and hopped to his feet. If Razznik wanted to play things seriously, he would return the favor. He charged at Razznik, only to find Zeno had already beaten him to the punch.
 Razznik smirked as seven identical Zenos, each with flames wrapped around their limbs attacked him at the same time from all directions.
 He was familiar with this technique. It was definitely not as shallow as a simple clone technique, or the afterimages Phantom Thieves used to deceive their enemies. These bodies were all the real Zeno, each containing just a little less power than the original body. The only thing equally shared among them was the original pool of mana. But in the case of a monster like Zeno, that did not mean anything.
 When one divided infinity by 7 what would they get?
 Zeno evidently took this battle seriously. Her eyes were wild with joy as she roared, "Wild enough for you!?" She did not wait for Razznik to answer before the seven bodies indiscriminately punched or kicked at the swordsman.
 Looking from the outside, it was like Hell itself descended on Earth. Pillars of flames accompanied every punch and kick, some small, some large. The flames, as if alive, fed into each other, rowing exponentially within the blink of an eye. In less than the time it took to blink, the eight figures were swallowed within a giant pillar of flame that rapidly grew in size.
 Eight figures could barely be seen flitting about within the chaos, at speeds imperceptible to the human eye.
 "Adding more chaos to an already chaotic situation." Razznik's cold voice came from within the flames. "I do not blame you. Most people react the same way when something does not work the first time." Within the flames, the Zenos could not hide their shock as Razznik suddenly sped up, his fists turning into a blur even they could not follow. There was no need to mention how fast those fists were if even Zeno could not follow them. "I myself lean toward Chaos when I seek solutions to my problems..."

Whooosh...
 A storm formed around Razznik as his fists rapidly blocked and parried the Zenos' attacks with unbelievable ease. The Zenos angrily increased their speed in response to Razznik's obstinate defense. They refused to believe the seven of them could not bring down this monster.
 "However, you must be careful not to lose yourself in Chaos," Razznik continued.
 "Shut up!" Zeno roared as she clawed at his head. To her shock, Razznik completely disappeared right in front of her. The seven Zenos froze in place. They had been so engrossed in their attack that for a brief moment, their brains were muddled when their target of attack suddenly disappeared.
 In a brief moment was often the difference between life and death.
 "There is no merit to a chaotic battle if you yourself are swept up in it."
 Zeno looked up to see Razznik's fist stretched out several meters above them. "Damn!" Zeno shouted as a massive cyclone enveloped her. Razznik, this bastard was not the kind type. Normally, one would talk before attacking, giving their opponent a chance to at least counter. Razznik, on the other hand, had not only launched his attack but waited until it couldn't be dodged before speaking.
 Zeno cursed as she rapidly reformed into one body and raised a mana shield. The cyclone smacked the shield with extreme prejudice. Zeno could not stave off the force. The cyclone pushed the shield until she crashed into the earth.
 WHOOSH!
 The cyclone exploded outward upon impact with the earth. The flame pillars were instantly extinguished as the gale swept up everything in its path. What little trees remained within several miles were uprooted by the cyclone and blown away. Within moments all that was left was barren land for miles, with deep gashes in the earth telling the tale of the terror wrought.
 "Chaos Without Order is Extinction," Razznik unhurriedly finished his lecture as he dropped to the earth.
 Lucius appeared next to Zeno and helped her to her feet while casting a wary glance at Razznik. Damn, did this guy not know the concept of going easy? He was certain Zeno would have been in serious trouble if she didn't block that cyclone in time. That the felt the need to accumulate her strength in one body was proof enough of just how dangerous that move was. "Are you alright?"
 "Yes, I'm fine," Zeno replied with a grateful nod. She too cast a wary glance Razznik's way. Only now did she truly understand what Razznik meant by Order within Chaos. During their short exchange, they had both relied on chaos to attack and counter. However, while she got lost in her attack, Razznik began to accumulate energy while attacking, planning his next attack. She had no doubt in her mind that even if his move failed for any reason, he had a backup in mind.
 So, this was what was meant by Order in Chaos?
 Lucius, on the other hand, was quite sharp. Immediately Razznik caught his arm, and admonished him with 'Predictable,' he understood what Razznik was getting at. As a noble son of Dracula, he was trained in a particular set of techniques. These techniques carried the philosophy of 'Absolute Order' preached by the vampires. Till now, he had yet to face anyone who was his match in battle, so his predictability was never exposed. After all, what was the use of predicting his attacks if he could still punch through whatever shield was put up?
 This sort of brute strength to overpower predictability was fine in Earth's realm.
 However, they were now in the Netherrealm!
 You could throw a stone here and hit any number of powerful enemies. If he carried that mentality into future battles, he would one day get found out! At that time, it would be too late to wonder how and why he died.

Ah, no wonder Razznik used so much force! He wanted them to realize the danger their lives were in. Lucius could not help but look at Razznik in a brand new light. This human might be anti-social, mean-spirited, battle-hungry, mad... uh, Lucius realized there were too many bad adjectives attached to Razznik so he skipped to the praise. Despite all these considerably enormous bad qualities, Razznik was a man who looked out for his companions.
 Lucius respected that about him.
 "Supposing you two are not absolute idiots, you should have figured it out by now."
 Fuck this fucker! Give me back my goodwill! Lucius was absolutely incensed, but he forced himself to remember Razznik had just essentially saved his life, so he calmed himself.
 Razznik pointed at Lucius with his left hand. "Chaos in Order," then pointed at Zeno with his right. "...and Order in Chaos." He then clasped his palms together. "Only when you understand how to mesh Order and Chaos effectively will you truly be strong."
 Zeno and Lucius revealed ponderous looks. They digested Razznik's words, intending on slowly ruminating on their meaning over time. Indeed, this was not a concept they could completely assimilate in one moment. Even if their heads understood, it would take time for the body to follow.
 Luckily, this was the Netherrealm. There was no shortage of people to 'practice' on.
 "Tutorial's over." Razznik's cold voice dragged the duo back to reality. They stared incredulously as Razznik raised his hand. The earth began to tremble beneath their feet, accompanied by a loud rumbling sound.
 BOOM!
 Zeno and Lucius's cringed as a black sword burst out of the earth. Its arrival was celebrated by a massive lava stream shooting out of the earth as if launched by a geyser. The lava stream reached as high as thirty meters high before spreading out over miles. Rocks, small and large, flaming and bare were indiscriminately launched across the plains. Craters formed where they smashed the earth, and soon, the world was once again engulfed in flames.
 The man responsible for this chaotic scene, Razznik, remained unfazed by the destruction. His gaze remained even as the black sword flew over and nestled its hilt in his grip. Razznik's aura skyrocketed, causing the air around him to distort and shift. He pointed the blade at Zeno and Lucius. "I shall not hold back this time. Come!"
 Lucius let out a wry laugh. That was you not holding back? Despite his chuckle, he tapped his chest. A katana's hilt slowly protruded from a small vortex that appeared in his chest. He grasped the hilt and drew out a slim but long blood-red katana. He casually waved the blade to his right.
 BOOM!
 A truck-sized portion of the earth was instantly uprooted. The rock fell back to the earth, sliding back into place like it had never left. Such was the unbelievable sharpness of the strike.
 To Lucius' left, Zeno's entire body burst into blue flames. The earth beneath her feet turned to glass from the sheer searing heat. However, this was not as simple as a fire body. She had truly turned into an elemental. With this body, physical attacks were rendered utterly meaningless.
 Razznik was not fazed by the duo's transformation. The smallest of smiles tugged at the corner of his lips. "I've been waiting."
 Lucius and Zeno shared a look then nodded, swiftly coming to an agreement. Their auras also charged to the sky as they charged at the swordsman. "We're coming!"
 ************
 Present Day
 Nama Woods.

"Well, well, who won!?" Zuri questioned, jumping up and down in frustration. Rider had chosen to end the story at the climax! What kind of monster would do that!?
 "The winner isn't important." Rider laughed and patted Zuri's head. "More importantly, did you learn anything from the story?"
 "Yes! Yes!" Zuri exclaimed. Clenching her fists, she said, "Uh... um, punching and kicking is good. But, um, um... Zuri should not just punch and kick... um, um, Zuri should... plan?" Her initial confidence waned the further she spoke. By the end, it was more of a question than a statement.
 "Correct! Zuri is indeed the smartest." Rider praised. He had come to admire this simple girl. Praises like these were the best motivators for pure-hearted people like her. "You are the chaotic type. There's no need to change that. But you should also plan. It will reduce the chances of being sneak attacked by your opponent. Remember, Chaos within Order, and Order within Chaos."
 "Order in Chaos..." Zuri muttered under her breath. She said something more, but Rider could not catch it.
 "What was that?"
 "Uh..." Zuri muttered something under her breath again.
 Curious about what this young girl could be pondering so seriously about, Rider crouched so he could hear. He had just drawn level with her when a fist suddenly struck him square in the nose.
 Pow!
 "Yay! Plan! My plan worked!" Zuri excitedly celebrated. "Hehe, Zuri is indeed the smartest!" She patted Rider's shoulder, her nose drawn up with a childishly smug grin. "Don't feel bad, Grey Ojii-san, Zuri is a genius!"
 Rider stared in shock at the young girl whose sparkling eyes were searching his for approval. Her wide, innocent, almost naïve laugh unlocked a part of the hybrid he had forgotten for the longest time.
 Rider threw back his head and laughed hard. He bellowed until tears began to stream down his eyes. No one knew if these were tears of joy or tears of sorrow. A thousand years of buried emotions erupted in one moment. Every barrier he had put up in the past millennium were smashed to pieces by this little girl. No, it should be said, she simply bypassed the barriers. This was the scary ability of innocence.
 Zuri could not know all of this. All she knew was that she punched the grey ojii-san and he started crying. She panicked. "Zuri's sorry! Sorry, Ojii-san. Don't cry, please. Zuri won't do it again. Please stop crying..." Soon she too began to cry. She wrapped her hands around Rider's neck. "Stop crying. Don't worry. It'll be fine. Zuri promises."
 The warm tears on Rider's cheek woke him from his stupor. He quickly composed himself and began patting Zuri's back. He consoled her, promising her he was fine now. He continually thanked her, but she only let go after he had promised about a hundred times that he was okay. Even then, it wasn't until he started laughing that she finally believed him and released him.
 Zuri released her hold and sized up Rider, skepticism in her eyes. "Zuri did not know Grey Ojii-san is so weak. Zuri will try to control Zuri's strength next time."
 Rider nearly spat blood. Weak? Him? If he was weak, was there anyone alive who dared to call themselves strong? The hybrid did not know whether to laugh or cry. In the end, he chuckled and patted Zuri's head. "Do you want to go on a trip? We can train as we travel."
 Zuri's eyes lit up. "Yeah! Where are we going?"
 Rider's gaze turned to the west. "I need to see an old friend..."
 

 **************
 **************
 A/N: So, not exactly a boss battle in the end, so much as it was a lesson by sempai. But some teasers for these end-game level guys, and their terrain changing abilities. P.S: The Netherrealm's terrain is much stronger than Earth realm's. So, take everything here and upscale it by a factor of 100. That's what would happen if such characters were to battle in Earth realm. It's no surprise these guys are usually confined to the Netherrealm.
 

 **************
 Video of the Day
 This one's a song. For some reason, it resonated with me in a way few ever have. Really felt like it could be the theme song for Parallel, or for Razznik in particular since that's who   immediately came to mind the first time I heard the song.
 
   
     
       
       
     
   
   
 

 

Episode 18: Foundations of Government

Kirkcour Woods,
 Northern Rosendun,
 16th Banem 1092.
 Two days had passed since the events at Suvron's Gate. Since then, Kashi, Shadow, and Larsial had been wandering through the forests north of Rosendun in search of the centaurs Absalon had seen. In regards to the events at Suvron's Gate, initially, Kashi had intended on lying to Larsial. However, he changed his mind when Shadow informed him of her deductions.
 Kashi was impressed by Larsial's ability to discern the nature of his inner world. For most people, having such an intelligent person by their side would lead to them becoming wary and suspicious. However, for Kashi, it was the opposite. The more intelligent Larsial was, the happier he was. This was because, with most people, he would have to rely on somehow winning over their hearts. However, for extremely intelligent people, it was often enough to convince their minds to begin with. After their minds had been conquered, he could then look into conquering their hearts.
 Kashi did not need Larsial to like him. He only needed her to pick him over the daeben. This was the reason he had asked her to shadow him. Following this line of thought, he explained the summary of his abilities to the both of them, leaving out his ability to manipulate the elements.
 Of course, another reason Kashi could so confidently expose his ability was that it wasn't something that could easily be countered. Whether it was the improved regeneration or muscle strength, they were both things that an enemy could not manipulate in battle. Also, Kashi adding life to his world was also something they could not manipulate or stop. At worst, the enemy would send assassins to hunt him down. But was that any different from what they would do regardless? As the guild leader of one of the largest guilds in the continent, it was only natural that he would be the target of assassinations. It was just unfortunate that Kashi was often a solitary wanderer hence it was immensely difficult for these assassins to track down his movements.
 This was also why Kashi did not tell Shadow and Larsial about his ability to manipulate elements. Now that was an ability that could change the battlefield completely. It was better to keep that one a secret for as long as possible. Only then would it be even more effective against their enemies.
 Following his explanation of his abilities, the trio traveled down to a large forest north of Rosendun called Kirkcour Woods. Kirkcour Woods was a dark forest home to many high-leveled creatures and monsters. The trees were robust and thick, often climbing as high as fifty to sixty meters high. Tightly-knit canopies blocked off sunlight, casting a dreary atmosphere over the forest. Eerie silence ruled like a mage had cast [Silence] on the entire forest.
 Absalon had reported meeting the centaurs on the outskirts of this forest. Absalon had not gone to find the village because of time restraints, but the centaurs had assured him they lived within the forest. The centaurs his troops encountered were scouts sent out by the village to seek out adventurers for help. Absalon was not the first group they had asked for help nor would they be the last.
 Prior to Absalon's arrival, a couple of adventurers had volunteered. Unfortunately, all the volunteers subsequently perished in the forest. Luckily for other curious people, a few of the adventurers were Summoned. One of the Summoned spread on the real world forums that the monsters in the forest were around Level 150. Analysts quickly realized that if the beasts were Level 150, then more than likely, the centaurs had to be around that level to have lived for so long in the forest. However, now there was a threat which even these Level 150 centaurs were completely helpless against.
 Unfortunately for Kashi, by the time he arrived at the location specified by Absalon, there were no traces of the centaurs. Fearing they had switched locations, he even checked along the forest's perimeter, but after checking several miles in both directions and still not finding anything, he was forced to accept the reality that the scouts had retreated into the forest for some reason.

Kashi was not pleased with this revelation. To his knowledge, there were three major possible reasons as to why the scouts had retreated and none of them were good for him. The first, the centaurs had somehow found a way to defeat the Blight. While this was good for the centaurs, it removed the advantage the daeben had of arriving as a rescuer during dire circumstances. Secondly, there was a chance that the scouts had finally found adventurers strong enough to combat the Blight. This would mean the battle was still ongoing, but Kashi would also be forced to compete with another group for their affection. Worse yet, his new plan for the centaurs would be put in jeopardy if another party was involved. The last, and perhaps worst possibility for the centaurs was that the Blight had become so terrible that they had no choice but to call back their scouts because they needed every available hand just to survive. Naturally, as long as the situation was not irreversible, this was Kashi's best case scenario.
 Kashi could only pray to the gods that he would get some of that Light Novel Protagonist luck, and arrive just in time to save the day. As for the centaurs that either had to die or be injured for such a scenario to arise... He would raise an incense for them.
 Unfortunately, even after searching through the forest for two whole days, Kashi's group had yet to find any trace of the centaurs. However, Kashi was not discouraged by his. First, the forest was quite large. Their current cycle of leveling, sparring, resting and exploring meant they could not cover too much ground in a day. Furthermore, the complex terrain allowed Drixlia to gain some experience running through bumpy terrain, avoiding and jumping over obstacles.
 Kashi resolved himself to the realities of a long search.
 ***
 The Royal Palace,
 Riven, Rosendun.
 At one end of Rosendun, the Guildmaster of the Hopeful Maggots had just resigned himself to a long wait. Meanwhile, at the other end of Rosendun, within the most important location in all of Riven, the vice-Guildmaster of the Hopeful Maggots had similarly resigned herself to a long meeting.
 Leila Lightwood, who had just recently been awarded an official role of 'minister' in Rosendun as a reward for her excellent achievement during the expedition to Serisis, was once again the center of attention within Rosendun Politics. This time, she had taken advantage of a summit of delegates from the three allied nations: Rosendun, Merriheim (Aygorzi) and Serisis, to submit her latest proposal.
 Naturally, Leila had already taken the necessary steps by presenting it to King Parissius and his ministers beforehand. Only after they approved it, did she then move forward and present the documents at the summit. This summit which had originally been scheduled to last for an hour had now dragged on for over eight hours. Worse yet, while other ministers could take time off to take a break or get something to eat, Leila was constantly on the move, explaining the document's details to the confused ministers.
 Leila did not dare to slack in her duty, as this was perhaps the most important piece of legislation she would ever be involved in. It would form the basis of the Rosendun Empire and everything it stood for.
 The documents explained in detail, plans for the formation of three major branches of government, and twelve subsidiary departments, or 'ministries' beneath them.
 Leila used the model of modern-day democratic branches of government. Usually, in most democratic countries, the government were made up of the Executive, Legislative and Judicial Branches. The Executive branch of government usually had the President at the top, with millions of people working with him to enforce the laws of the country. The Legislative branch was the branch of government concerned with actually creating and editing laws for the country. In some countries, this branch was split into Senate and House of Representatives.

The Senate usually had an equal number of candidates per state, intended to represent the interests of each individual state. Longer term times were also established to ensure the elected Senators spent less time focusing on reelection and more on actual legislation. On the other hand, the House of Representatives were usually more of a popularity contest. The terms were shorter, with some states having far more reps than other states. The House of Representatives was intended to be closer to the people, reflecting the desires of the common man to the lawmakers. Unfortunately, in recent times, both parties blended into each other so much, it was hard to discern any difference between them. Worse yet, both parties were susceptible to corruption as large companies often paid to have their interests brought forward rather than the interest of the people.
 The final branch was the Judicial Branch. Those in this branch were tasked with judging anyone who was suspected to have broken any rules in the nation's constitution. Often, there existed a High, or Supreme Court, which was the highest level of court and a group of lower level courts. Decisions passed in the Supreme Court usually became standards for lower courts which handled everyday issues to follow.
 Leila applied a few subtle changes to the current template in order to combat the two biggest issues: the corruption at the legislative level, and the problem of autocracy vs democracy. This was a fantasy world with kings and queens, not presidents. Autocracy was the rule of thumb here, not democracy and Leila had no plans to change it.
 Recent events in the real world had proven that even though democracy was often times better than autocracy, an excellent democratic leader would never be able to achieve a tiny percentage of what a good autocratic leader could achieve. In a democratic structure, the President of a nation often had far less power than most people realized. Any policies he intended to enact had to be passed through the Senate before it would be approved. While this served as a perfect check against crazy Presidents who wanted to eliminate half of their population, it also hampered the progress of even more good Presidents. This was because, as mentioned earlier, many members of Senate were 'appointed' by top companies. These Senators often prevented the passing of any bills that would damage the interests of their benefactors regardless of whether it benefitted the public or not.
 When the party system was added to this already complicated situation, the waters just got murkier. Often times senators on opposing sides would block or push ahead policies to either make their parties look more competent or reduce the chance of the opponent appearing more competent. In situations like these, the well-being people took a complete backseat.
 This kind of environment could slide during peaceful times. Most humans were not too interested in fighting their government beyond a little shouting or complaining every now and then as long as their lives were not in danger. However, if this sort of environment were to exist during wartime, it would not be hard for enemies to turn the disillusioned hearts of a nation's citizens against the nation.
 And what was happening in Destia right now?
 War, war, and even more War.
 Although not yet on the scale of the Sengoku Jidai (Warring Period) of ancient Japan or China, the continent of Destia was certainly in the middle of one of its greatest warring period. Major players had risen up here and there, eager to make a name for themselves. This naturally meant there were battles constantly occurring on several battle fronts. Add monsters attacking settlements to the mix, and you had a volatile situation that needed to be handled with special care. As such, it was imperative that the eyes of the Royal Palace were always on the people at every corner of their territory and responding in time to issues, not embroiled in pointless debates and blocking themselves from getting any actual thing done.

It was not like Leila thought autocracy was better than democracy. ON the contrary, autocracy was a roll of the dice. A good roll would produce a great leader who would introduce a couple of decades of prosperity for a nation, whereas a bad roll would introduce an inept, cruel or greedy leader who would cripple the nation for decades. For the current situation, however, an autocracy was far more suited to the environment than a democracy.
 Naturally, it helped that Leila personally knew the current Rosendun King to be an excellent roll of the dice. As such, she did not hesitate when making her changes.
 The first change she made was to eliminate the existence of a president. Instead, the King was placed above the three branches of government. He had the executive right to veto any decisions passed by the three branches. At the same time, he also had the right to pass any personal decisions without consulting with the branches.
 Leila surmised this simple change would a peculiar ripple effect on the legislative branch in particular. In the end, the idea behind the House of Reps and Senate was an admirable and good one, so she chose not to abolish those two. However, although the Representatives and Senate could still be 'sponsored' by the rich, their influence in actual legislation would greatly diminish. This was because laws and policies could now only be proposed by the Legislative Branch.
 The King reserved the sole right to pass any law into the constitution.
 This would greatly reduce the influence the rich had on policymaking. This was because, if the King ever found out a legislative member's arguments were influenced by some rich person, he could have that person removed from the Senate, or completely ignore that person's views. Putting all the legislative power in the King's hand should greatly reduce the corruption. After all, how do you bribe the man that has everything?
 Leila and Kashi had also long since taken another possible issue into account: the issue of a poor Crown. If the King's coffers were low, rich barons and upstarts could pressure the king into doing what they want. This was one of the major reasons why right from the beginning, Kashi had included the Crown in every business the Maggots had started.
 Furthermore, the Hopeful Maggots were doing something no one else was doing at present: Paying taxes to the crown. Currently, Royal Families in Destia earned their income from four major sources: First, income from lands directly owned by the crown. Second, income from feudal lords. Third, income from an annual tax conducted to bolster troops and finally, fines levied against criminals.
 The problem with this system was that it depended too much on the Crown owning vast amounts of land. Furthermore, dishonest feudal lords could easily shortchange the Crown, thereby reducing its coffers, and finally, the annual tax usually put a large strain on the poorer citizens.
 The case of Rosendun's Royal Family was especially dire, as up until a few months ago, the Crown had been missing for over a decade. Save seizing by force, it was difficult to lay claim to a lot of the land which brave men and women had fought to reclaim from the wilds by themselves.
 To remedy this issue, Leila introduced the movable property tax, sales tax, and income tax. Put simply, the sales tax stated that a certain percentage of Syros from every good sold would be collected by the retailer(seller) and sent to the government. The movable property tax or personal property tax stated that all items in a home not nailed to the floor was a moveable property and could be taxed. In the proposed model, regular citizens would pay taxes on carriages while businesses would pay taxes based on the amount of tangible and non-tangible objects used in the business building which could be moved around. Finally, the income tax would replace the annual tax. The income tax would take a percentage of every citizen and company's profits every month and give it to the government.

With all these steady sources of income, there was little to no chance of the Crown going broke as long as businesses were flourishing and citizens were buying stuff. Needless to say, the influence of the rich on the Crown would also be greatly diminished as the Crown would have all the money it needs to both uphold the needs of its people and also allow the King to 'live the life.'
 Of course, there was nothing anyone could do if a greedy King who wanted all the money in the world was to rise up. They could only pray the greed demon, Ema Ages would claim such a King as soon as possible.
 The Hopeful Maggots already led the charge in the realm of taxation. Not only had they made sure to include the Crown as a beneficiary of every business venture, Miote ensured they kept track of every product sold. 13% of all revenue was sent to the government. Rosendun's ministers had seen the benefit of this for themselves and were more than eager to have this passed.
 The only issue arose when debating the prices for the respective taxes. After hours of debate, the ministers finally settled on 14% for the sales tax and 40% for the citizen income tax. The income tax for business was set at a fixed rate of 20%. This was to encourage business owners as they would have more funds to play around with. After tussling back and forth, they finally decided to have regional lords determine the property tax for each of their principalities.
 The income tax was seemingly exorbitant at first, but its purpose was to facilitate the twelve departments. These departments were the Department of Agriculture, Department of Commerce, Department of Defense (Military Department), Department of Education, Department of Research, Department of Health, Department of Transportation, Department of Justice, Department of Labor, Department of Treasury, Department of Construction, and Department of Internal Affairs.
 The Department of Agriculture ensured the country's livestock, wildlife and plants were always at an optimal level. They would oversee the cultivation or breeding of plants and wildlife respectively. They would also facilitate and monitor trade of agricultural products.
 The Department of Commerce oversaw all trades in the country. They would ensure that patents, copyrights etc, were filed and followed properly. As such this Department would closely work with the newly established Merchant Alliance to monitor trades between merchants and citizens.
 The Department of Defense were all branches of military. They were tasked with defending the nation or attacking enemies in times of war.
 The Department of Education was one Leila was personally proud of. After a heavy push, she had managed to ensure free education up to sixteen years of age for all citizens regardless of income bracket. The soon-to-be established Academy would be the first of many to be set up around the allied nations. Furthermore, she had made it her mission to supervise the formation of the Academy to ensure the children were not forced to study for the sake of studying. This was a world with magic, dragons, music, songs, ale, and brave heroes. What a waste it would be if children's imaginations were killed in the Academy.
 The Department of Research oversaw the technological advancements of the country. They would do their best to encourage research into new, untested ideas. Leila envisioned multiple grants handed out by this department to promote researchers with revolutionary ideas.
 Getting free healthcare was another one of Leila's priority. The proposed Department of Health would work closely with the mages guild and apothecaries to hire people from both sides. Apothecaries were usually better at curing diseases and removing toxins whereas mages were better as healing injuries and removing magic-related ailments. With these two, they should be able to cover almost all types of ailments. Mages and Apothecaries working in the hospitals and clinics opened by the Department of Health would be paid directly by the government. This, and the Education Department were the major reasons for the large income tax.

The Department of Transportation oversaw the methods of transportation within and out of countries. They would ensure methods of transportation were safe for the people and ensure the right infrastructure was always in place to ensure the free-flow of citizens and goods. Naturally, this Department would work closely with the Department of Construction.
 The Department of Justice was in charge of carrying out specialized investigations into potential criminal activities and unearthing hidden threats within the countries. They would also supervise the important duty of housing indicted criminals in dungeons and prisons.
 The Department of Labor ensured the working class citizens were sufficiently remunerated for their efforts. They would also monitor the employment and unemployment rate in the country and report it. This job was especially important because unemployment was usually directly correlated to the amount of crime in a nation. In this world, most unemployed youths turned to banditry to feed.
 The Department of Treasury looked after the Nation's treasury. It handled loans given out by the crown and ensured they were paid back on time. An unofficial form of this department was already well acquainted with the Hopeful Maggots and considered them the best of partners.
 The Department of Construction supervised the construction of all infrastructure in the countries, from roads to houses, to city planning. This department would certainly become one of the busiest in the coming months as Rosendun sought to consolidate its power and develop its cities.
 The Department of Internal Affairs investigated all the other departments (and themselves) for cases of corruption and wrongful doings. It could be seen that workers in this environment would not be very welcome by the other departments. Still, they were necessary, hence their existence.
 There was one more Department, but no one spoke about it openly. This was the Intelligence Department. This department would hide in the night, compiling information on friends and foes alike. Dirty jobs like assassination and sabotage would most likely be also be handled by this secret department.
 Leila had no idea how much time had passed while she explained all these to the ministers over and over while expounding on certain details here and there. All she knew was that by the time King Parissius finally ordered for the session to come to a close, the sun had already left the sky.
 The ministers, each with their own thoughts, headed back to their homes to ponder on what they had just seen.
 Leila did not have this luxury. Soon after reaching the villa bestowed on her by the King, upon her conferment as a minister, she changed into her hunting armor and set off with Hogosha. Before she was a vice-Guildmaster, minister or schemer, she was still a gamer.
 In this world, strength mattered most. Leila would never forget that. Under the cover of night, she quickly mounted her horse and sped off towards the north in search of a good leveling spot...
 ***
 Elsewhere, an excited daeben examined a dead tree with excitement in his eyes. "Jackpot!"

 ***********
 ***********
 A/N: Shorter Chapters My ASS!
 Christ, this one took forever too complete. Unlike other chapters, there just wasn't any good breaking point, and I didn't want to post two politics chapters back to back, so... 
 Anyway, no action here, but hope you guys still enjoyed the chapter. A trip back to Social Studies and the Branches of Government... Somewhere in the middle of this chapter, I felt I went on a little rant lol... Don't blame me, please. A bit of an author tends to blend into every work of his.
 Anyway, this has been a touchy subject for me ever since I started following politics. The Democracy v Autocracy thing. Note (I don't mean military coup d'etat when I mention autocracies so let's forget about those.)
 What do you guys think? Which is better? Democracy (In its current form) or Autocracy?
 I personally still believe democracy is better, but I wish we could get rid of the party system. It is literally designed to set one end of the nation against the other. Also makes it difficult for neutrals to rise to power. It's always one end or another, and I friggin hate that..
 Anyway, this chapter took me to some dark places... let's clean those up with the picture of the day yeah?

 Picture of the Day...
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 The Centaur Deity... Ain't named him yet, but his design is just beautiful. I envy all these artists. Need to find one of my own, cuz I ain't ever getting that good with the limited amount of free time I have.

 

Chapter 19.1: The Blight (Intro)

            
 Kirkcour Woods,
 16th Banem 1092.
  The dark forest plunged into darkness at night, a few rays of the half-moon's light barely making it through the dense tree branches. An eerie silence pervaded the woods, and it was soon obvious to anyone present that this was a place devoid of life. 
 Creak!
 The sound of a twig breaking was like an ear-bursting alarm within the cold silence. However, the man whose feet had crushed the twig took another step and carelessly crushed another twig beneath his feet. He continually walked through the forest, each footstep releasing large crunching sounds that could surely be heard several dozen meters away. Despite this, the man did not seem to care as he continued his walk. He was either incredibly stupid or he had a plan.
 As someone who had maxed out [Silent Feet], it should have been more than easy for Kashi to walk through the forest without making a sound. However, the daeben purposely made as much noise as possible in order to draw out any creatures that might have been hiding. If it was not for the fact that it was far too corny, he might have started shouting and singing.
 As it was, Kashi could only walk while searching for signs of the famous centaur village or the Lv. 150 beasts the forums had talked about. He split up with Shadow and Larsial so they could cover more ground, deciding to rendezvous near the forest's entrance in four hours. Because Kashi was not confident about leaving Drixlia by himself, he had Drixlia follow while he searched.
 Roughly three of the four hours had passed since Kashi had split up with Shadow and Larsial. Kashi estimated he would need about thirty minutes to return to the rendezvous point. This was because his advance had been slow and careful as he searched for traces of Blights or centaurs. He could ride Drixlia on the way back, which would massively shorten the time.
 Kashi had begun considering his return when he suddenly came to a halt. His eyes shone with controlled excitement as he rushed ahead. He came to a stop in front of a dead tree. Its leafless tree branches and withered, grey trunk were quite eye-catching in the green forest. Kashi peeled off a piece of bark from the tree. He let out a sigh as the bark crumbled to dust. He dusted off his palm and looked beyond the tree.
 As expected, Kashi saw another dead tree just behind it. The daeben could not be sure if this was the Blight or not, but he knew the characteristics of Blights. A simple test would confirm. Kashi opened his right hand and an arrow appeared in his palm. The daeben had long since moved his weapons into the inner world because he could directly summon them out instead of having to scroll through the game's menu.
 The only caveat to this approach was that calling something from his dimension to the real world required the opening of a dimension gate. Naturally, opening a dimension gate cost mana. Luckily, for small, inanimate items such as arrows and bows, the mana cost was small to the point of negligence. With Kashi's MP recovery rate, the mana was almost instantly recovered.
 Kashi cut his left palm and dripped his blood onto the soil surrounding the dead tree then waved at Drixlia who obeyed and retreated a couple of feet backward. Yggdrasil's life energy healed the wound without leaving so much as a scar. The daeben did not pay the healing any mind as he attentively watched the blood-soaked soil.
 Kashi's brows flinched as a portion of the earth slightly shifted. It was a subtle movement. One which would surely have normally gone unnoticed. Especially in the dead of night. Unfortunately, Kashi had been watching out for precisely this tiny movement, and there was no difference between day and night to the daeben's eyes.
 Kashi did not waste a single moment after catching that movement. He instantly screamed, "Move!" as he dashed toward Drixlia.
 Drixlia turned into a blur as it sprinted off, almost seemingly leaving the daeben behind. 

BOOM!
 Kashi raced after Drixlia, looking over his shoulder just in time to see hundreds of blood-red vines as thick as a body builder's arm burst out of the earth and rapidly give chase. Wherever the vines passed, trees would instantly grey and wither, some instantly crumbling to dust. The daeben's gaze narrowed as some creatures rose from the ashes of the fallen trees. Unfortunately, he was moving too fast to confirm what exactly.
 Looking at the approaching vines, Kashi's expression turned grave, but there was a hint of a smile at the corner of his lips. This was what he had been searching for. Now that he had found a Blight, it should not prove too difficult to find the centaur village.
 Kashi eventually caught up to Drixlia who was cantering ahead, seemingly without a care for its master. Kashi jumped onto Drixlia's back and grabbed the reins. With a soft tap against the stallion's mid-riff, the stallion's speed instantly tripled and it soon disappeared into the depths of the forest, leaving the blood-red vines writhing in rage. 
 Minutes later, Kashi and Drixlia came to a stop at a small campsite. Larsial and Shadow had their hands on their daggers, only relaxing their grips when Kashi and Drixlia fully came into view. 
 Kashi hopped down and patted Drixlia on his side, a pleased smile on his face. He was more than impressed with the stallion's performance. Despite this being Drixlia's first time in this environment, it had easily maneuvered through the thistles and loose branches. Some of it was thanks to Kashi's guidance, allowing it to avoid the more dangerous paths. Still, Kashi could not make it decide where to plant its feet, especially while running. But to the daeben's pleasant surprise, Drixlia displayed its intelligence as it carefully placed its feet only in safe spots, avoiding trip hazards like low branches and high roots.
 Kashi had suspected Drixlia was studying him while they were searching the forest. Clearly, it had learned quite easily. Drixlia's intelligence strengthened Kashi's resolve to quickly upgrade its bloodline. It was not easy to find a mount as intelligent as the stallion. It was even harder to find one with which he could bond as well as he had with Drixlia.
 Kashi took out a red fruit and gave it to Drixlia. The stallion ate the fruit, then harrumphed, blowing air on Kashi's hair before leaving to join the other horses. Kashi chuckled, then patted down his hair as he walked over to Shadow and Larsial. "Find anything?"
 "Yes," Shadow reported. "I found traces of Blights roughly eighteen kilometers South-East. I did not think it was wise to advance on my own so I returned."
 Kashi looked at Larsial. "You?"
 Larsial smiled. "I did find traces of Blights, but mine was much closer. I was almost ambushed by a group of Needle Blights fifteen kilometers south of here."
 Shadow's brows rose. "Needle Blights? What are those?"
 Larsial looked at Kashi. "May I explain?"
 "Go ahead," said Kashi as he took a seat on a large root.
 "Thanks," Larsial said, then turned to Shadow. "How much do you know about Blights?" 
 "Not much," Shadow admitted.
 "Okay, I'll treat it like you've never heard of Blights." Larsial proceeded to explain the various characteristics of Blights.
 In essence, Blights were a crystallization of an ancient curse, manifested in the form of intelligent, tree-like creatures. Blights, which often looked like humanoid trees were vastly different from Treants. Blights originated from evil sources and often spread quickly through forested regions. They proliferated by contaminating any kind of plant life, which would either perish or spawn new Blights. 

There were three major classes of Blights: Needle, Twig, and Vine Blights. 
 Needle Blights were the most human-like of the Blight family and stood at anywhere between 180 – 270 centimeters (6 – 9 ft). Within the darkness of forests, it was quite easy for explorers to mistake them for another human. Needle Blights had spikes growing in clumps on their bodies. They could shoot out these needles to skewer any target. Needle Blights were quite annoying as they had the added ability to contact other Blights in the vicinity through pollens which were carried by the wind to any pollens nearby. Hence, they were also nicknamed, 'Alarm Blights.'
 Twig Blights were much smaller than Needle Blights, standing at just over 120 cm (4 ft). They were formed from numerous dry branches twisted together to assume a humanoid appearance. Twig Blights usually existed in large groups that took root when there was no prey in their immediate vicinity. Twig Blights were especially vicious because when they took root in the earth, it was very difficult to differentiate them from normal shrubbery. Fortunately, because of how dry the branches that made them were, they were quite susceptible to fire.
 Finally, Vine Blights were the kind of blight Kashi had encountered. Just as he saw, their normal form was a mass of slithering vines. They often hid underground, or just below shrubbery, waiting for unsuspecting prey. Their preferred mode of attack was to entangle and poison their prey, before launching a full attack. This kind of blights could also switch to a humanoid form by having a cluster of vines wrapped around each other. However, this form was very rarely seen. It only adopted this form to communicate with other intelligent species as this was the only form of blights capable of speech.
 "There's something else," Kashi remarked after Larsial finished her explanation. "Blights rarely occur naturally in nature. There's a high chance that there's a mastermind behind all of this. If we do not find him, the Blight will most likely never truly end."
 Larsial frowned. "Such a person must be unbelievably powerful to have something as dangerous as the Blight under his control."
 Shadow's gaze narrowed. "It does not matter how powerful he is. We just have to defeat him."
 "You make it sound so simple." Larsial chuckled and shook her head.
 "It is that simple," Kashi affirmed with a confident grin. "We find the centaurs, find the bad guy, kill the bad guy. Simple as one, two, three."
 "Lunatics," Larsial playfully admonished the duo. "I'm traveling with a bunch of lunatics."
 "The greatest heroes are often considered lunatics in their time." Kashi chuckled as he got to his feet and walked over with a stick in his hand. "More importantly, look at this." He marked an 'X' on the ground. "This is where we are." He drew a straight line southward then marked an X where he stopped. "That's where I encountered the Blight." He then drew two more lines, leading South-East and South-West, and marked their ends with an X too. "This is where you guys encountered the blights." Kashi drew a line connecting the three Xs. "What do you see?"
 "It's a curve?" Shadow muttered. "No, is that an arc?" A glint flashed in his eyes as he looked at Kashi. "You do not think?"
 "Yeah," Kashi confirmed Shadow's thoughts. "I think this is just an arc of a larger circle. The blight seems to be expanding equally in all directions. If we go with that assumption," Kashi drew a straight line that just barely touched the created arc. "...walking at a ninety-degree angle to this tangent ought to bring us to the center of the Blight."
 "That's smart," Shadow praised with an approving nod. He let out a sigh and shook his head, "I would not have thought of that."
 "Stuff like this comes with experience." Kashi shook his head. "Now that you know you can do this, you'll most likely apply it when the need arises in the future."
 "Uh..." Larsial muttered, unable to bear the humiliating feeling of not knowing what the two were talking about. She had been staring at the diagram, trying to understand what this tangent thing was but her efforts were completely useless. "What's a tangent?"
 "Huh?" Kashi looked at Larsial in shock, but then remembered they were in the game world. The guys probably didn't have those annoying Greek Mathematicians and their endless theories. There was no way they would know of concepts like tangents and Pythagorean theorems. Kashi figured the only reason they even knew about the concept of degrees (direction) was that it was an ancient concept in the real world, dating as far back as 6000 years ago. 
 Realizing where the issue lay, Kashi lazy dumped the task onto Shadow. "Want to explain?"
 Shadow was initially going to refuse, but then he saw the hidden panic in Larsial's eyes. He could tell she was scared he would instantly refuse. He had to admit it was admirable that such a proud woman would admit she lacked knowledge about something others considered fundamental. With a sigh, he reluctantly agreed and thus began an impromptu math lecture on circles, triangles, and squares.
 Kashi interrupted the lesson thirty minutes later. Although he had not participated, he was secretly shocked at how quickly Larsial picked up on the concepts Shadow introduced. If she was introduced to the real world, she would be considered a rare genius. However, Kashi realized this was to be expected. This world had the Intelligence stat. Even though assassins did not much look too much into improving Intelligence, they still invested a little effort because it helped with their mana-related skills.
 Kashi could not imagine what those monster mages who had monstrous amounts of points in their Intelligence would be like when the Academy opened. The daeben was now filled with even more optimism toward the Academy. 
 Kashi shook those thoughts out of his head. He motioned at Shadow and Larsial. "Come on, let's get moving."
 Shadow nodded and quickly mounted his horse. He steered his mount out of the campsite and drew abreast Kashi who was on Drixlia. "What is the plan?"
 "No more stealth," Kashi stated. "We're making a beeline for the center of this mess."
 "I thought you wanted to meet the centaurs first," Larsial questioned, confused.
 "I refuse to believe we won't see a single trace of the centaurs on our way," Kashi stated with confidence. "They must have battled the blight for some time. We'll surely see some signs of the battle somewhere and trace it back to the village." Kashi shrugged. "Either that or we first find the source of the blight, investigate it, then continue our search for the centaurs. Either way works, and is faster than blindly searching through the forest for days."
 Kashi looked at Larsial, then Shadow. "Any objections?"
 "Nope, works for me," Larsial confirmed.
 Shadow shook his head.
 "Good." Kashi spurred Drixlia into a hard gallop. A devilish grin spread on the daeben's face. "Let's wreck this place..."

 


 

Chapter 19.2: The Centaur

Du-dum du-dum du-dum du-dum!
 The thundering sound of hooves striking the earth interrupted the night's tranquility as three horses tore through the dense forest at breakneck speed. Drixlia led the pack, easily maneuvering through the trees. Larsial and Shadow urged their mounts to follow the same paths it took, neither of them confident in their horses' ability to run through the forest on their own at such high speeds.
 Kashi's eyes narrowed as they began to near the area he previously encountered the Vine Blight. Ferulic's Practice Bow appeared in his left hand while a quiver of arrows formed on his right which he then slung over his shoulder. The daeben took out an arrow and nocked it, gaze focused on a dead tree just a few meters ahead.
 Just before they reached the tree, Kashi pulled Drixlia to a halt. He quickly dismounted and instructed Shadow and Larsial to do the same. "We'll go on foot from here. It'll be disastrous if a Vine Blight trips the horses while they're sprinting."
 "What about the horses?" Shadow asked.
 "Shadow's right. We can't leave them out here on their own." Larsial reined her mount over.
 "Don't worry about that." Kashi placated them. He placed his right hand on Drixlia then watched as a curtain of light spread around it. Moments later, the light vanished along with Drixlia. "I'll keep them in my dimension for now." To Kashi's surprise, the Shadow and Larsial's mounts approached him of their own volition, uncharacteristically whinnying like little mares. Kashi was not sure, but he had a feeling it had something to do with the aura that leaked out when he placed Drixlia in his dimension.
 Kashi made a mental note to do an experiment on this later. But for the moment, he placed both horses in his dimension. Kashi's brows wrinkled as the horses disappeared. The mana drain had been a little more than he had expected. It seemed he could not just go around placing living beings indiscriminately into his world. He made another mental note to find a more cost-effective method.
 "Alright, let's do this," Kashi said then charged ahead at full speed with Shadow and Larsial following. The trio blurred through the forest, their pathing zig-zag, seemingly chaotic and through tree branches rather than the ground. The assassins behind Kashi understood the brilliance behind the movement. Their pathing was aimed at highly reducing the chances of a successful ambush by a scouting enemy. If the enemy could not accurately tell where they would be at a certain point in time, it would be difficult to set an ambush.
 Usually, this would force enemies to face them in a frontal. Even then, it would not be a concentrated force, but a split up faction hoping to tie them down long enough for the others to catch up.
 Their efforts soon proved to be the right one as less than ten minutes later, Kashi suddenly shouted. "Descend!"
 The trio dropped to the ground as dozens of half-a-meter needles zipped past their locations. A grin spread on Kashi's face as he glared at five Needle Blights. He nocked an arrow, preparing to face them, but Shadow and Larsial suddenly dashed past.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 

"Leave this to us."
 Kashi thought about it, then relaxed his stance. He had yet to truly see Shadow in action against non-boss like characters. He was intrigued to see how the assassin fought. He also glanced at Larsial's back. This would also be a good time to judge her attitude. He decided to keep an eye out for any more reinforcements while spectating the fight.
 Shadow did not know what Kashi was thinking about. The soft-spoken assassin only had a single thing in his mind at that moment. Kill everything!
 Whish! Whish!
 Shadow's cold eyes constricted as dozens of needles were launched toward them. Kashi watched, wondering how the pair of assassins would deal with this. Shadow drew a pair of short, black daggers from his waist and charged head on to meet the needles. To his side, Larsial's runes lit up as she stomped hard against the earth.
 Larsial leaped over the needles in one clean swoop, daggers drawn as she reached the apex of her jump. The Needle Blights raised their arms. They had been hoping she would do just that. She could not evade mid-air and was thus an easy target. Her subsequent demise should have been the foregone conclusion, but Shadow chose that moment to erupt!
 Clang! Clang! Clang!
 Kashi's eyes nearly bulged out of their sockets as Shadow's feet erupted in a strange rhythm, his body seemingly fleeting through the needles. The assassin's arms blurred as they deflected the needles back at the Needle Blights.
 The Needle Blights were forced to stop their attack on Larsial as Shadow's retaliation struck true. The Needle Blights staggered as the needles tore through them and roared in rage at being struck by their own attack. They turned to skewer Shadow, but to their surprise, he seemed to have disappeared.
 A sense of danger struck their senses and the lead Needle Blight looked down to see the white-haired reaper sliding across the earth. By the time he noticed Shadow, the assassin was already in the process of sliding beneath his legs. Shadow had used the famous knight skill [Charge], one of the few skills that allowed a person to quickly cover a short distance without relying on feet movement. [Charge] sent its user sliding across a short distance. It was quite a handy skill because its cooldown was only two seconds, hence it could almost be spammed non-stop. Usually, Knights used it to get close to enemies and bash them with their shields. In Shadow's case, immediately he activated the skill, he ducked, bringing himself closer to the ground.
 The quick movement was a very effective way of dodging enemy sightlines. This was one example of the uniqueness of L.N.E which allowed players to learn any skill regardless of class. Battles would always hold a greater hint of unpredictability as no one would know what skills a player or Resident would use next regardless of their primary class.
 Needle Blight-1 certainly did not appreciate Shadow's little stunt. It punched at Shadow, but its fist only hit the earth as Shadow had already slid all the way to its back. The assassin kicked off the earth and unleashed a rapid assault on the Needle Blight's exposed back. Needle Blight-1 was staggered by the rapid attacks and was unable to extricate itself. Luckily, it was not alone.
 The closest Needle Blight, Needle Blight-2 rushed forward and swung at Shadow's back with its sharp claws. In response, Shadow sheathed the right blade and completed his chain of attacks on the lead Needle Blight-1 with a powerful palm strike that launched the Needle Blight into the sky while the blade in his left hand blocked Needle Blight-2's strike.
 Shadow had learned from Kashi not to focus solely on Dexterity and Agility like most Assassins. He made sure to put invest some points in strength for moments like this.

"Nice!"
 The Needle Blights only now recalled there was one more opponent they'd left in the air. Larsial happily accepted the gift Shadow had sent her. A faint spider silhouette appeared formed behind Larsial as she brandished her blades at the incoming Needle Blight-1. With a snarky grunt, the spider's legs repeatedly struck the suspended Needle Blight. The miserable Needle Blight-1 could not mount any modicum of resistance as it was mauled by the angry spider. [Falling Spider] had a three-second duration, during which both the attacker and the victim would be suspended mid-air.
 While Larsial punished the airborne Blight, Shadow glared at the second Needle Blight through the gaps in its claws. The assassin's arm dipped under the blow, but he had no intention of engaging in a battle of strength. The micro-second he bought with the initial block was more than enough.
 In response to the blow, Shadow made a very un-assassin-like move. He once again unleashed [Charge], ramming his elbow into Needle Blight-2's chest. Unfortunately, he lacked strength and only managed to push it two steps back. Also, the claws slid off his blade and tore down his back.
 Shadow paid no heed to the wound. He drove his free fist into the Needle Blight's abdomen, forcing it to take another step back. A sinister red aura coated the dagger in Shadow's left hand as he swung upward, tearing a large gash in the Needle Blight's abdomen. [Wild Strike] was an unblockable skill, but Shadow used it for its secondary effect which had a 100% chance of staggering an opponent if it hit (except if the opponent has stagger immunities). Depending on a number of factors, that stagger could last for a micro-second to as long as three seconds.
 Shadow was not interested in finding out how long this skill would last. He circled around to the Needle Blight's back and unleashed a violent torrent of attacks at the staggered back within a second. In the next, he once again slapped the Needle Blight's back. This time, however, he used [Iron Palm] which unleashed a strike with double his normal strength. This skill, unlike [Charge], had a cooldown time of 30 seconds and had a penalty of reducing its user's strength by 5% after it was used for 20 seconds. Shadow had only used it because, like [Wild Strike], it had a 50% chance of staggering an opponent. However, it had a hidden effect which had a 90% chance of doubling the stagger time of an opponent that was already staggered.
 Shadow seemed to be blessed by Lady Luck as Needle Blight-2 could only stare dumbly as it was forced roughly six steps back.
 "I could kiss you right now!"
 Shadow ignored Larsial's shout as he waited for the remaining three Needle Blights. This time, he had lost the element of surprise as all three charged at him at the same time.
 Meanwhile, above, Larsial's three-second assault had come to an end. Her twin daggers drew a deadly curve in the air as they struck down at Needle Blight-1. [Ox Horn] was a dual-handed skill that knocked down opponents. When airborne, it had a hidden effect of shooting its target to the ground with the force of a bullet, releasing a shockwave that stunned enemies in a five-meter radius for a brief second.
 As it so happened, Needle Blight-1 happened to crash into the unsuspecting, staggered Needle-Blight-2. This was no accident, but something Larsial and Shadow had carefully arranged. It was hard to believe this was the first time these two were cooperating.
 The crash had the intended effect. Shadow's cold gaze flashed as a shockwave blew past him and struck the incoming Needle Blights, effectively stunning them. Shadow's gaze suddenly hardened as he looked past the Blights into the depth of the forest.
 Behind him, Larsial dropped to the earth and drove her blades through the heads of the fallen Blights. Her eyes widened in shock as a sigil of a red skull appeared on their chests and exploded, instantly decimating both monsters. She recognized this skill all too well. Shadow had used it on her during the war. [Mark of Doom], but, this time, Shadow had used it in tandem with [Marked Despair]. 

[Marked Despair] was a branch of [Mark of Doom] that formed a mini-mana bomb on the target. Every successful strike on the opponent afterward would increase the final potency of the bomb. The skill lasted for eight seconds before it would automatically self-detonate if the user chose not to detonate early.
 Shadow had successfully trained the skill to Lv.2 Expert which allowed him to place two marks, both of which had 30-second cooldowns. The assassin had sneakily marked both Needle Blights during his assault. The subsequent flurry of attacks on both monsters charged up the marks which he finally denoted after Larsial's final strike.
 That was two monsters down, but Shadow had not followed up with an attack on the stunned Needle Blights. This was because he had sensed a massive threat approaching from within the forest.
 Boom!
 As if in confirmation of Shadow's fears, a host of arrows shattered the remaining Needle Blights to pieces. A moment later, Kashi showed up at Shadow's right, hard gaze fixed on the darkness ahead. The daeben gripped Ferulic's Practice Bow in his hand, indicating how seriously he took the approaching threat. Larsial walked up to Kashi's right and brandished her daggers.
 Any warrior worth their blade could sense the incoming monster. This would not be an easy fight.
 Clop, clop, clop!
 Despite the tense atmosphere, a smile spread on Kashi's face as the tell-tale sound of hooves against earth drifted into his ears. Only one race would dare race through the forest on hooves.
 "Get ready!" Kashi prompted and the trio got into battle positions.
 Rustle...
 Whoosh!
 Kashi's eyes glowed as a heavily injured, massive centaur wielding a massive spear burst out of the trees into the little clearing. The right side of his head was shaved bald, while long silver hair draped down the left side in a style the real world would have tagged as rebellious emo-lord. However, there was nothing emo about the muscular, tattoed body riddled with injuries from a recently difficult battle.
 The centaur's brown fur had darkened to a dirty red from dried blood, but the spirit in his dark eyes had not dimmed in the slightest. However, a wave of crushing disappointment dimmed the centaur's gaze as soon as he saw Kashi's team. He'd heard the sound of fighting and hoped it was one of his comrades. Unfortunately, it was a party of Outlanders and only three of them at that.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 The centaur's charging speed took him past the trio, but he immediately circled around and stood by their side. He had inadvertently brought it along as he ran. If he continued running, this trio would be forced to face it in his place. He was not a man without honor. He would not have another fight his battle. A deep, authoritative voice boomed out, "You three, get out of here! It's too dangerous!"
 Kashi cast a grateful glance at the centaur warrior. Just this action alone had proven this man's integrity more than any words could. The daeben laughed and stepped in front of the centaur, shielding him. "Do not worry, and leave this to us while you treat yourself. We came here in search of danger."
 The centaur coldly harrumphed. In the past months, he had met too many overconfident adventurers who did not know how to spell 'Fear' until it was too late. "Do not overestimate yourself," the centaur admonished. "It isn't something you can fight!?"
 "It?" Kashi repeated with a chuckle. "I guess we're playing the pronoun game. Rather than waste time telling us to run, why don't you tell us what it is?"
 The centaur's gaze hardened, but he brandished his spear nonetheless. "It is-"
 Crash! Boom!
 Kashi looked at the creature that burst into the clearing with a wry smile. "Well now, you really need to work on your persuasion skills centaur-san..."


 ****************
 ****************
 A/N: Two Chapters in a Row, back-to-back. Kinda surprised me too. Couldn't really focus on anything until I completed this particular chapter. Not the first time this has happened either. Anyway, got a little Shadow and Larsial assassin action. Also gave me a chance to explore a fight with lots of skills flying around. Due to always focusing on Kashi, I haven't really had a chance to explore how other characters utilize their skills. Hope to remedy that in future chapters... This was good practice.


 Picture of the Day
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Imagine if Shadow took the samurai path. I imagine he woulda ended up looking something like this. Still cold, deadly and badass...

 

Chapter 20.1: Marilith

Kirckour Woods,
 16th Banem 1092
 Malevolent winds whistled through the quiet forest. A stifling aura of death settled over the dense trees, blanketing all living beings within its cold grip. This forest had been abandoned by light, and chilling darkness had taken over.
 Somewhere within the forest depths, an odd party consisting of two daebens, a human and a centaur squared off against a creature that could only have been born from the sinister aura surrounding the forest.
 Kashi examined the creature with a solemn expression. He recognized the creature as a Marilith, a half-snake, half-human demon with a female human torso and a long snake's tail. It also had six arms on its human part. Usually, the upper bodies of mariliths took the form of beautiful women. They would lure prey over with their upper body, then either paralyze them with venom or, constrict the prey with its tail before it could escape.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Mariliths were tough demons to face on their own, but the one in front of the party was dangerously unique. To begin with, it was at least ten times larger than a regular marilith. Its human torso alone was twice Kashi's height and large enough to fit three average sized men standing side by side. From his current view, Kashi could not make out the entire length of its tail, but he estimated it was certainly not smaller than 20m.
 Even more striking than its size, was the fact there was nothing 'beautiful' about its upper body. Its upper body was a mass of seemingly carelessly lumped flesh and scales and a pair of exposed sagging breasts. Its iconic six arms had increased to eight, but where a regular marilith had 'slender' arms, this marilith's arms were muscular and tough, ending in long, clawed fingers.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Kashi quickly came to a conclusion. This marilith was either infected by the blight (unlikely as blight only affects plants) or it was strengthened and evolved through some dark magic. The daeben's gaze narrowed as he considered the second possibility. So far, he only knew of one group with the capability to produce something like this.
 Kashi glanced at Larsial, but her expression was grim and tight. Even if she knew something about this monster, she fully expected it to attack her too. Kashi let out a sigh. There was no point worrying about it now. Everything would be revealed soon enough. Kashi looked at the monster, inadvertently meeting its hollow gaze. Just as he had been examining it, it had been examining the new additions to its prey.

Roughly three seconds had passed since the marilith burst into the clearing. This was more than enough time for both parties to examine the other and quickly come to a decision.
 The marilith, having come to the conclusion that the other humes were of no consequence, let out a roar and charged at the nearest party, the daeben that had met its gaze.
 "Shadow! Larsial!" Kashi shouted as he calmly nocked an arrow and jumped backed. "Break!"
 Shadow and Larsial quickly jumped to their left and right respectively. To their shock, the marilith appeared at their location just as they jumped out of the way, its claws only managing to swipe air. Both assassins paled as they realized what would have happened if they had been a moment late in evading. They had not expected the marilith to be this fast!
 Kashi, meanwhile glared at the marilith that approached with a speed very similar to his own. The daeben understood this was because he was retreating while it was advancing. Naturally, it would be faster. However, the daeben was not looking to compete in speed.
 Boom! Boom!
 Two wooden arrows burst out of Kashi's bow, their speeds creating small sonic booms at the bow, as the daeben quickly nocked a metal arrow. The arrows zipped across the clearing, appearing in front of the marilith within the blink of an eye.
 Just when it seemed to be a certain hit, the marilith displayed its daunting agility. It sharply curled around the arrows' path and continued the chase without dropping its speed. If anything, it accelerated, eager to close the gap and kill the daeben.
 Kashi's gaze remained even as the arrows flew zipped harmlessly through the 'path' created by the marilith's body. He imbued the arrow in his bow with the maximum amount of mana it could hold. Despite its nimble movements, Kashi easily identified the marilith's path. "[Drill]" Kashi released the third arrow, and with a boom, it screeched toward the marilith's chest.
 The marilith's sunken, gray eyes glared at the incoming arrow in disdain. These arrows might have been a threat to many other creatures, but it excelled in speed. To try again just after failing. This hume had clearly run out of ideas. It moved to dodge the incoming arrows.
 "[Dimension Break]"
 Before the marilith could dodge the incoming arrow, it was stunned by the light emitting from a mandala that appeared right in front of it.
 A pair of black arrows rushed out of the portal and smashed into the marilith's face.
 BOOM!
 The arrows smashed to pieces as they hit the marilith's head, in the process, destabilizing the dense mana packed in the arrowheads. The ensuing explosion forced the marilith to an abrupt stop. It was only a moment, but that proved to be all the daeben needed.
 The [Drill] enhanced arrow took advantage of the momentary pause to strike the marilith's exposed chest. The marilith cried out as it was sent flying several meters back. The spinning arrow burned all the mana stored within it as fuel to carry the beast as far as it could.
 The arrow quickly expended its mana and the marilith crashed to the earth just in front of Shadow, Larsial and the centaur. There was no way for the trio to know if Kashi planned this or not.
 Shadow and Larsial gaped at the marilith in shock. Barely a second had passed since they dodged the marilith's attack and it was back in front of them. Their feet had barely touched the earth, but both assassins quickly sprung to action. Shadow charged to the monster's left while Larsial took the right.
 Their daggers tore up a bloody storm on the beast's body as they quickly unleashed their most offensive skills. There was no need to worry about finesse when fighting monsters as large as this one. The duo did not battle alone. Kashi supported the assassin duo with a rapid hail of arrows from within the forest, eager to take advantage of the brief stun window.

Unfortunately, good things did not last long.
 Kashi's sharp eyes caught a twitch in the marilith's middle finger. He unhesitantly commanded. "Retreat!"
 Shadow and Larsial readily complied. They swiftly jumped several steps back.
 Kashi's decision proved to be the right one.
 Roooar!
 The marilith roared as it rapidly spun in place. Its long tail whipped around itself in rage, but Larsial and Shadow, by distancing themselves, bought themselves enough time to read the tail's path and subsequently evade it.
 The marilith recognized its failure and let out an even angrier roar. It raised its arms and eight swords coalesced from dense black lights. It brandished its blades and charged at Larsial. It raised the blades high, eager to rip the daeben to shreds.
 Kashi's timely instructions rang out once again. "Centaur-san! Hold it!"
 The centaur, who had been watching the fight in shock, only then realized he had done nothing to help. The centaur buried the unease in his heart as he brandished his spear and charged.
 "What?" Shadow murmured in shock as the centaur 'disappeared' and appeared in front of Larsial. The assassin's eyes were sharp enough to recognize the centaur did not truly disappear. His insane charging speed just made it seem that way.
 Clang! 
 Sparks flew as the centaur parried the marilith's opening strike with his spear. The centaur glared at the marilith through the sparks, powerful hatred burning in his eyes. "Die! [Slayer's Spear]!" The centaur's spear shone with a golden glow as it rapidly shot out, leaving several afterimages due to its speed.
 The marilith roared in pain as sizzling smoke rose from its arms and body wherever the centaur's spear hit. The golden glow around the centaur's spear was revealed to be holy energy which was highly toxic to demons. Luckily, it was the marilith on the offensive, and the centaur only got in one or two lucky strikes for every twenty he needed to parry the marilith's swords.
 The marilith, irritated, moved to circle around the centaur, but the centaur's hooves shuffled in a manner no horse-like creature should be capable of performing. He used a deft combination of hop, slides and side steps to easily follow the marilith's movements, pirouetting to the side with a skill that even humans would be envious of.
 "Excellent!" Kashi praised as he watched the centaur weave from one side to another. Regardless of if the marilith circled to the centaur's side or behind it, he would always somehow manage to match its movements. In real life, horses just weren't capable of such movements, but this was where higher intelligence proved its worth.
 The centaur race had improved their agility so they could battle freely in the forest where danger could come from any direction. An inability to make swift turns in the forests of Destia would only lead to their deaths.
 Kashi struggled to beat down an urge to bring Drixlia out and have it learn from the centaur's movements. As much as this was a prime learning opportunity, he could not risk anything untoward happening. After all, mariliths were no small pushovers.
 The centaur continued to hold the marilith's aggro, unleashing multiple skills one after another to draw its attention to himself. His quick judgment and situational awareness proved he was quite used to playing the role of tank. However, this was certainly one of the most difficult instances of that role in his entire life. Every thrust of his spear was one made with his life on the line.
 The centaur's arms trembled each time they clashed with the marilith's claws. Sweat pooled on the spear's shaft as exertion began to take his toll. The centaur had been battling for several hours against multiple enemies all culminating in this battle. Despite its strong desire to battle, the accumulated fatigue was beginning to take its toll.
 The marilith noticed the centaur's struggle and immediately launched a frenzied attack, striking down harder and faster than ever. It was only regretful it could not put its full focus on the centaur because of the two assassins flitting about and attacking its side. In true boss monster fashion, it easily multitasked, retaliating against the assassins with its tail.
 For their part, Shadow and Larsial dodged and attacked, adopting a patient approach to whittling down the marilith's life. Their daggers did not do much damage against the heavy scales and a lack of significant enchantments meant their weapons did not pose any real threat to the marilith. This was in stark contrast to the centaur's blade which was not only of a higher grade but had a holy enchantment on it.
 This was the major reason why the marilith focused all its attacks on the centaur. It did not dare overlook the holy weapon. If the centaur got in a good hit with that blade, the damage would be imaginable.
 Pa!
 The marilith roared in excitement as it slapped the spear out of the dead tired centaur's arms. Eight swords swung down in tandem to reap the centaur's life.
 Claaang!
 A loud, long screech echoed through the forest as eight arrows struck the swords at the same time. The swords' blades shattered under the extraneous force. The falling pieces caught the stunned reflections of both the marilith and centaur.
 Within the blink of an eye, those pieces caught the form of a daeben between the centaur and the marilith. The daeben's blood-red eyes were especially catching under the moonlight. The pieces clattered as they finally struck the earth, the sound especially loud as a cold silence enveloped the clearing.
 "Well now, that's enough fun for one night," Kashi joked with a terrifying smirk. The air grew heavy and the atmosphere completely changed, turning even more sinister and dark with blood. "You should take a rest centaur-san. I'll take it from here."
 The marilith, for the first time that night, instinctively jerked back. It warily measured up the daeben, hesitation growing in its heart.
 Kashi was oblivious to the marilith's thoughts. Not that he would have cared either way. He had already marked the beast for death. Nothing could save it now. "Larsial, Shadow. Prepare yourselves. I'll be taking point from here on out."
 Kashi looked over his shoulder at the centaur. "Centaur-san. You'll deal the finishing blow with that holy spear. I trust you'll be prepared."
 "Darian," The centaur replied.
 "What?"
 "My name." The centaur stiffly explained as he took a step back. "Darian Alshmeer. You may call me Darian."
 "Oh. Pleasure to meet you, Darian," Kashi greeted with a smile. "You can call me Kashi. I'll—"
 "Watch out!" Darian shouted as the marilith desperately lunged at Kashi's exposed back with a newly conjured set of swords.
 "How rude," Kashi grumbled as he instantly whirled around on the spot. "I am not a villain." His body twisted this way and that, easily dodging the swords. This action, coupled with the marilith's forward momentum, eventually found him centimeters away from its body.
 Pow!
 "The least you could do is let me finish my monologue," Kashi grumbled as he buried his fist in the marilith's midriff. The marilith stooped over and coughed up blood, just missing the daeben. Kashi ignored the beast hanging over his head and instead, looked over to Darius with a grin. "Get your spear ready. It's about time you saw how Maggots fight. You may consider this our 'job interview'."
 Boom!
 Kashi unleashed another strong punch that sent the marilith tumbling several meters back. Kashi's fingers clenched and unclenched with excitement as he equipped four quivers on his back and waist. Ferulic's Practice Bow returned to his inner world as he gripped two metal arrows in his arms. A devilish grin spread on Kashi's face as he walked toward the recovering marilith. "Shadow, Larsial. Try to keep up!"
 Whoosh! 

 

Chapter 20.2: The Marilith

Whoosh!

 Kashi's figure blurred as he instantaneously covered the distance between himself and the marilith. Similar to [Charge], Kashi slid across the ground in one deft motion, the arrows in his hand emitting dark aura as he shot them at the raging beast. The difference between his movement and [Charge] lay in how he achieved the same effect without using the skill, but through exploding mana beneath the soles of his feet. This was a feat ninety-five percent of the summoned would not be able to accomplish. However, the true elite knew that personal manipulation of mana was the most efficient method of combat.
 The marilith quickly took advantage of the fact Kashi's punch had sent it sprawling close to the edges of the forest. It quickly curled up the tree behind it, barely dodging the arrows that smashed into the tree's bark. Luckily, these were all Lv. 180 trees. While a significant portion of the tree's trunk was blasted off, enough remained intact for it to remain standing.
 The marilith instantly counterattacked. Its rapid climb up the tree trunk built up enough momentum for the quick jump that followed. The enraged demon's angry eyes lit up in delight as it shot toward the charging daeben. Its momentum, coupled with Kashi's charge guaranteed it would definitely smash into the daeben. Excitement boiled in its blood as it imagined the daeben's panicked expression before it destroyed him.
 Kashi raised his head to meet the marilith's glare. Contrary to the demon's expectation, a mocking grin greeted it.
 The tale-tell whirs of mechanical gears rang through the clearing as a single arrowhead with a metal wire attached to its end stabbed into the marilith's forehead. The marilith's eyes widened in confusion, but no one bothered to answer its question. It looked over the daeben to meet Shadow's steely gaze.
 The assassin's left arm was raised in front of him, sleeves drawn back to reveal a black gauntlet. The arrowheads had shot out of this gauntlet, evident by the rope in Shadow's hand. Shadow grunted as he dropped low to balance his center of gravity. He turned in place and pulled the rope with all the force he could muster. Assassin's lacked strength so this would have normally been a futile struggle. Unfortunately for the marilith, it was airborne, flying in Kashi's direction, who was in front of Shadow. If a line were to be drawn from the marilith to Kashi, then to Shadow it would be revealed to be a straight line.
 As such, Shadow did not have to exert too much strength to pull the marilith a few feet further than it intended as there was no significant change in direction.
 The marilith let out a shrill cry as it was sent sailing over the daeben. In desperation, it swung its swords at the daeben, hoping that the increased velocity from pull would catch the daeben off-guard.
 Unfortunately, the marilith was fighting Kashi. Such an opportunity would not so easily present itself. Seemingly telepathically, Kashi stuck close to the ground, much like Shadow earlier. The marilith's swords could only harmlessly slash at the air until Kashi's momentum took him past their range.
 Not one to rest on his laurels, Kashi instantly equipped Ferulic's Practice Bow, whirled around and fired three successive arrows at the marilith's exposed midriff. The first arrow smashed its exposed underbelly where the human half met the snake half. This strike launched its midriff upwards and greatly reduced its forward momentum.
 The second arrow crashed into the same spot, forcing the monster to fold inwards as its 'waist' was launched a meter into the sky. This also had the bonus effect of completely killing off its forward momentum.
 The final arrow carried the most force. Enhanced by [Drill], the arrow burrowed deep into the marilith's waist. Kashi grinned as the marilith was sent flying into the sky, spinning haphazardly as it did.

Who knew when or how she got there, but Larsial's frame appeared above the marilith's spinning frame. The [Falling Spider] once again made an appearance. The eight-legged spider silhouette repeatedly stabbed down at the monster.
 The shocked marilith could not react in time. It roared in pain as the spider's legs mercilessly ripped into its back. Luckily, due to the nature of its ascent, its more vulnerable human part was sloped downward so Larsial's strikes only struck the slim border between flesh and scales. Murky, black blood rained down on the earth as the spider's legs alternated between both sides in its indiscriminate attack.
 Torrents of arrows peppered the marilith's sloping portions, but it frantically defended its human half with its swords. It could do nothing for its lower half but at this stage, keeping its life was more important than anything else.
 [Falling Spider]'s three-second duration soon ended. Dark aura burst out of the enraged marilith's eyes in the split-second the skill ended. A heavy burst of mana blasted out of its body as it let out a desperate, enraged roar that forced the sharp-eared daeben to wince in pain.
 Kashi's gaze tightened as he detected a dangerous spike in the marilith's mana as it dropped to the earth. It raised its arms as streams of mana surged into its swords and coated them with dense, dark mana. The daeben yelled at Shadow to take cover as he quickly shot an arrow, then charged towards Darian.
 With a deafening roar, the marilith's arms blurred as it rapidly swung its blades. Dense mana blades randomly shot out of the blades in all directions, forming massive mana nets that were impossible to dodge.
 Or so it should have been.
 As a result of Kashi's warning, Shadow copied the marilith's trick and took cover behind a tree. Just like with Kashi, the marilith's mana-infused wind blades were unable to fell the tree in one blow, allowing Shadow to switch to another before the current one fell.
 Suspended in the air, Larsial should have been the easiest target of the monster's attack. However, the assassin grabbed onto an arrow that just 'happened' to fly by her. The arrow's force nearly dislocated her shoulder, but she would not have complained even if it had as it carried her into the forest and away from the marilith's attack range.
 That left Kashi and Darian.
 Kashi knew Darian was already at a critical state. At his current health, any little attack would snuff out his life, let alone a rage-filled attack like this one. Luckily, Kashi's experience allowed him to anticipate the attack. He arrived in front of the centaur before the waves of blades reached it. Kashi returned Ferulic's Practice Bow to his inner world and stomped on the ground three times. Three identical mandalas appeared on the ground from which three Earth Style [Wall]s rose.
 Curiously, however, those walls rose up behind the daeben rather than at his front.
 "Kashi-dono!" Darian shouted in fear as he wondered if Kashi had somehow messed up his spell. It would not be the first time it had happened. Warriors were prone to errors in tense situations. The current situation was a prime example of that. Only a select few among seasoned veterans of combat could keep their cool even in the tensest of situations.
 However, who was Kashi?
 If he claimed to be number two in the virtual world in combat experience, no one would dare to claim to be number one.
 Kashi had indeed not made an error in judgment. His eyes shone with excitement and the prospect of facing a new challenge as he took a few steps forward and grinned at the dense mana-blades. Kashi's ridiculous agility exploded as he deftly weaved through the blades. He used the smallest of movements, shifting his feet this way and that, always ensuring he was on either his toes or heels to provide an option to pivot to the next direction.

The clearing went dead quiet as all those present gaped as the magnificent display of insane speed, reaction, judgment, and acrobatics! Not every dodge could be as clean and easy as a simple dodge to the left or right. Sometimes the blades approached horizontally, forcing Kashi to either duck or jump. The daebens ability to seamlessly transition between these exceedingly strenuous movements left everyone in shock.
 Darian had long forgotten why he was even there in the first place. If it were not for the sound of the wind blades smashing against the walls Kashi put up, he might have left cover altogether for a better view, instead of peeking from the side.
 Kashi chuckled as he felt the resentment of the man inside him.
 This!
 This was the kind of sensation Suzuki sought everytime he challenged the platform in the training halls. The pumping adrenaline when he barely dodged an attack by a hair's breadth. The wind whistling past his face when a wind blade whizzed past his nose. The excited elation of timing a jump perfectly between two horizontal wind blades.
 Kashi's introspective fun was cut short by six vertical blades that innocuously followed up the horizontal mana blades. Considering the blades had been flying randomly all this time, was this bad luck or...?
 Kashi glanced at the marilith and only barely pressed down his laughter as he realized the angry beast had turned all its attention to him, leaving only one two hands to keep Shadow pinned down. Rotating midair, with six rapidly approaching mana blades spread out evenly from his head to his legs, the daeben was in a position most would deem irredeemable. Kashi, however, was just beginning to get into his groove. His hands dipped into the quivers strapped to his sides and drew out three arrows per hand.
 "I-Impossible!" Darian shouted, this time in disbelief as the arrows shot out of Kashi's hands, the daeben's spinning momentum adding even more momentum. The mana-infused arrows crashed into the mana blades, resulting in a small outburst of wind and mana as both entities exploded.
 "How devious," Kashi who was about to land, joked as he spotted mana blade heading for where his foot would hit the earth. "How about this then!" The daeben taunted as the toes of his left foot hit the earth.
 The mana blade screeched as if sensing the blood it was about to draw. However, just as it was a meter away from cutting into the daeben's ankle, the daeben's left foot spun in place until it faced away from the incoming mana blade. Then just as the blade was as close as ten centimeters out, Kashi's left knee bunched ever so lightly. His left toes pushed off the earth as his knees sprung upright, catapulting him into a backflip over the blade.
 Kashi spun in the air, realigning himself and landed facing the stunned marilith. The daeben could not help but let out a cheeky grin as he took in the stunned silence in the woods. "Nailed it!"
 The marilith stared dumbly at the daeben. It had planned that so carefully! It expected the daeben to fall to the horizontal blades, but in the rare case that Kashi dodged that, it had sent the vertical blades to follow. It was absolutely certain the daeben would fall to that set, but in the worst case scenario, the final mana blade was meant to knock him off his feet before he could stabilize himself!
 It had only stopped attacking because it did not want to waste the remaining mana it had. It wanted to track where Kashi would fall after being tripped by the blades. It would then unleash the rest of its mana on the fallen daeben. But what the hell was this!? How did this pathetic hume manage to achieve all of that!?
 ROAAARR!
 The marilith let out an enraged roar as it threw caution to the wind and slashed wind blade after wind blade at the belligerent daeben. It chose to attack with all its arms, Shadow, Larsial, and Darian thrown to the far corners of its mind. It no longer cared if it died or was forced to flee at the end of the day. It just wanted this daeben dead! It had never hated a hume so much in its life!

"Bring it!" Kashi for his part, eagerly welcome the frantic blades as he charged ahead. He once again weaved through the condensed bombardment, except this time he rushed toward he marilith as he dodged. Arrows flew from their quivers as he shot down the troublesome mana blades, his relentless advance not slowed down in the slightest. As he charged, Kashi's brows rose when he noticed a brief respite in the bombardment. He looked up at marilith, the smile on his face turning even more defiant and terrifying as he saw the demon suck in a deep breath.
 It clearly was no ordinary breath as the marilith's muscles instantly doubled in size afterward. Kashi did not have to wait long to find out what that was about. A shimmering, translucent image of the bust of a multi-armed goddess with closed eyes appeared behind the demon. Kashi did not have time to ponder on the identity of that image before the goddess' eyes snapped open.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Hundreds of arms created by dense mana sprouted from the marilith's back, each holding a blade of their own. The arms blurred as they each slashed ten times in the span of a second then dissipated, forming mana streams that coalesced into a single, giant mana blade that hovered in front of the marilith.
 The hundreds of slashes turned into a dense net-like structure formed entirely of mana blades. This was the definition of a final attack. Everything had been put on the line to finally end the daeben right there. Unknowingly, the marilith had subconsciously trusted the daeben to continue his charge. It never suspected for a second that the daeben would attempt to dodge to the side. After all, although the net was ten times faster than the previous attacks, it did not doubt that the daeben would still have a method to dodge it if he wanted to.
 The marilith's gamble proved to be the right one, as Kashi, faced with the net of compressed mana blades did not dodge, but continued to charge head-on. Was this confidence, or a stubborn streak that ran in the daeben's blood? Only the daeben himself could possibly answer that question.
 Kashi kept his charge constant but spun as he ran, turning himself into a spinning top as he shot arrow after arrow at the net's center. Slowly, but surely, cracks began to form at the center of the net but it was at this time that the situation suddenly changed enough to shock even the daeben.
 Boom!
 Of the ten layers that formed the net, five suddenly accelerated. Worse yet, the blades also rotated at different speeds as they approached, forcing the daeben to focus his attention on them. The aim here was clear: Bog down the daeben with the outer layer so he would not be able to attack the second layer and break out.
 It was an ingenious plan, and taking into account Kashi's speed so far, there was no way he would be able to block it.
 Unfortunately, Kashi, much like most of the shonen heroes he'd watched growing up, was the kind of fighter that never started a fight at full gear.
 BOOM!
 [FERULIC'S TECHNIQUE ACTIVATED]!
 [ANGEL STEPS ACTIVATED]!

Swathes of green aura burst out from the daeben and enveloped him within. The daeben let out a hearty laugh and...
 Whoosh!
 The daeben's figure flitted through the bombardment, leaving only faint afterimages as testaments to his last known location. It was like everyone else was living in the past, as they could only see where he had been. Meanwhile, the second layer of the blade net, came under an even more relentless attack, as dozens of arrows shattered against the center within the short blink of an eye.
 The marilith watched all this happen with pure hatred. It could do nothing but charge up the final blade which had become more solid with each passing second. As much as it hoped Kashi would make commit an error and fall, that increasingly did not seem to be a realistic hope. What the hell kind of scenario was this, where the more realistic scenario was for the daeben to break out of that bombardment!?
 Dust clouds rose as the wind blades crashed the earth, gradually covering the area around the daeben. The marilith tensed as the dust rose, dreading the possibility that it would block the daeben would block the path. It was at this moment that it heard a shattering sound. Its eyes widened with shock as a small hole appeared at the center of the net.
 Once again, the marilith was floored by the daeben's arrogance. He could have easily broken through the sides, but he chose to smash through the center, the core of the net, and the place with the most blades bound tightly together.
 Almost instinctively, the marilith once again gambled on the daeben's arrogance and immediately slashed down. The giant mana blade shot at the net, its core aimed at that exact hole.
 "Brilliant!" Kashi roared as he finally broke through the net's center, only to come face to face with the dense mana blade. He sensed the power pulsating within the blade and knew his arrows would be completely useless. Rather than dodge like a good little boy, he defiantly raised his right arm to meet the blade. "Bring it!"
 BOOM!
 A massive explosion erupted as soon as the blade made contact with the daeben, sending dust and earth flying. The daeben's figure was swallowed up by the explosion, causing the hearts of everyone in the clearing to jump into their throats.
 What happened!? Did he fail or succeed!?
 Darian no longer cared about his safety. He stepped out of cover and stared at the dust cloud.
 Shadow's gaze narrowed, but he ultimately made no movement.
 Larsial peeked out from behind a tree, her eyes wide in shock as she stared at the dust cloud. Regardless of the result, she was now certain the daeben had definitely been going easy on Froy.
 The marilith was perhaps the tensest one there. It anxiously examined the dust cloud, fearing what the result would be once it cleared.
 Whoosh!
 It turned out it did not have to wait for the dust cloud to disperse.
 "That was awesome!" Kashi shouted as he dashed out of the dust cloud.
 "WHAT!?"
 "!!!"
 "HOW!?"
 The peanut gallery expressed their shock as they stared at the object firmly clasped in Kashi's dragonified right hand.
 "Here, have this back!" Kashi laughed as he whipped the mana blade in his right arm back at the stunned marilith.
 Due to its shock, the marilith failed to dodge in time.

Sqshh!
 The marilith screamed out in pain as the three arms on its left side were shorn clean off.
 "Fuck!" Larsial cursed as she dove to the earth to dodge the blade as it slashed its way through the forest, diving many trees in half before finally dissipating.
 Oblivious to Larsial's close shave with death, Kashi had the largest grin on his face as he finally arrived right before the marilith. The daeben's grin somehow widened even further as he regarded the marilith's pained expression. "As thanks for the thrilling experience, I'll show you what it means to be a true Asura!" Kashi roared as he jumped so he was abreast with the marilith's human part.
 "Earth Shattering Technique: Fifth Form, [ASURA]!"
 A gigantic Asuran image formed behind the daeben. Unlike the marilith's image, Kashi's Asura was a full image, depicting the entire Asura from head to toe. Furthermore, the Asuran image was so vivid, it was like they could reach out and touch it. Nothing compared to the marilith's translucent image.
 But the biggest difference of all lay in the Asuran image itself.
 While marilith's was clearly a summon of some sort, Kashi's Asuran image greatly resembled himself if he gained pounds of muscles and grew horns. It was for all intents and purposes, a demonified Kashi, and not a random image.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Asurans were known as harbingers as chaos and destruction. Their unquenchable rage often left numerous landscapes destroyed beyond recognition. Was the world trying to send a sort of message by having the daeben's Asuran image as a demonified version of himself?
 Who knew?
 Kashi had his back to the image so he was the last person that was going to ask such a question. With an excited shout, the Asuran image merged into Kashi's body. Where the marilith's image formed a mass of hands behind the demon, Kashi's entire body somehow transformed to match his Asuran image.
 Kashi once again displayed his uncanny ability to adapt to any situation. Anyone else would have been disoriented by gaining two extra pairs of arms, but the daeben simply took it in his stride and battered the poor marilith with an endless flood of punches way too fast for the human eyes to follow. The relentless blows soon formed countless images, creating an effect of seemingly a thousand hands delivering the blows.
 Blood splattered all around the earth as the marilith suffered under the relentless blows. The marilith could do nothing to retaliate as Kashi completed the battering. The daeben hammered one final blow to its jaw as his Asuran form dissipated, sending the marilith flying to the sky.
 If the marilith hoped this would be a brief respited it was sorely mistaken. Ferulic's Practice Bow appeared in Kashi's hand as he dropped to the earth. Twin arrows filled to the max with Dragon Ki shot out. The arrows rotated around each other and morphed into a single giant dragon.

The dragon chased after the airborne marilith.
 The marilith used the last of its strength to rotate to the side, allowing the dragon to pass by it in mid-air.
 Unfortunately, Kashi had planned for that eventuality and added the rarely used but definitely effective [Homing Arrow]. The effects of [Homing Arrow] activated, causing the dragon to turn mid-air.
 The marilith could only cry out as the dragon swallowed its human half and exploded. The heavily battered, and slightly unconscious marilith coughed up large amounts of blood as its body weakened even more.
 "Darian-san," Kashi suddenly prompted. "Prepare Yourself!"
 Darian readied his spear. Ever since Kashi asked him to, he had been charging the spear with holy energy, just waiting for the time to strike. Kashi's call was all he needed to flex his tired muscles and raise the spear. He gritted his teeth, wondering if Kashi wanted him to throw his spear. He really doubted he had enough energy to do even that, but if that was what it took to down this monster, he would not mind shortening his lifespan with a forbidden technique to achieve the throw.
 Luckily, Kashi had no intention of forcing the heavily injured centaur to overexert himself. "It's coming!" The daeben shouted as he raised his arm to the sky. "Realm Piercing Technique, Fifth Form: [GILGAMESH]!"
 Who knew what had possessed the daeben? He had managed to use up all his high-level skills in this fight! He was so excited he even constantly called out their full names even though he did not have to. This could only be attributed to the daeben lacking a true fight in ages. Grinding monsters could never satisfy the excitement that came with fighting an intelligent humanoid enemy. This fight had served as a method for the daeben to vent all the unease he had been suffering silently.
 Working towards the progress of the guild was fun, and exciting in its own way, but nothing could ever match the sheer excitement of a true battle where he was forced to bring out 100%. The daeben sighed as he watched one thousand-five hundred arrows shot out of a portal that appeared above the marilith.
 Who could understand his pain?
 "That was fun." Kashi turned his back to the conclusive result as the arrows pierced through the marilith at the same time.
 The marilith's tenacious life force saved it from instant death, but the force from the arrows sent it crashing to the earth, kicking up a large cloud of dust. The marilith weakly rose up, all thoughts of fighting gone from despair-filled eyes. It warily examined the dust cloud around it, hoping it could correctly pinpoint the daeben's location and successfully run away in the other direction.
 It did not hold much optimism as a result of its near-fatal injuries but hey, you never know right? The daeben might have assumed it had already died and it could use that opportunity to escape. It would heal itself then return with reinforcements. The marilith began to fantasize about its eventual revenge when a golden blade sliced through the dust cloud.
 The marilith scoffed at the slow spear and made to dodge, only to realize with fear it could not even move its body. Kashi's arrows had pinned the entire length of its tail portion to the earth. There was no way for it to dodge that slow blade!
 The marilith cried out as the blade grew larger until it consumed the entirety of its vision.
 Puchi!
 The dust cloud cleared to reveal the blood-soaked Darian, holding the handle of the spear that had buried itself in the marilith's head. Tears streamed down the centaur warrior's eyes as he withdrew watched life dissipate from the marilith's eyes. "This is for my brothers..."
 

 ***************
 ***************
 A/N: 
 SPECIAL ANNOUNCEMENT!!!
 For those who have been asking how they can support my writing, I am glad to annoucne that Ihave finally opened a patreon. Following this chapter will be one dedicated to all things patreon. For those who have either can't donate or don't feel like this work is something worth donating to, don't worry. I will not be changing the way I release this story. There won't be paywalls to access this series, but there are some perks that I have to set aside for my Patreons. For those who are interested, please head on to the next chapter and offer your suggestions in the comments of that chapter.
 

 Back to this Chapter!
 First proper boss fight in a while, and it was properly spread over a six-thousand words chapter. We might have forgotten due to the large amount of world-building and character development chapters but this is primarily an action novel.
 Hope I still got it! Lol!
 

 Picture of the Day
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 This image has inspired me. It brought back memories of Razznik facing off against Aileera (Leila's previous avatar in King's Journey) at the prologue chapters for Vol. 1
 The demon facing up against the defiant, confident maiden. She glares into the emotionless eyes, challenging the deeply buried humanity to once more fight its way out. Will the demon succumb to the human within, or will it raise its spear to the woman it once loved... Only the next scene can tell. But this one moment stretches for an eternity for these two...
 Huh... This is definitely making it into one of my stories.... Somehow. Lol

 

A/N: The Patreon Chapter



 Hey Guys!!! So, I'm gonna be talking about my Patreon here. My goals, ambitions, and whatnot will be clearly laid out for y'all to see and judge for yourselves. I will also be listing out the perks I assigned to the different Patreon tiers. I would like you guys to note that despite the page being published, these perks are not finalized.
 This chapter is primarily for you guys to look through the existing perks and suggest what you would like and what you don't like. Please try to be considerate of me as an author while making your requests. If you feel it's not reasonable, it most likely isn't.
 Alright, as per my teacher's instructions, I will first lay out the topics spread in this chapter so you have an idea what I'm going to cover here.
 i) History and Reason for Finally Starting a Patreon
 ii) Ambitions and Goals for Parallel Series
 a. Purchase top-tier writing tools (Grammarly and Scrinever) – $75
 b. Edit and Create a Definitive Edition of Parallel Vol.1 (Patreon Exclusive(?))
 c. Hire a Professional Editor and Proofreader for Parallel Vol.1 ($500)
 d. Hire a Professional Graphic Artist to Design the Cover ($249)
 e. Self Publish Parallel Vol.1 Online (Amazon)
 f. Find a way to bring Parallel Vol.1 to Print
 iii) The Patreon Tiers and their Respective Perks
 a. Residents ($1)
 b. Adventurers ($10)
 c. Warriors ($25)
 d. The High Council ($50)
 

 HISTORY AND REASON FOR FINALLY STARTING A PATREON
 So, as most of you might know, I am currently a student. I just finished my Bachelor's and am currently working on my Masters in Computer Science. Anyone who has done Computer Science can attest to the massive amount of time we spend coding and working out algorithms for our assignments. This was one of the major reasons my release schedule was so abysmal.
 So, what changed recently?
 I decided to take the risk and quit my part-time job! Between school and my part-time job, I barely had any time to sit down and write. Now, however, I have dedicated the nightly hours I usually spend at my part-time to fully writing. This is the major reason why I can regularly output high-quality chapters recently.
 And as the past couple of weeks have shown, most of the chapters are at the very least 2500 words, which is actually among the higher chapter length numbers on average on Wattpad. Special chapters like last week's and today's can even run as high as 4000 words, so I would like to believe I have not sacrificed the integrity of my uploads for this change. You guys can be the judge of that.
 Now although this is all well and good, cutting off my part-time job was a huge risk on my part. Without any extra income, a lot of plans I had for Parallel have been forcefully put on hold. Hence, I sincerely hope you find it in your heart to sponsor me going forward. Not only will it help me keep the lights on, but it will also prove to myself and my folks that this can actually be a future career path worth following. Any little you can give will be greatly welcome!
 Alright, enough with the sappy stories, let's move on to the important stuff.
 What the hell you gonna do with our money Ren?



 AMBITIONS AND GOALS FOR PARALLEL SERIES
 Alright, so I have a slightly optimistic dream of having Parallel Vol.1 published by January next year. However, after intensive research, I realized it's not as easy as giving it to a publisher and hoping for the best.
 Rather than hand it over to a publisher, I'm choosing the self-publishing route. Why you may ask? Because most publishers I came in contact with, (of those who did not outright reject my work), insisted I would either have to pull down my novels from Wattpad or put up a 'sample' on Wattpad and remove the rest. I'm sure a lot of you readers have run into this on Wattpad before. You'll be enjoying a book, only to suddenly realize it's just a sample. Worse yet is when it's a novel you've been following for weeks or years, and the author suddenly pulls it because he/she is getting published.
 Don't get me wrong. I'm not faulting those authors or anything. Most publishers demand this, and I understand why the authors themselves might be afraid that people will only read their work on Wattpad and not buy the book. However, I do not want to go down this route. I would have never believed in myself as a writer if it wasn't for the commenters on Wattpad. I've shared before how I almost lost confidence in myself when I dipped my toes into RoyalRoadl. This was a site I loved to death. In fact, a lot of the start of Parallel is a giant, obvious love letter to the story 'Moonlight Sculptor'. But it was that same site that all but crushed my confidence for a long while. However, this did not last long. How could it when I could always turn to awesome comment chains that spanned for dozens of comments either analyzing the story or just taking the piss.
 You guys built my confidence, sustained it, and I would never betray that no matter what happens. This is why I will never paywall chapters on Wattpad. Whether you're a Patreon or not, everyone will get my chapters at the same time. I understand that this is not the most business savvy move, but it's the one thing I will not budge on. All this said, let me clearly outline my roadmap for publishing this novel:
 i) Purchase top-tier writing tools (Grammarly and Scrinever) – $75
 ii) Edit and Create a Definitive Edition of Parallel Vol.1 (Patreon Exclusive(?))
 iii) Hire a Professional Editor and Proofreader for Parallel Vol.1 ($500)
 iv) Hire a Professional Graphic Artist to Design the Cover ($249)
 v) Self Publish Parallel Vol.1 Online (Amazon)
 vi) Find a way to bring Parallel Vol.1 to Print (Amazon) ($1500 for 100 copies) This one is a long-term goal. We can push it to the back of our minds for now.
 So, as y'all can see, taking Parallel to the next level takes money, money, and more money! If only I had Miote by me in real life, none of these would be a problem! Anyway, yeah, these are my current goals. I want you to know that every dollar you donate will go a long way to making these a reality!
 Now, you guys might have noticed something called DEFINITIVE EDITION OF PARALLEL VOL. 1 and wondering what the hell that is. Well, before taking this novel to an editor or proofreader, there are lots of changes, big and small that have to be made to it. From things like the correct races to the tiers of weapons, magic systems to a major overhaul of how ki and mana are represented in the stats table.
 You guys might have noticed a trend of me repeatedly differentiating between mana and ki. This is no coincidence. As those of you have been here from the beginning know, Parallel started out as a fun, light novel that was sort of a fan-fiction of Moonlight Sculptor. At the time, I didn't think I would go this far so I didn't put much thought into the game stat system and several other auxiliary but important factors like date and time, as well as weapon rarities. Some of these were easily fixed in later chapters, but some are not as easy to fix as others. A prime example of this is the ki, mana debacle.

Warriors are not meant to have the same amount of mana as mages, but at the start, because warriors also used special moves, I blindly assigned mana to them too. I soon realized that they need a separate 'power' tree, which I then decided to title ki. Ki, in warriors, will be tied to their stamina stat, much like how mana is tied to wisdom. This is a significant change I need to make right from the ground up, starting from the very first volume.
 Hence, the Definitive Edition will be a daily edit of each chapter of Parallel Vol. 1 once I have purchased Grammarly and Scrinever. I initially decided to post it solely to my Patreon page, where you guys can read, criticize and join me in the editing process... However, should you so decide, I will post a delayed chapter to Wattpad. Delayed by a week should be fine.
 Note that this is completely different from the Parallel Series! As previously stated, the main series (and United Front) will never be paywalled! I can guarantee you that!
 Finally, let's look at the tier of Patreons and their individual benefits
 

 THE PATREON TIERS AND THEIR RESPECTIVE PERKS
 The various Patreon Tiers are as follows:
 a. Residents ($1)
 b. Adventurers ($10)
 c. Warriors ($25)
 d. The High Council ($50)
 

 Residents
 Residents donate $1. Residents and all tiers above get a shout out at the end of every chapter, and stand a good chance of having a cameo in the story itself.
 

 Adventures
 Adventurers donate $10. Adventurers and all tiers above get access to my personal drafts, private caches of character ideas pulled from the internet and random ideas floating around. Adventurers also have higher priority than Residents to have a character named after them.
 

 Warriors
 Warriors donate $25. Warriors and all tiers above can design an entire character of their choice (within the laws of the story), and this character will play a role in the story. Note that this applies to both the main Parallel Series and Parallel: UF. Also, note that the created character can end up on either the evil or good side.
 

 High Council
 The High Council can design a character of their choice (within the laws of the story) that will play a significant role in the story. An example of this is Miote. His real-life name, Usman Taki was gotten from a reader called @MohammedUsmanShafeeq. There's nothing stopping you from becoming the next Miote should you wish!
 Members of the High Council are entitled to free, signed copies of all novels once they are published
 Members of the High Council can also discuss, and propose mini-arcs with me. What is a mini-arc? A mini-arc is like a side quest the main character goes on. It doesn't necessarily further the overarching plot, but it's usually a nice way to have some character development, strengthen certain characters, or find an excuse to have a character find some epic loot or stumble onto something even bigger.
 An example of a mini-arc would be Kashi's current search for the centaur village. It does not further the overall plot of world domination, but it's a chance to pass some time in the world, have some world-building, action-scenes and add some extra perks while we wait for the big showdown looming in the horizon. So, if you've got ideas for mini-arcs feel free to propose them. I will certainly name a prominent character after you in recognition of your contribution.
 CONCLUSION
 Alright, whew, this ended up almost the length of a regular chapter. I tried to touch on everything I could, but I'm only human and might have forgotten some important details. If you have any questions, feel free to ask below and I will get back to you ASAP.
 That said, you guys might have noticed I don't really have too many rewards to hand right now. Please bear with me. As an unemployed student, I certainly can't afford any great rewards like other patreons hand out!
 Lol.. that said, if you've read this far, Patreon or not, thank you for your patience. I really appreciate it. Let me know your thoughts in the comments below, and catch me on my brand new discord channel Live No Evil (Chat Room) https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj
 I know Watty doesn't exactly allow copy and pasting from the books, so I will add also put the link in the comments below.
 Oh, by the way, my profile name is Renoe_K#2704
 Hehe, I'll be honest, I'm a fresh noob at this whole discord thing. I'm gonna spend the next couple of days reading tutorials on how to work this damn thing! What's that? Why am I reading a tutorial for discord when I refuse to read the manuals for literally every household appliance and electronics I buy?
 Hehehehehehe..... Young one.
 Oh, yeah here's the link to my patreon if you're so inclined: https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K

 

A/N: Answering Some Questions

This is mainly to answer some quick questions some of you have about the Patreon. I did not want to tack it onto the end of the next chapter which will be accompanying this upload. Don't worry, I won't open only a patreon chapter. I know how disappointing it is to expect an upload only to see the author talking about random stuff.
 Alright. Let's get down to it. Here are the most questions I've gotten in the past day. I will regularly update this chapter as more questions are asked. So, here are the questions
 1) What is Patreon and how does it work?
 2) Do you charge per content or per month
 3) Am I charged immediately I form a pledge?
 4) Is $1 too small? 
 5) What's Discord and How do I join?
 6) Can I Change my Pledge/Make a Random Pledge?  
 

 ANSWERS
 1) What is Patreon and How does it work?
 I can't believe I forgot to explain what Patreon is. I wrongly assumed everyone should know what it is. Patreon is a site for upcoming content creators, be they singers, writers, YouTubers, gamers, etc. who want to create content that is fun and engaging for their audience but can't rely on the regular means of earning revenue because of all the red tape and restrictive rules.
 Patreon allows viewers, readers, music lovers etc. to help fund artists of their choice from as low as $1 a month to as high as 50$ or even higher depending on the content creator's choice in return for exclusive perks no one else can enjoy. A lot of users donate $1 to their favorite artists. It might seem small at first, but imagine what happens if fifty, or one-hundred people donate $1 each? That's the power of patreon. A lot of non-mainstream content creators are turning towards Patreon as their source of income. Some success stories such as Peter Hollens earns enough from Patreon alone to sustain his entire family! That's just wild!
 

 2) Do you Charge per Content or per Month
 I set up my Patreon to charge per Month. What this means is that Patreon will only bill you once per month, on the 1st of every month. What this means is that you can set a pledge for $1 or higher right now, and be safe in the knowledge that you will not be charged until the 1st of November. 
 (For the sake of future readers, if you pledge in the middle of the month, you are not charged until the start of the next month!)
 This means that all you need to do is be sure that you'll have the amount you set as your pledge in your account at the 1st of every month. For example, I can place a pledge of $1 because I am certain that no matter what happens, there won't be a situation where I do not have even that much in my account. That way I don't need to manage it, and I am sure I've done my part for my artist that month.
 

 3) Am I Charged immediately I form a Pledge?
 No. You are not charged immediately. As stated above, because of how I've set up my Patreon, you are not forced to part with your money the moment you set your pledge. So, you can easily set your pledge now even if you don't have the money as long as you're sure you'll have it on the first, and that it doesn't hurt you financially!
 I cannot stress this enough! Please do not donate more than you can afford! I'm a mega fanboy too, and I've had moments where I wanted to donate more than I should have because I really loved a creator's work. NEVER NEVER DO THIS!
 

 4) Is $1 Too Small?
 Are you kidding me? Hell no! Most Patreon channels live and die on the $1 donations. Just imagine if 100 readers donated $1. That's a content creator $100 richer than he would have been if he thought $1 beneath him! Believe me. If you feel you can afford to donate $1, please do! It will go a loooong way!
 

 5) What is Discord and How do I join?
 Discord is a platform that was initially designed for gamers to chat and talk to each other in a friendly, easy-to-use environment. However, like all things, many soon caught on to its awesome potential and now its used by millions of people in different fields to create 'rooms' where they can chat with their fans in a relaxed, fun environment.
 To join, all you have to do is either download the app on your phone, tablet, computer, potato, or whatever it is you use. Sign up, create a profile, then paste the following discord link in your browser: https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj
 Alternatively, you could click on the giant plus sign on your discord app home screen to join a new server. When you're prompted to enter the instant invite, enter the following: https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj
 

 6) Can I Change my Pledge/Make a Random Pledge?
 The answer to your question is yes! When you choose to become a patreon, you are provided with the option of either choosing one of the creator's established tiers, or  making a custom pledge of your own choice if the pledge you're comfortable with is not within the tiers provided.
 You can also freely switch between the different pledge tiers later on, and change your custom pledge if you feel you can donate more or less.
 

 

 Thank you for your time and patience... Enjoy the next chapter and have a nice day!
 

 For those who want to make their pledges, this is my Patreon Page: 
 https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K

 

Chapter 21: Darian Alshmeer

          
             
 Kirkcour Woods
 16th Banem 1092
 Darian pulled out his spear from the marilith's forehead and watched the lifeless beast fall to the ground with anguish-filled eyes. Why? Why had he been the only one to survive? Just because they lacked power, his friends had been slaughtered by something like this! Something like...
 Tap.
 Darian jerked as he felt a hand tap his left flank. He looked down, meeting Kashi's mirth-filled gaze. 
 The daeben squeezed out a strained smile as he regarded the centaur warrior's lifeless eyes. Kashi recognized those eyes all too well. Suzuki had the same look in his eyes for several weeks after the accident. "Survivor's Guilt?"
 "Guilt... yes," Darian murmured. "I am responsible for the deaths of so many fine warriors. My selfishness has cost many mothers their sons and daughters." Darian' right hand tightly gripped the spear's shaft. "This sin, I will never be able to redeem myself." Melancholy and resignation darkened the centaur's gaze as his grip loosened. "I suppose it's a good thing then that I will not live much longer."
 Kashi's brow shot up. "You're not thinking of suicide are you?"
 "Haha, no Kashi-dono," Darian denied with a bitter chuckle. He turned so he faced the daeben and humbly bowed. "On behalf of the Lymar tribe, I humbly thank you for your assistance. It may be impertinent of me to ask you this after you've just risked your life to save mine, but my tribe is situated one-hundred kilometers south-east of this location." Darian indicated the direction with his left hand. "Would you please find my father, the chief and give him my spear. If you can find it in your heart, I also ask that you please lend your strength to save them from this dire plight."
 "What about you?" Kashi asked. "Why can't you take me there yourself?"
 Darian shook his head. "I fear my injuries are too severe. I've done all I could to stay alive long enough to see this beast slain. Never in my wildest dreams did I think I will get the chance to slay it with my own hands. This is more than enough. I can die now with no regrets."
 Kashi's eyes narrowed as he regarded the bowing warrior. Eventually, he sighed and stated, "No. I will not help you."
 "K-Kashi-dono!" Darian shouted in panic, but he still did not raise his head. "Please, if nothing else, at least take this spear to my father. The village needs this spear if it is to survive the coming storm."
 "Why should I?" Kashi retorted with a snort. "I could just as easily wait for you to die and take the spear for myself. It does look pretty powerful. Don't you think so, Shadow?"
 "I agree," Shadow stated as he walked up to the daeben's side. He did not know what Kashi was playing at, but he would not be the one to get in the daeben's way. "Larsial, what do you think?"
 "That's a rare Holy-Attributed spear," Larsial analyzed as she walked to Kashi's other side. "The fact he was using that to fight the marilith for so long without a single crack on the blade suggests it's at least legendary tier. It might even be Divine-Tier. It would explain why he's so eager to take it back to the village. It might be their protective talisman."
 Kashi and Shadow looked over to Larsial with shock and confusion written all over their faces. Oi! Oi! Oi! Are you trying to make him hate us!?
 Larsial playfully stuck out her tongue in reply at the two men in reply. 
 Darian' head was still bowed so he could not see the interaction between the trio. He gritted his teeth and tightly clasped the spear. Yeah, this was the truth of the world. Who would choose to risk their life when there was such a massive benefit for doing absolutely nothing?

Why had he even begun to rely on someone else? The dying embers in Darian' eyes rekindled with renewed determination. That's right! He would not shame his fallen brothers by giving up so easily! Darian gritted his teeth and raised his head to meet the smiling daeben's strong gaze.
 "I take it you've chosen to live a bit longer?" Kashi questioned.
 "Haha, yes, Kashi-dono." Darian was not stupid. He knew from the daeben's expression that he never had the intention of stealing the spear. If Kashi wanted, he could easily slay the centaur with a casual punch. There was no need to talk so much. "I will squeeze out whatever life force I have left to carry this back to the village. I only ask that should I fail, you complete the journey in my place."
 Kashi shook his head with a smile. "That will not be necessary. You will definitely make it." Darian did not have a chance to ask what he meant by that when Kashi suddenly placed a hand on his flank. 
 Darian' eyes went wide with shock as a flood of green aura poured out of Kashi's brightly illuminated hands. The proud centaur failed to hold back a blissful moan as the warm, pleasant aura seeped into his body through his injuries.
 Yggdrasil's healing potency finally had a chance to show its might. Shadow and Larsial gaped as they watched the centaur's injuries rapidly close up. Within mere seconds, all of Darian' injuries had completely healed without any scars whatsoever. His lifeforce was also rejuvenated by the pure healing energy, causing him to experience a vitality that rivaled that of his teenage years. 
 Forget healing. This energy, whatever it was, made him feel much better than he had in years. The centaur's happiness and shock were fully displayed on his face as Kashi removed his hands from the centaur's body.
 The daeben looked up at Darian, a weak smile plastered on his face. "There. You should be able to take us to your village now right?" 
 Darian' opened his mouth, but his voice failed him when he noticed the daeben's pale complexion. Looking closer, he could see the pool of sweat on Kashi's forehead, revealing the exhaustion the daeben had been trying to hide. Darian' heart grew heavy. He clasped his right fist with his left palm and bowed once more. This was the warrior's salute of his village, given only to those who have gained the utmost respect from an individual. "I will never forget this favor. This life is yours from this moment."
 "It's fine." Kashi weakly waved away the promise with a smile. This time, he was not faking it, that healing had almost drained what was left of his mana. Although his fight with the marilith had looked easy to the outside world, he'd expended a ton of mana and ki while countering the mana blades. It was to be remembered those were the ultimate attack of a monster of at least level 160. The mana needed to counter such an attack was in no way small. 
 Luckily, Kashi's ridiculous mana and ki regeneration had already kicked in and he was recovering both quite quickly. It was just that the amount of mana needed to open op his dimension to pour out the healing aura was not small. Kashi was grateful for this experience. He was beginning to get the rules to his dimension with each test.
 "Your people need you," Kashi stated as he took a deep breath. "I would not dare claim your life. For now, it's enough for us to be friends," Kashi said and held out his right hand, causing Larsial and Shadow to look at him out the corner of their eyes.
 Did this madman just say the 'friend' word? This is still Kashi, right? The Kashi? Does this man even know what 'friend' means?
 "Friends?" Darian balked as he stared at the daeben's hand. "No, no, no. I wouldn't dare." He hurriedly shook his head.
 The assassins turned their attention to the centaur. Now this one's rejecting? 
 Oblivious to their thoughts, Darian, grasped Kashi's forearm with a smile. "Let's just say I'm in your debt."

"Fair enough," Kashi conceded with a light chuckle. He opened his left palm and a large portal appeared on the ground. Drixlia and the assassins' mounts rose from the portal, whinnying in disappointment as they realized they had returned to their own dimension. Drixlia trotted over to Kashi and blew the daeben's hair.
 Kashi laughed as he patted the stallion's muzzle. "You liked it there, didn't you?"
 Drixlia's head comically bobbed up and down as it neighed to express his assent. But immediately after it paused, a troubled look in its eyes as it dug the earth with its front, left hoof. It really loved the air in Kashi's dimension. The pure mana and life energy were both beneficial for its growth. Its instincts told it that if it stayed there for a long time, its chances of evolving would increase exponentially. 
 Unfortunately, it had always been a wild horse. Its hot blood would not allow it to sit in Kashi's peaceful world and grow fat. It loved to roam. It loved finding new places and running through danger. None of this was available in Kashi's one-dimensional world that only had grass and water as far as the eyes could see.
 Kashi could sense Drixlia's discomfort but unfortunately, he had not spent enough time with the stallion to build the skills necessary to understand its intentions.
 "Your horse," Darian said. "It says strange things."
 Kashi looked at Darian in shock. "You can understand him? I thought that was a myth?"
 Darian shook his head. "It is not entirely a myth. Some among our people are born with the innate gift to speak to and understand horses. Those not born with the gift are taught the skills necessary to glean the beasts' intentions from their behavior."
 "Is there a need?" Kashi was confused. "It's not like you guys need to ride horses."
 "Maybe not," Darian agreed. "However, our ancestors were horse herders. They sold horses to different empires in return for food, clothing, and shelter. Tradition states we must pass on the skills whether we need it or not."
 Kashi clasped his palms together. "Thank Aethir for traditions," he joked as he hopped onto Drixlia's back. "So, what was little Drix saying?" Kashi asked as he held Drixlia's reins.
 "He enjoys the 'world' he was in, but feels like it cages him," Darian murmured. He was clearly not confident in what he was saying. What did the horse mean by a 'world'? Was it crazy? He looked at the daeben. It seemed Kashi had summoned it from somewhere. Could it have been another world altogether?
 A terrifying thought suddenly surfaced in Darian' mind. Was this guy also a Summoner? If that was the case... A shiver ran down the centaur's mind.
 Kashi did not pay attention to Darian' discomfort. He was pondering on the centaur's revelation. Indeed, he could not keep Drixlia locked up in his realm. Who knew how long it would take for it to evolve? That was a strategy he could only use with a beast that really did not want to work at all. It seemed he would really have to depend on the centaurs.
 Kashi leaned over and patted Drixilia's crest. "Don't worry partner. We'll definitely find a way." Drixlia neighed and shook its head vigorously, its spirit fully reinvigorated. Kashi chuckled as he turned to Darian. "What next? Do we go straight to your village?"
 Darian looked into the forest with a troubled expression. "If it's not too much trouble, I would like to bury my brothers. They gave their lives as true warriors of the tribe. I do not wish for their bodies to be desecrated by common wildlife."
 "That is an admirable purpose," Kashi agreed with a nod. "We will accompany you in your search. How many are there?"
 "Six warriors rode with me," Darian squeezed out through gritted teeth. "Four stallions and two mares". 

Kashi spurred Drixlia so he was next to Darian. He patted Darian' shoulder and promised, "We'll find them."
 Darian sniffed then looked at the spear in his hand. "Would you mind placing this in your inventory?"
 Kashi was not surprised that Darian knew about the word 'inventory.' Many Summoned liked to boast about their inventories to disgruntled Residents. To many Summoned, it was worth it to admire the looks of envy, greed, and awe on the Residents' faces everytime they pulled something out of or put something into their inventory.
 A random thought crossed the daeben's mind as he accepted the staff and placed it in his inner world. "Hey, would you pay for a pouch that had effects similar to our inventories?"
 "Do you mean a dimensional pouch?" Darian asked. "My ancestors found one in a relic decades ago. It's now one of our village's greatest treasures." Darian was not afraid to share this information with Kashi. As far as he was concerned, the Summoned's inventory space was much larger and more valuable than their little dimensional pouch. He turned to trot in the last known direction of his brothers-in-arms. "I highly doubt think there is a living soul with enough Syros to pay for something that important."
 "You should not be so free with that information," Larsial suddenly interjected. "As far as I know, the Summoned's inventory space is not infinite. I have met quite a few Summoned who were troubled over their tiny inventory space. They would gladly raze your village to the ground for the sake of your dimensional pouch."
 "Is this true?" Darian asked, stunned by the information.
 "Summoned are a heartless bunch," Kashi agreed with a wry smile. He pointed at Shadow. "Just look at him."
 Shadow suddenly experienced what it felt like to be shot while lying down. He glared at Kashi but the daeben had already turned back to Darian. Shadow gritted his teeth and took out his rink. "Hey, Sis. Have you ever considered beating up Kashi? He really enjoys it..."
 Kashi, who did not that a new type of hell was being prepared for him somewhere, continued to chat with Darian. "If you don't mind, could you tell me what your mission was? Seven is a little small for a clearing party."
 "You are my benefactor. There is nothing to hide from you," Darian said. "Members of my platoon long since figured out that this particular blight was man-made. We theorized that if we could end the source of the blight, the monster would be severely weakened. Enough for us to clean them up."
 "You said 'this particular blight,'" Kashi remarked. "Do you mean blights have occurred here before?"
 Darian sighed. "In recent decades, as long as you live in this forest, blights have become reality you cannot escape from. Most times, they are small in scope and we can easily clear them out by tracking the vine blights to their Root Tree and destroying it. Previously, our worst ever scenario was one time when three Root Trees spawned at the same time. This time, however, we could not understand what is going on."
 "What do you mean?" Larsial asked.
 "We tracked and found at least ten Root Trees... Ten!" Darian exclaimed. "That was just the ones we managed to track. Even worse, the blights this time were ten times stronger and there were all sorts of never seen demons!" Darian clenched his fists. "We knew there was some secret force behind this. We just had to find and expose them."
 "If it's so dangerous, why don't your people pack up and relocate?" Shadow suddenly interjected.
 Kashi glanced at Shadow out of the corner of his eyes. This punk. He doesn't talk much, but when he does, he cuts straight to the heart of the matter. It was enough to give someone a heart attack. 

Darian' brows furrowed, a troubled light in his gaze. He took a second to think on the question, then despondently sighed. "My apologies, I am not at liberty to reveal that. Only the village chief can choose to answer that."
 "I understand," Shadow stated, but his cold gaze caused the atmosphere to turn awkward.
 Kashi coughed, drawing attention to himself. "A-anyway, did your team end up finding anything?"
 "Yes, we did," Darian revealed. His gaze was filled with pride as he thought of the sacrifices required to get this information. "We located the headquarters of the group causing this. At the center, there's a massive hole. We could not see what was within it, but we could tell that it held the source of the blight. In fact, it might have been the true source of all the blights so far." Darian clenched his fist. He bit his lips in regret as he said, "Unfortunately, we were discovered by a vine blight on our way out. We managed to fight our way out of their encirclement for a long time, but in the end, we came up against the marilith."
 Darian' voice dropped and his gaze darkened. "We could not outrun it in the forest, so we tried to fight it, but none of us were strong enough. My brothers fell one after another to its claws. In the end, when there were only two of us left, I managed to lure it away. I don't know how long we battled for, but then I heard the sounds of fighting. I thought it was reinforcements hence why I fled in your direction. I apologize for that."
 "No need to apologize," Kashi refuted. "I thoroughly enjoyed that fight! I have not been given the opportunity to truly go out like that in a very long time."
 Darian was about to reply, but at that moment, a familiar smell stung his nose. His gaze turned steely. "It's just ahead," he said, then broke into a hard sprint.
 Kashi's expression also turned solemn. To be frank, he had smelled the thick scent of blood much earlier. But he'd wanted Darian to take the lead on this one. They were his people. He should be the one to find them.
  Kashi looked over at Shadow and Larsial. "We'll follow." The trio raced in the same direction as Darian. They eventually broke through the trees to a small patch of land.
 Kashi's nose scrunched up as the thick scent of blood assaulted his nose. His eyes turned cold as he took in the mutilated body parts strewn across the patch of land. The marilith's cruelty could clearly be felt in the terrified eyes of the warriors on the ground. These proud military stallions and mares did not fear death. They just hated the way they died. No one deserved to be torn apart or chewed to pieces by a brainless monster. 
 That was not a death befitting one who put their life on the line for their people!
 Kashi dismounted, but he was shocked to see someone had already beat him to it. Kashi swallowed hard as the densest, most explosive mass of killing intent he had felt in this life hit him like a brick wall. 
 "Kashi..."
 "I know." Kashi acknowledged as he placed a hand on Shadow's shoulder. He looked at the broken figure standing at the center of the land, empty eyes taking in the state of his best friends. "We'll slaughter them all."
 Seemingly satisfied with the daeben's reply, Shadow managed to rein in his killing intent. Bloody murder still reigned in the assassin's cold eyes, but it was now sealed within, festering and growing until the day it would explode.
 Kashi walked over to Darian' side. "It doesn't mean much at this point, but I can help you transport their bodies to your village. Their noble sacrifice deserves a proper burial fit for a hero."
 Darian' heart rumbled like it had been struck by thunder. He had not imagined he would ever be able to give these warriors the burial they deserved. Grateful tears poured freely down the centaur's eyes as he turned to face Kashi. He once again clasped his fist and bowed. "I will never forget this debt!"

Kashi did not attempt to brush this debt off. Compared to saving Darian' life, the daeben knew this favor, to a warrior was much more important. To brush it off would only be an insult to the memory of Darian' comrades. 
 Kashi, Shadow, Larsial, and Darian patiently scoured the land for every body part they could find. Any found was handed to the daeben, who then carefully placed them into his inner world. Luckily, the daeben had excellent spatial awareness. Just by picking each part, he could picture the full centaur. He did not rest until they had found every single piece of all the centaurs. Even with that, there were a few pieces of flesh missing. Most of these had been bitten and swallowed by the marilith. There was nothing Kashi could do about that.
 When they were done, Kashi, Shadow, and Larsial mounted their horses and followed Darian as he led them towards the village, their emotions dampened by the horrid scene they just witnessed. 
 A few blights attacked them during them during their journey, but Kashi was not in the mood to enjoy a fight, especially when they came across the body of the final centaur Darian had helped to escape. Much like Darian, the centaur succumbed to his injuries and perished. Unfortunately, there was no magic daeben to save him.
 Kashi solemnly placed the corpse in his inner world before continuing their journey.
 A few hours later, Kashi squinted as the rising sun bled into his eyes. Off in the distance, the tell-tale wooden walls of civilization marked the end of this journey.
 ***
 ???
 Daggerfall
 Somewhere within this continent, the red rays of the sun washed over a sea of blood and corpses. The sun's rays raised the curtain on a gruesome war that would engulf the land as the wailing and screams of those present at the scene scattered into the morning winds.
 ***
 In one corner of Daggerfall, a young Orc champion looked up at the sky with furrowed brows. "What is this?"
 ***
 Somewhere else, a dwarf walked out his home and gazed at the red sky. "Something is wrong."
 ***
 Somewhere else, a young halben licked her lips as she gazed at the blood-red sky. "Let it flow..."
 

 

 **************
 **************
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:
 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabaria...
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252...
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf...
 You Guys are the Best!!!
 

 ************
 ************
 A/N: 6 Patreons in a day... Someone pinch me and tell me I'm dreaming! Hahaha, thanks a lot you guys! I still can't believe this is a reality. You have no idea how much that first notification meant to me! They say you don't forget your first time. Well, I sure as hell won't forget my first set of Patreons. You guys have boosted my confidence and for that I will forever be in your debt.
 

 Picture of the Day
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 If you ever wondered what Yanakal really looked like...
 

 

 Video of the Day
 
   
     
       
       
     
   
   
 
 If Parallel ever makes it to the small screen (anime), I want this to be the opener for Season 1 Episode 1

 

Chapter 22.1: Bloody Morning

10 Minutes Earlier...
 Rhatheth, Daggerfall.
 17th Banem 1092.
 A flock of migrating birds gently flew over Daggerfall's tropical grasslands. Every year, they would relocate to Ederwood's tropical rainforests to escape Markoth's harsh cold. Then, when the month of Banem arrived, they would begin the long journey back home. Their migratory path took them through the tropical grasslands of Daggerfall, a region these migratory birds did not fancy because of its lack of trees.
 "Hahaha! Grovitch, you shit stain! You bagged yourself a big one!"
 Euphoric laughter booming across the hated land drew the flock's attention. The birds looked down, but then instantly increased their speed when they spotted the cluster of green-skinned creatures walking across the field. Within moments, no traces remained in the vicinity.
 On the ground, the laughter was revealed to have originated from one of two orc hunting parties on their way back from their latest expedition. The hulking green masses, trekked alongside their giant boar mounts, laughing as they compared the newest catch against the other party's. This mission had lasted an entire week. That was a week spent scouring for prey during the day and sleeping under the stars at night. The Orcs missed their warm straw beds. They could not wait to return home and go several rounds with their women.
 Daggerfall's grasslands lacked the widespread exotic beasts found in the region. The land's hot and humid climate, coupled with its sparse rainfall meant few creatures chose this place as their home. However, the abundant grasslands made it a haven for herbivores. The Orcs made this place their home for centuries as they sought to escape the world's eyes.
 Several millennia had passed since Ferulic designed the first Orcs from the vilest of humish desires. When they were first created, Orcs knew nothing but slaughter and mayhem, and they did indeed plunge the world into chaos which caused them to be hated.
 Fortunately, the passing of centuries continually diluted the madness within the Orkish bloodline. Roughly one-thousand years to this day, a mysterious man helped the Orcs purify their bloodline. This action directly promoted the Orcs from being labeled as savages on the levels of kobolds to a sentient race that could take their place next to the other humes.
 However, the world was not ready to forgive the orcs for their past crimes just because they had become sentient creatures. If anything, the orcs' sentience meant they could finally get to enjoy watching the orcs wallow in pain at losing their loved ones. But as fate would have it, the orcs did not lose their strength or battlelust even after turning sentient.
 The orcs were all too happy to engage the other races in a prolonged war that resulted in heavy losses on all sides. Eventually, the leaders of the world realized the pointlessness of the bloodshed and came to an agreement with the orcs. Daggerfall's lands were ceded to the orcs in return for the orcs' promise to never step out of it.
 The orcs agreed to this arrangement. The entire Orkish tribe packed up and moved to Daggerfall. Upon arriving at the land, they split up into dozens of nomadic tribes spread across the country. These nomadic tribes would sometimes run into each other on the grasslands, and be forced to contest over a hunting ground.
 In the past, both tribes would fight until one was utterly routed. The new tradition, however, was that a few selected individuals from each tribe would do battle. The winners would claim the hunting grounds while the losers would have to continue their search for a new hunting ground.
 This way, the orkish tribes ensured their fighting prowess did not decline despite the relative peace.
 The village of Rhatheth was one such nomadic village. The orcs walked alongside their giant boar mounts as they laughed and boasted about the looks of elation on their women's faces and the loud cries of pleasure that would make their neighbors jealous. Each orc claimed he was the manliest 'man' amongst the group, with some going so far as to display their excellent 'thrusting' game.

"Stop!"
 The orcs' boisterous atmosphere seized as one of the party leaders raised his hand. The leader's eyes narrowed as he peered into the horizon. "Grovitch. Is that smoke I see?"
 The orc called Grovitch was the leader of the second party. He stepped forward with a waraxe balanced on his shoulder and squinted as he too peered into the horizon. His features instantly twisted as panic shook his heart. "Durst, That's smoke! But, the village's still so far away. Why do we see smoke from here?"
 "I don't know. But I don't like it," Durst replied, his voice tense with worry. "Hurry!" He roared and quickly jumped onto his mount.
 By now, the trailing orcs could also see the smoke on the horizon. Panic seized their hearts, as the orcs quickly mounted their boars and chased after Durst's back.
 Durst's breathing grew haggard, and his eyes turned red as the village came into view. Indeed the smoke was coming from the town! The thick plumes of smoke were too eye-catching in the plains. Durst's heart leaped to his throat as a terrifying notion took root in his mind. "Riyhad! Merthyl! Please be safe!" The orc captain cried out as he pushed the giant boar far beyond its limits.
 Durst paled once he was within three hundred meters of the village. Fire and smoke scorched the land and consumed many huts. The perimeter walls had crumbled to dust, and corpses dotted the earth around the perimeter. The orc captain jumped off his giant boar once reached the village bounder and examined a nearby body with a grim look.
 Grovitch dismounted and walked up to his friend's side. He took in the gruesome scene with a stony gaze. "This was a massacre."
 "They were assassinated," Durst corrected. He pointed at the orcs' necks. "One clean cut each. The enemy is skilled."
 "Enemy? You think one person did all this?" Grovitch looked at the long stretch of bodies.
 "I'm certain," Durst said as he pointed at three nearby corpses. "The cuts are uniform across at least four bodies. The same blade used with the same technique. Unless the enemy can clone himself, this is the only reasonable explanation."
 "This was not done by an orc." Grovitch's voice cracked, and he suddenly paled. He would have been as worried if this was done by orcs. There existed unwritten codes of conduct in Orkish communities for the rare chance that an orc tribe was driven to the point of desperation that they needed to raid another tribe. The raiding tribe shall only kill until their target was subdued and women and children were not to be harmed.
 Grovitch had initially assumed this was the doing of a nearby orc tribe, but Durst just confirmed that wasn't the case. Would that not mean his children could be in danger? "Durst. I've got to check on the kids. You should see if your wife and daughter are—"
 "Aaaah!"
 A loud wail filled with pain, misery, and rage nearly tore out their eardrums. One scream turned to five, then ten, until they could no longer figure out just how many people were shouting.
 Durst's face twisted with worry. He turned to look at Grovitch who wore a very similar expression. "Where are the men?"
 "I sent them into the village to search for survivors," Grovitch said. His eyes suddenly turned red with rage as a thought surfaced in his mind. "Do you think they were ambushed?"
 "Only one way to find out," Durst said as he rose to his feet. He nodded at his friend and they both grabbed their warax from the side of their mounts before running into the village.
 Durst's eyes scanned the village streets as they ran toward the source of the screams. His brows furrowed in confusion as he realized he could not find signs of any corpses despite the burning buildings. Did the enemy kidnap their people? The orc captain's eyes burned with fury. If they dared to harm a hair on his daughter!

The orc captains recognized the source of the screams to be the village square. Both men picked up the pace, and after rounding the corner, they finally had the village square in view. However, they were stunned to find their path blocked by the orcs from the hunting party, all of whom had their head raised, bellowing in equal parts despair and rage. Some orcs sat listlessly on the earth, their gazes empty and bleak. These broken spirits were ready to give up on life at that moment.
 Durst once again experienced an upheaval in his heart. What in the world could make so many brave warriors scream out this way? Dark clouds covered the orc captain's heart as he attempted to push his way through the crowd.
 The wailing orcs were about to unleash their anger on the rude bastard pushing them, but their expressions changed when they realized it was their captains. Their subsequent actions only served to increase the worry in Durst's heart.
 "Captain! Don't go! Captain!" The orcs shouted with pain and tears as they struggled to hold back Durst and Grovitch.
 The captains were not stupid. The terrifying truth began to take root in their minds as they absentmindedly pushed their men out of the way. Both orc captain's eyes were heavy as stone, their noses stinging with the sharp smell of fresh blood. They needed to confirm this truth for themselves.
 "Captain!"
 "Stop! Captain!"
 "Please wait, Captain!"
 By this point, even the listless orcs had begun holding back the captains. The orcs desperately did their best to prevent their captains from entering the village square. Unfortunately, both Durst and Grovitch were captains for a reason. They successfully pushed their way into the village square, where a bone-chilling sight greeted them.
 Mountains of corpses filled up the square. Old, young, infants, women, men... hundreds of corpses were piled up amongst thick smoke and fire. Thick blood flowed between these mountains, gushing like a river toward the plains. At the center of these mountains, a group of orcs was hurrying to untie some headless bodies that had been hoisted on poles.
 "AAAH!" Grovitch's cry tore through the village as he recognized three children on the poles. "Mutch! Drackt! Fundu!" Grovitch called out to his sons, but how were they to answer their father's calls without their heads? Grovitch ran over and pushed the orcs who had been trying to untie the bodies out of the way.
 The orcs had been trying to remove the bodies from the pole with as much care as possible, but Grovitch in his current state did not care about any of that. With a swing of his ax, the poles came crashing down, bringing his children's corpses with them.
 Luckily, the orcs he pushed away recognized the danger and caught the pole before it hit the ground. They proceeded to gently lay the pole on the ground, and quickly untie the children. They then stepped aside as Grovitch grabbed the tiny bodies and hugged them to his chest. "I'll kill them! I'll slaughter them all! Daddy promises you! I will not rest until I find the ones who did this! I will bring you their heads! I promise! I promise! I promise!" Grovitch's men raised their heads and bellowed in rage alongside their captain. This was a sin that must be washed in blood. No one would rest until they found the culprits!
 A few meters away from Grovitch, Durst watched as his men cut down his wife and child's bodies from the pole then gently place them on the ground in front of him. Durst knelt to the ground, hollow eyes looking at the bone bracelet on his daughter's left.
 "Hehe, everyone's going to be so jealous!"
 "Do not take pride in other's jealousy."
 "Daddy, why are your tusks so big?"

"It's because daddy is strong."
 "Daddy who's stronger? You or Uncle Grove?"
 "Hmph. I'm ten times the orc that bastard is."
 "Daddy. I wanna be a warrior when I grow up."
 "Heh, I'll train you until you're the best."
 "Daddy. The boys said love is weak. Am I weak? I love you."
 "If that is true, your father is the weakest man of all. I love you more than anything in this world."
 Durst's men broke down as they watched their captain converse with the bodies of his wife and children. They had never seen their leader so vulnerable. It felt like he would directly crumble to dust under the slightest pressure.
 Contrary to their expectations, Durst rose to his feet after taking the bracelet from his daughter's arm. His eyes regained a sharp glint as he looked at his men. "Their heads?"
 The orcs shook their heads. "We didn't find any. They may have taken them as trophies."
 "I see," Durst muttered and shook his head. "Burn the bodies. A great evil has taken place here. We cannot let our people suffer after death. Also were there any survivors?"
 "Just one," the orcs reported. "He was heavily injured and could barely speak. Luckily, our healer managed to keep him alive long enough to utter a single word."
 "What did he say!?" Grovitch roared.
 "Dwarfs."
 "Dwarfs!" Grovitch roared with rage as realization dawned. "Those ungrateful bastards! We tolerate their presence, and they reward us with this! I'll kill them all! I'll slaughter them till the last man!" As his rage reached a fever peak, Grovitch suddenly realized he had not heard a word from his friend. He looked at Durst, only to see him wrap his daughter's bracelet around the grip of his favorite ax and calmly rise to his feet. "Hey! Are you not angry! Where are you going!?"
 Durst turned to look at Grovitch. The emptiness in Durst's eyes chilled his friend to the core "What do you mean, where am I going?" Durst calmly retorted. "I know the enemy, and I know where they live. Where do you think I'm going?"
 Grovitch's eyes widened with shock. For the first time in the history of their friendship, Grovitch became the voice of reason. "What do you think you're doing? Do you wanna get yourself killed!? You think you can raid them all by yourself!?"
 "What do you expect me to do!?" Durst cried out in rage. "Wait? Wait for what!?"
 "At least wait until we conduct the rite of passage!" Grovitch shouted. "Who's gonna send off your family in your place!"
 "Their heads are out there in some bastard dwarf's basement! They can never pass on fully until I get those! There's no time to waste!"
 SKREEE!
 Both orcs froze as a huge red hawk zipped down into the village.
 The hawk perched on the arms of an orc beast tamer. The orc fed the bird some meat then took out the scroll tied to its leg. He hurriedly handed the letter over to Durst when he saw the seal on it.
 Durst's face paled as he read the contents of the letter.
 "What happened!?" Grovitch could not wait any longer and demanded an answer.
 "We were not the only villages hit this morning. An urgent meeting has been called at Qima to discuss countermeasures."
 Grovitch's eyes narrowed. "Just how many were hit?"
 Durst's gaze hardened as he looked out into the horizon. "Every village in this region."
 !!!
 

 

 

 **************
 **************
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:
 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf
 The High Council: Paul C. Bergeson (@facemaster), Raymond Russel, Jacob Morgan
 You Guys are the Best!!!


 Please Support me on Patreon at https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj




 Picture of the Day
 Cool.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Cool.

 

Chapter 22.2: To Trap an Orc



 Half an hour later, Rhatheth's hunting party solemnly stood around a mountain formed from all the corpses in the village. Smoldering embers burned in the orcs' eyes as Grovitch and Durst approached the pile with a torch in their hand.
 Durst's eyes gleamed with hardened resolution as he knelt in front of the hill. "We failed to protect you. But rest easy, I swear we'll bring those responsible to you for judgment. Until then, sleep for a bit."
 Durst placed the torch at the base of the hill. Elephant grass caught the flames and spread it up the mountain.
 "Wait for me," Grovitch muttered in a grave tone and threw his torch onto the mountain.
 Grovitch and Durst walked away, and two orc shamans took their place. The shames uttered chanted a spell and stomped their staffs on the ground. A flaming rose fower sprang up from the field and engulfed the mountain within its petals. Plumes of black smoke rose to the skies, and if one listened carefully, they could almost hear the wailing of unresigned souls.
 Similar scenes played out in numerous villages around that region, the wails of the deceased creating dense dark clouds that hung over the region and blotted out the sun.
 The orcs in Rhatheth stood still amidst the crackling of flesh. Smoke and ash burned their eyes, and the pungent stench of burning flesh stung their sensitive noses, but the orcs did not move a muscle until the hill crumbled into a pile of ash.
 The orcs, led by Grovitch and Durst, rubbed the ash all over their skin. They would carry their family's vengeance with them until those responsible lay dead at their feet. Only then would they be free of this debt.
 Durst and Grovitch shared a look then led their brothers out of the village. They mounted their warboars and pushed toward the only city large enough to hold all the orcs in the region, the great Orkish City, Oerbora.
 ***
 Oerbora
 The Orkish city, Oerbora, was a testament to the evolution of the orcs as a city and culture. The city's ten meter stone walls were built brick by brick by their ancestors who sought a safe haven for the tribe in this deadly land. Over time, it grew from being a simple hideout to a trade city for the orcs.
 Orcs in the region traveled from far and wide to trade spoils from their hunts for medicine and other provisions. The city, in turn, sold the items to the wisben from Ederwood in exchange for precious materials required for the production of these goods. The wisbens even had a special district allocated to them. It was markedly much more beautiful and stylish than the rest of the city.
 In prime orkish fashion, the city also housed an arena where orcs battled against each other and captured beasts. After all, no matter how 'civilized' orcs got, they would always put strength above everything else.
 Today, a grave atmosphere hung over the usually boisterous city. The typically rowdy orcs wore hard glares and had their hands tightly gripped around their weapons. The news of the massacres had spread to the city's public. Many orcs here had family in the attacked villages. Words could not explain the rage boiling within them. They only needed the name of the responsible party, and they would immediately launch an attack.
 The orcs had no idea that within the wisben district, a young woman sat at a table and nodded as she received reports of a particular successful mission. The contemplative wisben, dressed in a set of plain brown robes had a pair of deep-set eyes the color of ripe lemons and peach-colored, thick, straight, neck-length hair that she wore in a severe style.
 This young woman was Nakahara Akiko, tactician for the Silver Spear guild. Her in-game persona was a wisben mage that went by the name, Honne Onna. She was the woman in charge of their latest operation, and she was more than pleased by the result.

A massive, intimidating nordic man with the aura of an unavoidable bloodhound stood by her right. A pair of almond-shaped burning, orange eyes glared at the wisbens that came to give the report. The man sported a red mohawk and was garbed in tough leather armor that evoked thoughts of wild barbarians. This man was Takahiro Ken, the muscle of Silver Spear and went by the in-game moniker, GrizzlyDiamond.
 A tall, mature, elegant wisben sat at Honne Onna's left, deep-set emerald-like green eyes lit up with a smile as she regarded the messengers. She was dressed in traditional, elven armor and her fine, straight, white hair trailed down her back like a ribbon. This woman was the eldest in Siver Spear, Yamazaki Hitomi, with the in-game moniker 'Rustyreaper,' named after the personification of pain spirits.
 GrizzlyDiamond's bushy eyebrows furrowed as he listened to the reports. He looked at Honne-Onna with confusion in his eyes. "Why did you change the plan?"
 Honne-Onna's thin lips curled upwards in a cold smile. "I just figured, why waste our strength when we can make them kill each other?" She looked at Rustyreaper, who was admiring a dagger in her hand. "How did it go?"
 "I made sure to leave one alive," Rustyreaper replied with a small smile.
 "What? Why!?" GrizzlyDiamond questioned with shock on his face. "I thought you said we shouldn't leave any survivors."
 "Yeah, that was your order," Honne-Onna confirmed. "But I gave Rusty-san a different task. She had to make sure someone survived long enough to report the last thing he saw, but not so long that he would be able to report everything that happened in the village." She looked at GrizzlyDiamond with a smile. "Do you think you could've accomplished such a delicate task?"
 "Probably not," GrizzlyDiamond admitted with a laugh as he scratched the back of his head. "So, why did you do that?"
 "To pin the blame on the dwarfs," Rustyreaper answered. "Those dumb orcs are blind with rage right now. They'll lash out at anything and anyone, let alone when there are witnesses."
 "Mm, I understand," GrizzlyDiamond muttered. "Your shape-shifting would've been perfect for the job."
 "Ugh, don't remind me," Rustyreaper complained and scrunched his nose in disgust. "I never want to shift an orc ever again."
 "Don't worry, Rusty-san," Honne-Onna chuckled as she consoled the older woman. "Grizzly's the star of the next round."
 GrizzlyDiamond's eyes lit up in delight. "Oh? What do I have to do?"
 Honne-Onna's light yellow eyes gleamed with a cold light. "What you do best of course. Massacre a bunch of fools."
 "Perfect!" GrizzlyDiamond cheered as a prodigious amount of ki burst out of him.
 Honne-Onna smiled and looked out of the window to the streets below. She watched the tense orcs with a cold smile. "Struggle for as long as you can, maggots."
 ***
 Lymar Village,
 Kirkcour Woods.
 Achoo!
 A puzzled expression appeared on Kashi's face as he sneezed. Hm? Was somebody talking about him? The daeben revealed a smug look. Well, can't be helped if I'm that famous. Kashi chuckled inwardly as he absent-mindedly toured the centaur village atop Drixlia.
 As was to be expected of a tribe of centaurs, most of their buildings were twice the size of a regular home, resembling large barns from the outside rather than huts. As it was with most woodland tribes, the houses were constructed with thatch and wood. The roads were wide to accommodate the large centaur frames walking side by side, and a weird smile like that of a wet dog filled the air. Kashi could not help but doubt the centaurs' grooming tendencies.

Why was Kashi going through the village on horseback?
 Earlier that day, Darian went to report to the council, leaving Kashi with nothing to do. The daeben decided to tour the little town to see what centaur civilization was like. His quest took him through the central market where he first faced the shame of being a daeben in a centaur community. His head barely reached the stalls, and he had to stand on his toes to get a look at the goods. A few centaurs laughed when they saw his uncomfortable position and offered to carry him, but Kashi vehemently refused.
 Ever since then, the daeben went everywhere on Drixlia's back, so he was not forced to look up at everything. The centaurs warmly welcomed Kashi into the community, and willingly explained their complex cultures to the daeben. The warm reception was not without merit. Every centaur in the village knew about the daeben's role in saving the chief's son from certain death.
 "Kashi-dono."
 Kashi looked over his shoulder to see two centaur guards with their right fists clasped in their left palms. Kashi smiled and returned the salute. "Is it time?"
 The senior guard's eyes lit up in delight at Kashi's salute. "Yes, Kashi-dono. The council is ready to meet you. I apologize for the delay."
 "It is fine," Kashi said with a laugh. "I know how these things work. Can I get my companions?"
 "Do not worry Kashi-dono. Guards have been sent to pick them up."
 "Oh? That's good then," Kashi remarked. "Lead the way."
 "If you will."
 Kashi followed and eventually came across a beautiful life-sized statue of a strange centaur with the upper body of a satyr, that held a spear that looked very similar to the one Darian had. The figure proudly stood at the center of the village in front of a large barn with numerous text written in an unfamiliar language etched into its walls. The guards stopped at the entrance and motioned for the daeben to continue on his own.
 Kashi spurred Drixlia, and the duo crossed the threshold into a typical village meeting hall. The council of elders, was, as expected, a gathering of all the old farts in the village. The centaurs formed a semi-circle whose base was close to the entrance. At the head, located at the other opposite wall, was the tribal chief of the centaurs. A small gap at the bottom of the semi-circle allowed Drixlia to trot to the center of the room where they met Larsial, Shadow, and Darian.
 Kashi's eyes narrowed as he noticed a fresh set of injuries on the warrior's back. He knew he had healed the centaur to full health without leaving any scars. Darian definitely got those scars after he came to deliver his report. However, there were no signs of resentment in the young stallion's eyes, so Kashi chose not to pursue it.
 Kashi turned his attention to Shadow and Larsial, who, unfortunately, did not get the memo to arrive on their horses. Kashi sent a gloating smirk Shadow's way. The assassin coldly regarded the daeben as he slightly pulled out his dagger from its sheath.
 Uwah... Scary, scary. Kashi made a mental note to never tease Shadow in the future. He was no Hektor. Kashi could not confidently state Shadow would not do something to him in his sleep in retaliation.
 "Kashi-dono, for the favor you have given us, our village will always be in your debt," the chief saluted and humbly thanked the daeben.
 Kashi looked at the chief. Indeed, he could see the resemblance between the old man and Darian. He imagined Darian would look somewhat similar if he grew a beard and lost a bit of the rashness in his eyes. The chief's warm eyes exuded wisdom gained over a long period of time. "No, no. I only did what any honorable warrior would have," Kashi laughed as he returned the salute. "This is an auspicious day. There is no need to ruin it with talk of debts."

"Mm, you are correct," the chief mused. "I do not believe I have had the pleasure of introducing myself. I am called Mando Alshmeer. The foolish boy you saved is my only son. Please allow me to thank you to at least as a father."
 Kashi smiled and nodded. "I accept. One day, I will come to collect this debt." The daeben's eyes glowed as he spread his arms out wide. "I'll ask for about this much!"
 Mando Alshmeer's eyes went wide then he burst out in laughter when he realized the daeben was teasing him. "Fine, as you wish. I will not speak of debts. But if you do not mind my asking, and I apologize for my rudeness," Mando said as his eyes slightly narrowed. "But, why have you really come to our village."
 "Straight to business huh," Kashi chuckled.
 "Apologies, the times are as you see them. We do not have time to do things the usual way."
 "No, no. This works out perfectly for me," Kashi revealed with a smile. "I detest all those bureaucratic stuff anyway." The daeben's eyes flashed as he patted Drixlia's mane. "I seek a method to improve my partner's bloodline if you please."
 Mando's eyes hardened. "And you believe we can help with this? Why?"
 "Were you not the one who said you do not have the time for the regular rope skipping games?" Kashi teased. "Why start now? Just tell me. Can you help me or not?"
 Mando's gaze searched Kashi's eyes for any clues, but could not find the doubt he was searching for. "You seem to know a lot about our culture."
 Kashi shook his head. "Not so much. I only have knowledge of the era one thousand years ago. I cannot express how delighted I was when I found out you had not abandoned your tradition."
 "I see," Mando muttered. "Let me take a look." Mando's eyes suddenly glowed with green light as he examined Drixlia. "Sweet Mera, this stallion! Its genes are excellent!" Mando praised as he stared at Drixlia in disbelief. "Where did you find him?"
 "Bought him at a stable near Kerta," Kashi replied.
 "Sweet Mera, what luck," Mando exclaimed with a sigh. "Yes, yes, if the genes are this good, we can indeed help improve its bloodline." The chief shook his head and sighed. "Unfortunately, it is impossible."
 Kashi's brow shot up. "Why is that?"
 "The ritual requires five shamans," Mando explained. "One lives in our tribe, but the other four are in different clans within in the forest."
 "Why is that a problem?"
 "The other clans are under attack by the blight as we speak," Darian said, speaking for the first time since Kashi entered the hall. The daeben had almost forgotten the centaur's voice. "My father is wary of sending troops to assist them."
 "Darian! You have yet to complete your atonement!" Mando roared at his son, eyes burning with anger. "You will not speak unless spoken to!"
 Kashi watched as Darian slunk back and hung his head. Ah, the classic new generation vs. old generation clash of ideals. "What does he have to atone for?"
 Mando glared at his son as he said, "He stole the village's sacred weapon and caused the deaths of six brave warriors by embarking on an unsanctioned task. In normal times, he would have been immediately exiled for such behavior."
 "But right now, you need all the hands you can get. Is that it?"
 Mando nodded. "Exactly. I am loathed to admit it, but my boneheaded son is the best warrior we have in the village, and a lot of the younger generation look up to him. An exile at this time would be detrimental to the well-being of the tribe."
 Kashi's brows rose once again. "In that case, how about I take him with me to liberate those villages. Is that fine?"
 "You wish to take Darian alongside you?" Mando asked with a frown.
 "I need a guide anyway, so I don't get lost," Kashi said with a light shrug. "I'm already used to him, and he can handle himself in a fight. You can consider it a part of his punishment."
 Mando looked at his son. "Do you believe this man has what it takes to liberate our brothers?"
 Darian nodded with a grim look in his eyes. "If even he cannot, nobody can."
 "I see." Mando focused his attention on the daeben. "My son will be in your care then."
 "Leave it to me." Kashi nodded. "More importantly, do you have a graveyard? I believe it is time we laid those brave soldiers who fought alongside your son to rest."
 Kashi's words reminded the chief of the matter he had forgotten. Mando quickly ordered his people to begin preparations for a hero's funeral.
 Kashi watched the bustling streets, and a strand of inspiration hit. He took out a sketchpad and pencil from his inventory and began a brand new sketch.
 

 

 

 *****************
 *****************
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:
 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf
 The High Council: Paul C. Bergeson (@facemaster), Raymond Russel, Jacob Morgan
 You Guys are the Best!!!


 Please Support me on Patreon at https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj
 

 *****
 Picture of the Day
       
 For those who are wondering if there are any significant changes in the Definitive Edition, a small sample has been put up on my page...  You may Judge it for yourselves.

 

Chapter 23.1: Calm Before the Storm



 Lymar Village,
 Kirkcour Woods.
 17th Banem 1092 12:42 pm
 Crackle...
 Kashi and his companions stood among the centaurs, faces serene as they watched the burial rites of the fallen centaurs. Like most woodland tribes in this world, the centaur tribes chose to burn the bodies of the dead. This was as because wildernesses and deserted regions were home to many evil spirits that sought out freshly buried bodies to inhabit. It was not unheard of for undead to rise from graveyards. The situation was much better in major cities because cemeteries and tombs were often blessed by priests to reduce the chances of undead corruption.
 "Thank you, Kashi-dono." Darian expressed his gratitude as tears flowed down his cheeks. His heart ached as he looked across the burning pyres to the new widows and children that solemnly stood by the Lymar Tribe's chief. Determination burned in his eyes as he gripped a new spear strapped to his right flank. "I swear I will make the bastards responsible for this pay."
 "That you will," Kashi promised as he watched the smoke plumes rise to the sky. Usually, this ritual would have been held at night, but because of the expeditory nature of Darian's next task, it was pushed to the afternoon. Kashi bowed to the burning pyres then turned Drixlia around. He tapped Darian on the shoulder, "Come, we need to hurry if we're to reduce the number of pyres that will rise tonight."
 "You are right." Darian solemnly murmured. He saluted his companions with a bow then led Kashi, Shadow, and Larsial out of the village.
 Darian halted at the village entrance when he saw ten young warriors awaiting their arrival. Darian's brows furrowed as he looked at the warriors. "Why are you all here?"
 "The chief has asked that we escort you on this mission," an armored centaur stated with a salute. "Please allow us this honor."
 Darian's pupils trembled as images of his companions flitted through his eyes. "No, I cann-"
 "Why don't you let them?" Kashi interrupted before Darian could complete his rejection. "Do not let your comrades' deaths cloud your judgment. We are embarking on a dangerous mission with no assurance of victory. Every able-bodied soldier we can get on our side is without a doubt, a plus. Imagine if you died because you rejected help. Do you want your comrades to suffer guilt even after death?"
 "Your words are harsh," Darian rebuked with a steely gaze.
 "Harsh they may be, but true nonetheless," Kashi calmly countered. "Every soldier who picks up a sword is ready to die for the land they believe in. To pretend otherwise is an insult to their honor and name. These men have chosen to risk their lives to protect their homeland. Why do you wish to prevent them this honor? Or could it be you feel you are the only one worthy of saving the centaurs?"
 Kashi's rebuke bit into the core of Darian's soul. The centaur prince's heartbeat quickened as realization dawned. Just what had he been doing this whole time? Darian let out a sigh and looked at the warriors. "You may follow. Please, your life is most important of all. You can only save others while you live. Do not forget that."
 Kashi let out a smile. "Don't worry too much. As long as I'm here, you probably won't have to do much." This was not simple boasting on the daeben's part. Kashi had calculated the average strength of the common Blight from Shadow and Larsial's battle. As long as an anomaly like the marilith did not show up, he was confident in clearing out any number of blights. This confidence was even more pronounced when he thought of the hundreds of arrows he bought from the centaurs.

"These villages, how far are they from us?" Kashi asked.
 "The closest is about an hour's ride from here," Darian stated as marked the earth with a few dots to represent the villages and their distance from each other.
 Kashi's brow rose as an intrigued glint flashed in his eyes. "Is that what I think it is?"
 "Yes," Darian confirmed as he connected the dots with a line. "It's a spear."
 Kashi's eyes lit up as he studied the strange formation. There were six centaur villages in Kirkcour Woods. Of the six, three made up the spear's 'shaft' with Lymar positioned at the spear's butt. The final three formed a rough triangle, which when connected to the furthest of the villages on the spear's shaft, formed a diamond-like shape that was precisely the spear tip.
 Kashi rubbed his chin as an amused glint shone in his eyes. Could this be the reason the centaurs were unwilling to leave this place? Could there be a secret related to this formation? Kashi thought about it, then shrugged it off. No use wondering. Time would eventually tell. More importantly, something was strange about this image. "Didn't your father say four villages were under attack? Including this village, that should make five. I count six here."
 Darian's eyes grew heavy as he drew an X on the first village. "The Bedu clan was wiped out a week ago, and its shaman was captured."
 "There are six shamans?" Kashi questioned with a furrowed brow. "This ritual, are you sure it works with five shamans?"
 "It will work," Darian confirmed with a nod. "However the effects will not be as good as when it is carried out by five shamans."
 "I see," Kashi muttered as the wheels in his head began to spin. "So, that's how it is."
 "Kashi-dono?" Darian worried that Kashi would be displeased and hurried to explain. "The chief meant no harm. He did not want you to put yourself in unnecessary danger."
 "It's fine," Kashi placated with a smile. "I do understand his reasoning. It's just unfortunate that I will have to disappoint him. I am precisely the kind of person who seeks out unnecessary danger." Kashi asked as he recalled a troublesome point. "Are you certain the shaman was captured and not killed, and do you have any way of knowing if he's still alive?"
 "Yes, he is alive," Darian confidently stated with a firm nod. "I saw him at the enemy's camp. Some soldiers were torturing him for information, but he would not budge."
 "Torture huh, such an ineffective method," Kashi rebuked. He then added with a laugh. "Alright then. Let's go liberate those villages first. We'll figure out how to rescue the shaman later."
 Darian looked at the daeben with deep respect in his eyes. He knew the daeben primarily wanted to help his horse. Kashi should have considered the missing shaman as a significant loose edge. Instead, the daeben had pushed that to the back of his mind in favor of rescuing the trapped villagers. Darian doubted he would ever be able to repay the mounting debts.
 "Yes, Kashi-dono." Darian charged into the woods with Kashi's entourage by his side, while the village's warriors brought up the rear. The thundering of hooves boomed through the forest as the company sped toward the first village.
 This was bound to be the most taxing hour of their lives.
 ***
 Oerbora, Daggerfall.
 1:45 pm 17th Banem 1092.
 The city's population skyrocket within the last couple of hours as orc tribes from all over the region gathered at the rallying point. The thick smell of blood and rage drowned the city in a malevolent atmosphere akin to a powder keg. The raging orcs barely kept their emotions in check, but all it would take was one spark, and the entire place would go up in flames.

A company of orcs rushed through the city gates on panting wild boars. Typically, the guards would never allow such an unruly entrance, but today was a special occasion. With so many angry orcs entering the city at the same time, there was a high chance the standard searching procedures would end in a catastrophe.
 The orcs jumped down from their mounts as soon as they passed the city gates. There were no stables in the city large enough to handle this many mounts so the beasts were handed over to some guards who would arrange a place for the mounts outside the city.
 These orcs were the warriors from Rhatheth, led by the powerful duo, Grovitch, and Durst. Durst's large frame and long tusks commanded respect from nearby orcs, a privilege he instantly exploited by grabbing a nearby orc. He obtained the location of the meeting place for the tribes from the orc then led his brothers to the given position.
 There was only one structure in the orcish city capable of holding the thousands of orcs gathered from all over the region.
 The arena was not what most would expect. It was a large patch of land, around which rising, interlocked wooden benches were built. Each level of the benches could hold at least one thousand orcs sitting side by side and it there were five levels, which meant a seating capacity of at least five thousand orcs.
 The arena significantly paled in comparison to others like it in the other countries. The trees in Daggerfall, while suitable for building huts in tandem with clay, were terrible for making large structures. Their wood was soft and brittle, often times snapping into pieces when stressed. As a result, all the wood used in the construction of the benches in the arena and Oerbon's walls were obtained by raiding Ederwood's boundaries.
 Durst and his tribe arrived at the arena and were not surprised to find a large crowd gathered in the arena. The sheer number of orcs not only filled up all the seats but also spilled onto the fighting grounds. In this scenario, those pushed to the edges of the arena were the weaker orc tribes. The fiercer tribes and their chiefs had the authority to force their way to the front.
 "Move," Durst calmly ordered the orc in front of him.
 "Huh!?" The orc was already irritated at being shoved all the way to the back. He was ready to crush the idiot who tried to cut the line. He turned with a loud roar, "Do you want to di- Durst!" The orc screamed as soon as he realized who was behind him. Durst's imposing frame and large tusks cut a figure no orc would forget after a single encounter.
 "It's Durst!"
 "Blood-Drinker Durst!"
 "Move! Move!"
 Durst snorted as a path formed from Orcs willingly stepping out of the way. He and Grovitch led their brothers to the center of the gathering. The regular tribe members stopped roughly halfway through, and Grovitch stopped one step before the center where a small circle of elites stood.
 Durst joined the elite circle, his gaze narrowing as he examined the twenty tribal chiefs. There were too many of them to remember their names, but his gaze hovered on a young orc who was silently sharpening an ax.
 This orc's appearance was quite eye-catching. Most notably, unlike most orcs, despite being a male, the young orc's build was quite lean (by the orcish standard). In the eyes of humans, he would appear as a muscular man in the vein of men like Dwayne Johnson. To orcs, however, this was quite puny for an adult of their kind. The orc's ears were a lot more pronounced and pointed than regular orcs, evoking memories of the elves. He was blessed a full head of reddish-orange hair that fell down to his shoulders. Finally, like most orcs, he was barechested, revealing a perfectly-chiseled frame and some tattoos that ran along his chest and arms.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 The young orc sat alone with his ax. No one approached him, nor did he bother to speak to anyone. The orc was ostracized by the rest of the orc tribe mainly because of his almost non-existent tusks. They were so small, they were virtually negligible, which constituted as a major disgrace to most orcs. There were those who speculated he was a hybrid between an orc and an elf, but there was no proof to substantiate these theories.
 However, despite all these 'stains' on his name, this ostracized orc had won a place at the center of this gathering. This was no accident. Neither was it a gift or something he was granted out of pity. The young orc claimed this place by, becoming the current reigning champion in the arena.
 Durst looked at the champion, but could not recall his name. It had been a long time since he had come to the city after all. He shook the matter out of his head as two orcs walked to the very center of the crowd.
 The two orcs were an old shaman and a massive orc in the prime of his life. The massive orc oozed terror and blood, but his eyes also held a rare trait among the orcs, wisdom. The terrifying orc turned in place and took in all the orcs present. 
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Pain, Grief, Anger, Hatred.
 These terrifying emotions choked the very air, and the orc could sense it all. He took a deep breath, swallowing all the rage in the air. Somehow, everyone in that area suddenly felt he was looking into their eyes. Grimlock, head chief of the south-eastern region only said two words, "Brothers... Rage!"
 

 *****************
 *****************
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:
 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer
 The High Council: Paul C. Bergeson (@facemaster), Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince
 You Guys are the Best!!!


 Please Support me on Patreon at https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj 

 

Chapter 23.2: Orc Summit

          
 The ground quaked as the orcs bellowed and roared out their pain and frustrations! Who knew how many thousands they had lost in the massacre!? The orcs converted the anguish buried within their souls into raging flames that could only be expressed in the loudest and most terrifying screams. The cries carried along the wind, and all the living beings for several miles were scared off by the intense bloodlust.
 The rage-fueled roars continued for over ten minutes before the orcs until the orcs finally vented the anger and rage in their hearts.
 Clack!
 The orcs' attention were drawn to the center as Grimlock stabbed the jagged greatsword in his hand into the earth. The orc chieftain gazed at his people as he said, "Brothers, I feel your rage, your pain! To think someone would do such a heinous thing! We orcs are no heroes nor are we good, but we meet our enemies on the battlefield with honor and strength! We do not avoid the strong and attack the weak. Yet some bastard thought it proper to slaughter our women and children." Rage burned in Grimlock's eyes as his hands clenched around the sword hilt. "Brothers, what do we do when we find the bastard responsible!?"
 "Kill them!" "Burn them!" "Tear them apart!" "Destroy them!"
 "Kill!" 
 "Kill!"
 "KILL!"
 The orcs' chant shot across the city, the bloodlust infecting all the orcs in the city. The orcs' eyes reddened in rage regardless of their location as they joined in the chant. The bellows shook the roofs off all the buildings in the city, reaching all the way to the elven district. Within one of the buildings, Honne-Onna looked out at the raging city with a devilish grin. "Not enough. Cry out even more."
 Within another building, an old dwarf stared at the Rink in his hands with shock and fear. "Are you serious!? No disrespect sir, but I don't think the orcs are in the mood to sit down and talk."
 "We must try, regardless!" The voice in the Rink was strong and proud but held a hint of panic. "Otherwise, these lands will be covered with not just our blood, but thousands of our brothers and sisters too. We cannot let things reach that stage! Our lives are a small price to pay to secure the future of our race."
 The dwarf shook his head but eventually gave a reluctant sigh. "As you wish, Farvulia-sama. I will see that it is done."
 "You have my gratitude, Uthman-san," Farvulia thanked the dwarf. "I will soon set out. By Aygor's mercy, we'll get to the bottom of this before it gets too far."
 "As the lord commands," Uthman acknowledged. The rink's light dimmed, signifying the end of the call, and the dwarf sullenly stowed it in his bag. Uthman Keggrog was a dwarven trader sent to trade with the elves and orcs by Rudega Farvulia, the dwarf most of the younger generation thought had the highest chances of claiming the dwarven king throne. At least, until the king in the east arose from nowhere.
 Although Uthman appeared to be a simple trader, he had another task. To spy on the orcs and relay any odd behavior to Farvulia. The majority of dwarfs saw orcs as a primitive tribe not worth a mention. As far as they were concerned, there was only one thing you needed to know about orcs. And that was when they would attack. Since orcs had the inane habit of blowing on a horn before beginning any raid, dwarven settlements often had a chance to react and fortify themselves before any attack.
 Rudega Farvulia, on the other hand, saw the orcs as both a potential ally and threat. He knew that the only reason the dwarfs were able to remain so complacent in this land was that the orcs were not a united nation. Usually, they only had to face one small tribe's attack a time, which was quite easy to fend off. The consequences would definitely be dire If they were forced to confront a united region. Hence, Rudega always ensured he had a spy in the important orcish cities to look out for any large gathering.

That insight finally paid off, as through his contacts, Uthman was able to report the latest development in time, preventing the dwarfs from getting blindsided. However, who knew Rudega would go one step further and ask his spy to go confront the orcs head-on to buy some time?
 Uthman seriously questioned his sanity for remaining loyal even at this moment. However, though he grumbled and complained, he still grabbed an overcoat and stole into the streets. He made his way to the arena, carefully avoiding the main roads and sticking to the alleyways instead. The old dwarf did not want to risk meeting an orc in this atmosphere. There was no telling how they would react after all.
 Meanwhile, within the arena, Grimlock raised his hand to end the chants then turned to Durst. "You've heard the cries of your brothers. Tell us, whose head do we have to chop off?"
 Durst's eyes narrowed, but he did not speak the word on his lips. The six-hour ride had cooled his rage from a blazing inferno that consumed his thoughts to a simmering flame buried deep in his heart. This granted him time to think, and he had begun to find some few odd things about the entire fiasco.
 To begin with, dwarfs were never the best at warfare. It was quite difficult to believe a group of dwarfs could easily take down entire villages filled with orcs. After all, the women and children of orcish tribes were no pushovers. Orcs learned to fight and kill from the moment they were born. The reason orcish women remained behind during hunting expeditions was not to take care of the home, but raise the next batch of warriors for the tribe. Durst could easily think of a few female orcs who could fight him to a standstill.
 Something else bothered the orc chief. The orc that survived long enough to name the dwarfs as the culprit. Was that really providence? Or was the murder planned so the orc would live long enough to reveal the dwarfs as the culprit, but not long enough to be questioned further?
 If it was the former, everything was good. But if it was indeed the latter, then the orcs were playing into the hand of a terrifying enemy. Of course, all this hinged on the fact that he just could not fathom the dwarfs suddenly getting the strength required to accomplish the massacre.
 Was he looking down on the dwarfs? Durst's mind tumbled with contradictory thoughts. What if the dwarfs had been biding time, building their strength for this specific attack? Wouldn't his hesitation buy them more time to achieve more dastardly deeds?
 Durst's hesitation did not pass Grimlock's sharp eyes. The war chief smiled and questioned, "What is the matter, Durst? It's not like you to hesitate."
 Durst nodded. "You're right, Grimlock. I don't know why, but I feel uneasy about this."
 "Hmph! I see married life has tamed the ferocious Blood-Drinker," a strong voice mocked. Durst looked to his left and met the eyes of Brast Blackblood, a large orc with black soot black skin. Brast was scary even for an orc, oozing air that screamed bloody murder. As always, his war ax was firmly grasped in his left hand, almost as if he expected an enemy to pop out at every turn. "If you know who we should be fighting then spit it out! What's with the wishy-washy attitude!? Are you afraid!?"
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 

"Me, afraid?" Durst growled accompanied by a low, guttural chuckle. "You're as insane as ever, Brast."
 "Enough with the nonsense," another orc interrupted Durst, this time from his right. "Our enemies are the dwarfs. I saw one scamper away with my own eyes."
 Durst looked to his right. The speaker was Rernark Ragelock, one of the few orcs from the older generation that could stand toe-to-toe with Durst and Grimlock. Rernark was a tough old bastard, even among the orcs, and well respected for his strength. The orc's only flaw was his penchant for the 'old days.' Who knew how many poor orcs had been forced to listen to his drivel about the good old days of the orcs.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Of course, no one dared to point out the fact that Rernark himself was not alive during those 'good old days,' and was thus talking out of his arse.
 "Dwarfs? Did he say dwarfs?"
 "He said dwarfs."
 "Those weak dwarfs dared to do this?"
 "Those bastard dwarfs," Rernark grunted as the surrounding orcs muttered in confusion. "They've been hiding their strength. I say we stop wasting time and dig out those fools before they do something worse."
 "Yeah! Yeah! Kill the dwarfs!"
 "Slaughter the bastards!"
 Durst frowned as the orcs roared expletives and curses while swearing to any god who would listen that they would destroy the dwarfs. The faster things escalated, the worse Durst felt. He could not shake the feeling something was wrong somewhere. However, at the same time, he could not justify calling off an attack on the dwarfs. All the evidence pointed to them. His hesitation could result in more lives lost if his suspicions were false. Eventually, he sighed shook his head.
 What was the point of all the doubt? Worst-case scenario, the orcs would be pulled into a fight with the dwarfs. Was there an orc out there who feared battle? There was no way the orcs would lose a war against the dwarfs. As long as that remained true, there was no need to worry about the consequences of war.
 Grimlock caught the change in Durst's demeanor. With a smile, he once again stopped the chants with a raise of his hand. "We know who the enemy is. Do we attack?"
 "ATTACK!"
 The orcs collectively bellowed and raised their right arms to represent their agreement. Durst only hesitated for a brief moment before also raising his hand. At this time, the orcs needed unity, not divisive thoughts. Within moments, every orc had their right arm raised. Well, almost every orc. There was one orc who remained quiet, calmly sitting on the earth and sharpening his ax with a whetstone.
 The orc sharply stood out, but no one said a word because that orc happened to be Ragnaf Banbeast, the current orc champion.
 The orcs, as if coming to an understanding, chose to ignore his presence. Their chants once again shook the earth as they shouted, "To War!" "Kill the dwarfs!" "Exterminate the Dwarfs!"

Suddenly a single cry screamed over everyone else's. "What!? There's a dwarf! There's a dwarf here!"
 The cry seized the orcs' attention, and a deathly silence descended over the arena.
 "Unhand me, you brute!" someone shouted, the tiny voice proving its owner was certainly not an orc. "I have an important message for your chief!"
 "You bastard!" the orc cursed. "I'll tear you apart."
 "Wait!" Durst was not sure what got into him, but he quickly shouted, stopping the orc from carrying out the threat. "Let's hear what he has to say." Durst turned and sent Grimlock a searching gaze.
 Grimlock nodded and bellowed. "Bring the dwarf to me. Let me see the face of this dead man."
 A scuffle was heard as an orc pushed his way through the crowd and unceremoniously dumped a small sack onto the floor. The 'sack' struggled and removed its brown hood to reveal itself.
 Grimlock's eyes sparkled with bemusement. "Oh, Uthman, is it? Why did you come here? I thought you valued your little life above everything?"
 "It's because I value my little life so highly that I took the risk of coming here," Uthman grumbled as he dusted his robes. He then bowed to Grimlock and formally announced his reason for coming, "Grimlock-sama, I am here with a message from the Farvulian household."
 "Oh? That Rudega brat?" Grimlock chuckled. "That brat's sticking his nose where it doesn't belong. This is a problem for the South. Why's he poking his nose here?"
 "Ah, as it happens, Farvulia-sama is currently residing in the Thonur Household," Uthman explained. "He heard about what happened and wishes to lend all of his assets to catching the culprits."
 Grimlock frowned. "Thonur? What is that brat doing so far south?"
 Grimlock's worry was warranted. Currently, Daggerfall was split into four major regions. North, South-East, South-West and Central regions. Each area shared a major dwarven settlement and an orc city. The North had Xynnar (dwarven) and Northmold (orcish). Central had Kinallen (dwarven) and Craydon (orcish). The South-East had Nuxvar (dwarven) and Oerbora (orcish) and finally, the South-West housed Aynor (dwarven) and Garigill (orcish).
 The Thonur household lived in Nuxvar, which was located in the same region as Oerbora, while the elite Farvulian family lived in Xynnar. It was no surprise that Grimlock wondered why the man touted as the next dwarven king appeared in his territory just as such an attack was launched.
 Uthman caught the suspicion in Grimlock's gaze and suffered a chill down his spine. "I swear on my mother, the Farvulian house had nothing to do with this attack! Please, Grimlock-sama, give us a chance to get to the bottom of this before war breaks out."
 "Oh? What does the brat suggest?"
 "A meeting at a neutral location of your choosing," Uthman replied. "It will give us a chance to talk before things escalate beyond the point of no return."
 "Thousands of women and children slaughtered. Do you not think we've long since crossed that point?"
 Uthman trembled. "Please! At least give us a chance to prove we are innocent before we go to war."
 "Grimlock, let me go." Durst stepped forward. "Something about this whole thing doesn't sit right with me. At the very least, let me first hear them out."
 Grimlock looked at Durst with a raised brow. "Are you sure?"
 "Yes," Durst confirmed with a nod. "No one craves revenge as severely as I do. But I do not wish to live the fool, satisfying my revenge while the true killer runs free. If I find it is indeed the dwarfs, you can be sure I will personally lead the charge."
 Grimlock looked at Durst then at Uthman. The dwarfs mustache visibly shook as he weathered the war chief's stern gaze. "Fine. You will go on my behalf," Grimlock stated as he turned to Durst. "Your clan will accompany you for protection." Grimlock caught Ragnaf out of the corner of his eyes. "Take Ragnaf with you. He's lived his whole life within these walls and could do with some real-world experience."
 For the first time, Ragnaf looked up from his ax, an excited glint in his eyes.
 Grimlock looked at the ancient shaman that silently stood next to him. His voice was noticeably more respectful as he said, "Guvern-san. I'll have to trouble you to accompany them. You're the only one who can make decisions on my behalf."
 Guvern Dreamstone was one of the oldest orcs alive. At over 190 years of age, he was rapidly nearing his end of days. However, if it were not for the mass of gray hair and shrunken body, it would have been impossible to tell. Guvern was every bit as muscular and strong-looking as the younger orcs around him.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Guvern let out a low chuckle as he grasped his bone staff. "These old bones have still got some life left in them. I'll gladly accept the chance to stretch 'em out after such a long time cooped up indoors."
 "My apologies, and thanks," Grimlock said, then he turned to look at the other chiefs. "We will begin preparations for war but wait for Durst's report before we launch an attack. Any objections?"
 The chiefs shook their heads.
 "Wait," Rernark Ragelock called. He signaled a shaman at his side who cast a spell on Uthman, causing the dwarf to drop to the earth, unconscious. "There's a possibility this is a trap. My tribe will follow Durst's at a distance, just in case. I will also follow Durst to meet this Farvulian. With me there, they should not be able to play any tricks."
 'Doesn't that mean that without you, I will fall prey to their tricks?' Durst snorted and looked at Grimlock.
 Grimlock laughed at the anger in Durst's eyes. "Rernark, you may follow. Make sure you watch each other's backs."
 "As it should be." Durst nodded.
 "Of course," Rernark stated.
 Grimlock looked at the unconscious dwarf. "Someone pick up this dwarf. Durst, Rernark, Ragnaf, follow me. The rest, begin preparations for war."
 With that, Grimlock disbanded the orcs, while he took the negotiation team aside to talk.
 In the elven district, Honne-Onna smiled as she listened to a subordinate report the outcome of the orcs' meeting in detail. "Good," she said as the report came to an end.
 

 *****************
 *****************
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:
 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer
 The High Council: Paul C. Bergeson (@facemaster), Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince
 You Guys are the Best!!!


 Please Support me on Patreon at https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj 

 

Chapter 24: Liberty


Thonur Household,
 Nuxar, Daggerfall.
 1:13 pm, 17th Banem 1092.
 Within one of the mansion's rooms, Rudega Farvulia glared at the beautiful wisben calmly seated by the window. His eyes burned with rage as he muttered, "This is not what you promised."
 Brilith Loneheart, guild leader of Winter Leaf Clan, smiled as she regarded the angry dwarf with a pair of beautiful green eyes. "Farvulia-san, I promised I would help you unite the dwarfs under your banner. Nothing unites a group of people like a common enemy."
 "Not like this!" Rudega angrily spat. "If we go to war with the orcs, regardless of if we win or not, there'll be nothing left of us! I needed your help to unite the dwarfs, not destroy us all!"
 "Heh. And here I thought you were in it for the crown," Brilith chuckled. "I must apologize then, but what's done is done. You need my help to safely pass through this ordeal."
 "Never." Rudega's eyes flashed. "I will not allow you to station any more troops this far north."
 "Farvulia-san, you are dooming your people to death," Brilith teased. "Allow Ederwood to take the blade in your stead. You'll be praised as a hero and will surely gain the throne."
 Rudega snorted. "You might have fooled me once, but I will not so easily fall for your trick a second time." The proud dwarf turned and walked to the door. "It was a mistake to have ever asked for your help." Rudega paused as he clasped the doorknob. "Thank you for your help so far, but I hope to never see your face again."
 "On the contrary, Farvulia-san, I'm sure we'll have many more meetings shortly."
 Rudega cursed and walked out of the room. Rage and self-doubt clouded his vision as he walked out of the mansion. He had asked for Brilith's help to unite the clans because of the chaos incited by the Dwarven King. Many houses had begun to secretly battle to claim the title of King in the West, and he could see how this would further splinter the already divided dwarfs. He had sought to quickly unite them, not to gain the throne for himself, but to stabilize the current situation. Yet, it appeared he had brought a hungry wolf into their midst.
 Rudega grumbled inwardly as he summoned his security detail and walked to the stables where a pack of barghests awaited them. The strange creatures looked like wild dogs with monstrous teeth and thin, black coats. They were one of the few animals in Daggerfall that were small enough for the dwarfs to use as mounts.
 Rudega mounted his beast and cast a gaze at Brilith through the window. He gritted his teeth and swore, "I won't let you have your way." With a determined expression, he issued a command then quickly exited the city with his guards, headed for the meeting location assigned by the orcs.
 "Please, don't let it be too late," Rudega pleaded to the gods.
 Brilith Loneheart watched the company leave with a placid smile. "Just as Honne-chan said." Her gaze flittered to a corner of the room. "You know what to do."
 For a brief moment, a silhouette turned visible, but it disappeared the very next second. "I do." A young woman's voice responded.
 Brilith nodded, then looked out of the window. Her lips curled into a wide grin as she muttered, "Soon, this whole country will be mine."
 ****
 Kirkcour Woods.
 2:06 pm, 17th Banem 1092.
 The afternoon sun shone down on a desperate battle within the forgotten forest. Hundreds of blights and small beasts surrounded a town, desperately trying to either tear down or jump over its high, wooden walls. A herd of brave centaurs lined the wall, vehemently shooting down arrows and spells at the invaders, in a desperate bid to protect their home.

The blights did not take the assault kindly. They retaliated by shooting out sharp branches and needles to thin out the walls. Inexplicably, packs of direwolves were also involved in the attack, which was quite strange because animals were usually not affected by the blight. As if the situation was not bad enough, a loud screech rang out, and the warriors on the walls paled as massive Eagles descended onto the enemy army and picked up some of the blights and direwolves.
 The warriors desperately changed targets and fired at the Eagles, but only a couple fell before the speedy birds of prey bypassed the city walls. The birds dropped dozens of blights and direwolves into the heart of the city, and the intruders immediately began to reap chaos. The defenders on the walls were instantly torn between rushing into the city to save the defenseless or maintaining their ground.
 The choice was an immensely difficult one. If the defenders gave up their advantage on the walls, the blights would overrun them, and make their way into the city. However, if they let the intruders run free, their loved ones would be at the mercy of the blights and direwolves.
 Gelarios Achas, chief of the Dora tribe, frowned with unease as he surveyed the combat situation from atop the wall. Try as he might, he could not see a way out of their current predicament. Worse even, he noticed the eagles had already begun to circle around for another pass. If this were a regular invasion, he would have long since surrendered, but the enemy had not issued a word about surrendering. It was apparent their foe wanted to wipe them all out.
 Gelarios could not understand why this was happening. The centaur tribe had always lived peaceful lives away from society. When did they gain such a powerful, relentless enemy?
 Gelarios' eyes narrowed as the eagles swooped down to pick up the next round. "Fine! We'll fight to the last man! Archers, Mages! Forget the wall, bring down those damn birds! We'll show these bastards the pride of the Dora tribe!"
 "OOOH!"
 The ranged warriors prepared their projectiles as they watched the Eagles pick up the next batch of direwolves and blights. They chose to momentarily abandon the wall and take out the aerial threat.
 Gelarios' expression hardened as the eagles took flight. If these monsters made one more pass, their village was as good as done. He raised his hand and prepared to give the order to fire.
 Shunk! Shunk! Shunk!
 Gelarios' eyes went wide with shock as a continuous barrage of arrows shot out from the forest and stabbed through the eagles' wings.
 The majestic birds screeched in pain as they crashed to the earth along with their load as an oppressive, monstrous aura billowed onto the battlefield and pressured it into a heavy silence.
 Gelarios shivered in fear and looked over the monsters to the edge of the forest from which the heavy bloodlust erupted.
 The monsters and warriors stared in shock as a majestic black stallion walked out of the forest. Its rider, a daeben dressed in a simple, sleeveless undershirt lowered the bow in his left hand and coldly gazed upon the battlefield. Moments later, a pair of assassins on two horses flanked him on either side.
 Gelarios' heart tightened, but he was not sure if these people were allies or people looking to fish in troubled waters. He did not have to fear for too long though, as eleven centaurs ambled onto the field, spears at the ready.
 Gelarios' heart quickened as he recognized one of the centaurs to be Darian, next-in-line of the Lymar tribe. His gaze sharpened as Darian raised his spear and twirled it in a distinct series of motions. The chief suddenly turned to the soldiers on the wall. "Prepare to open the gate!"

Across the battlefield, Darian observed the movements on the wall and nodded in appreciation of the Dora chief's trust. Now, he had to prove that the faith was well-placed. He looked at Kashi with a smile and said, "We will clear a path to the gate, Kashi-dono. What are your plans?"
 Kashi surveyed the dense cluster of monsters with a cold smile. "Shadow and Larsial will accompany you to clear out the monsters already in the city."
 "And you, Kashi-dono?"
 "Oh, do not worry about me." A devilish grin spread across the daeben's face. "I was just looking for a good chance to quickly level up."
 Darian shivered as he observed the daeben's expression. "Good luck, Kashi-dono." He called out to his troops as he brandished his spear horizontally in front of himself and galloped toward the monster horde. "[Sleipneir's Charge!]"
 The centaurs mimicked his movements and charged behind him in an arrow-like formation. Golden ki surged from the tip of Darian's spear to his arms, then exploded outwards to merge with the other centaurs who emitted similar auras. The ki molded as they charged to form a bullet-shaped gold casing that wrapped around the charging centaurs. The ki roiled along the bullet, but most of its energy concentrated at the tip of Darian's spear.
 The bullet formation smashed into the outer sections of the blight army and instantly blasted the raging monsters out of its path. The bullet tore through the monster army, clearing a straight path toward the village's gate. Shadow and Larsial galloped behind Darian's formation, leaving Kashi to bring up the rear.
 The daeben ensured the monsters did not quickly close up the space left by the bullet. Arrows incessantly flew out, accurately striking down monsters as they attempted to chase after them.
 Kashi only absent-mindedly performed this task, as the bulk of his attention was on Darian's formation. He repeatedly played back and dissected the activation process in his mind. First, was the momentum. Darian charged ahead, concentrating his ki at the tip of his spear. The concentrated ki was then released, and the centaur's forward momentum forced it to flow backward. Because it was released from a spear tip, the ki was sharp, creating a bullet-like structure that was perfect for penetration.
 Furthermore, because his ki was much stronger than his companions', Darian's ki swallowed up the ki released by the other centaurs to further strengthen and magnify the effects of the formation.
 Kashi's eyes gleamed, and he resolved to get the centaurs on his side no matter what. Drixlia's evolutions aside, Absalon's army would stand to rapidly develop if it picked up even an iota of the centaur tribe's tricks. "Heh, so that's how it was," Kashi muttered inwardly as realization struck.
 Indeed, there were no useless races in this world. Every intelligent race had something to add to the world, and it was the job of the privileged races to enhance those traits and give these weaker races a place in the world. Kashi let out a wistful grin as he thought about the drakul and the races in Serisis. It seemed he would have to reevaluate how he thought about these races. Their value was definitely not as simple as an extra war force. He would need to take his time to study the different races and draw out the unique charms.
 However, before that...
 "Open the Gate!"
 Kashi looked up to see the village gate grudgingly slide open as Darian's formation neared. Inevitably, the monsters near the gate took the opportunity to rush in, but the centaurs were not stupid. They only partially opened the gate such that the monsters could only get in one or two at a time. The unlucky beasts were then promptly slaughtered by soldiers stationed behind the gate.

Kashi's brows furrowed as he observed the chokepoint. He understood the chief's plan. The Dora tribe would fully open its gate just before Darian entered. Then immediately the group passes successfully, they would shut the gate. However, because they could not afford to let Darian's formation damage the gate, the Dora tribe would be forced to open the gate early to avoid any miscalculations. Who knew how many monsters rush through the opening during that brief period?
 Kashi had no desire to see that reality. He hastily shouted, "Darian-san! Single-line formation!"
 Darian's brows jumped. Single-line? He instantly knew what Kashi intended. With a single line, the Dora tribe would not have to open the gates too wide, but didn't the daeben understand why they employed an arrow formation instead of single line? The arrow formation pushed enemies toward the outside, creating a vacuum behind the charge. The larger the arrow, the more space the enemy troops would need to fill up to resume attacking the charging force.
 Most importantly, however, the arrow formation pushed enemy troops outward, forcing them to hit their allies and disrupting their momentum. The single file, file formation also had the capability of piercing through the enemy, but in turn sacrificed a lot of the disruption, as well as placing a heavy burden on the lead.
 Darian was fine with the burden of being the arrowhead, but his real fear was that the vacuum behind their formation would be lost. This vacuum was what created the safe space for Shadow, Larsial, and Kashi to follow behind the formation. Once Darian switched to a single file, Shadow, Larsial, and Kashi would instantly become vulnerable to the enemy's attacks.
 "Don't worry about us!" Kashi yelled out before Darian could voice his thoughts. "I've got it covered!"
 Darian hesitated for a moment, but then recalled the daeben's performance against the marilith. That's right, it was that Kashi saying he had it covered. If he did not trust him, then why would he have come all the way out of here with the daeben. Darian gritted his teeth and roared, "Single-Line!"
 The centaurs obeyed his commands, and the arrow collapsed into a single line. Shadow and Larsial followed suit, with the silver-haired assassin in front, and the daeben close in behind.
 The monsters saw their opportunity and lunged at the trio who were not under the formation's ki protection.
 Kashi snorted as the monsters converged on them. He raised his right and flicked his middle finger at the beasts as he sentenced them to death. "[Gilgamesh]"
 A thousand arrows shot out of giant mandala that appeared behind the daeben's back. Curiously, the bolts did not attack randomly but flew on either side of Darian in an arrow-like formation. Each arrow rotated in place, emitting chaotic torrents of mana that destroyed everything in their path.
 Darian's eyes widened as the arrows annihilated the beasts. What in the hell was this daeben!? Was he a god? This strength should not belong to a common hume!
 Kashi did not pay attention to the centaurs' distress. It was taking all he had to control the path of the arrows. Gilgamesh was designed to be a one-time skill. This meant it was meant to fire its arrows at a single target or area. That was supposed to be the scope of its ability. However, Kashi had always experimented on using it to accomplish different things in different scenarios. In this case, he delayed the firing time of sections of arrows to create an arrow-like formation. He was also expending a lot of mana to slow down their speed, so they did not fly ahead of Darian.
 Thankfully, Kashi did not have to slow down the arrows for too long. A few seconds later, when they were only a few meters from the gate, Kashi set a single homing target for all the arrows and stopped holding them back. The bolts instantly converged on a blight that was trying to force its way through the gate.

All one thousand arrows tore through the target, inadvertently also clearing the area in front of the gate. One blessing only led to another damnation, however, as the arrows tore through the beast and headed for the gate itself. It seemed like Kashi's attempt at saving the day had backfired.
 Gelarios paled. "Is this the end?"
 Darian continued to charge, but his grim expression revealed his unease.
 Shadow's expression remained the same. For as long as he had known Kashi, the daeben had never been one to do something without considering the possibilities. Larsial was surprised by the calmness in her heart as the situation reached its climax. She wondered why she wasn't panicked and instinctively turned to look behind her.
 "Ah, I understand." Larsial burst out in laughter as Kashi, with a relaxed grin on his face, winked at her.
 "[Dimension Break]"
 CRACK!
 The onlookers present paled as a crack appeared in the air in front of the arrows. The crack smashed open to reveal a portal, which the arrows all entered with alarming speed.
 Kashi flicked his thumb, and four similar portals appeared around the battlefield. The arrows zipped out of these and indiscriminately slaughtered everything in their path before the mana in them finally dissipated.
 Dense silence pervaded the battlefield as Darian and his troops listlessly passed through the gate. In this world, there was such a thing as witnessing too much power. When someone was marginally better than you, you could convince yourself that with enough hard work you would one day catch up to them. But kind of drive was meaningless when faced with those with heaven-defying talents. When one gazed upon these heaven-sent beings, it would already be considered an achievement not to give up on your dream.
 Darian and every single warrior on the wall were currently feeling a hollowness in their soul comparable to precisely that feeling of helplessness. This was not a question of mere strength anymore. It was the combination of skill, foresight, and power that made them feel so helpless.
 Unfortunately, if just this much was already wrecking so much chaos in their hearts, what was coming next would utterly shatter their hearts.
 "A-Are you not coming in?" Gelarios' heart thumped as he looked at the monster outside the gate.
 Kashi looked up at the commander with a loose smile. "Close the gate, and make preparations to rout the enemy. I'll handle the rest. We shall speak more on my return." Kashi turned Drixlia, so they faced the monster army.
 "Ah, I've really drained my mana this time," Kashi muttered as he patted Drixlia's fur. "I've only got my ki left huh? Now, how did that stuff go again..."
 BOOM!
 Gelarios' eyes jumped in fright as a monstrous amount of dark ki exploded from the daeben's body. Faint traces of fire, wind, and water revolved around the daeben, scorching and destroying the earth around him. "It can't be!" Gelarios cried out as he grabbed the edge of the battlement and watched the disastrous ki slowly, but surely condense around the daeben, becoming smaller, but many times stronger.
 The traces of fire and wind slowly grew stronger as the mana continually condensed until it formed a tiny, minuscule ball, barely visible to the human eye.
 Kashi grinned as the ball dropped onto Drixlia's forehead then spread down its forehead to form a faint red and blue line. "This might hurt a little Drix, but bear with it for a bit."
 "Monster," Gelarios would continuously mutter over the next couple of minutes. "He is a monster."
 

 

 *****************
 *****************
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:
 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer
 The High Council: Paul C. Bergeson (@facemaster), Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince
 You Guys are the Best!!!


 Please Support me on Patreon at https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj
 

 

 Picture of the Day
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 There's something poetic about a chesch bard.

 

Chapter 25: Battle for Dora

Dora Tribelands, Kirkcour Woods.
 2:15 pm, 17th Banem 1092.
 Tense silence pervaded the battlefield outside the centaur town as hundreds of blights and direwolves glared at the lone daeben warrior that stood between them and the town gate. The daeben whispered something into the ears of the black-coated stallion he rode upon then cast his red, blood-colored gaze upon the monsters.
 BOOM!
 Gargantuan pressure exploded from the daeben's gaze and pressed down on the surrounding monsters like a sledgehammer! Hundreds of weaker direwolves instantly fainted in fright, and most others froze in place, knees shaking in fright. However, even though their instincts commanded them to flee, the force controlling this monsters overrode that fear and forced them to remain on the battlefield.
 The alpha wolves and the blights did not display any overt signs of being affected by the pressure, but if examined closely, the speed of their heartbeats would have been revealed to have tripled.
 The monsters' fear was not without cause. Kashi often fought monsters tens of levels above himself. As a result, his Fighting Spirit was ridiculously high. Exponentially high in fact, that if he did not personally restrain himself, there were very few people in the world who could stand in his presence.
 Kashi normally could not make use of this overwhelming advantage because he was either often fighting boss characters who were immune to its Fear effects, or he was battling weak monsters, and it would not be fun to wipe them out without a fight.
 This, however, was an important battle against hundreds of monsters. Even Kashi could not guarantee he would definitely survive if he did not go all out. Hence, he instantly burst out with the full extent of his Fighting Spirit.
 "Charge!" Kashi took advantage of the monsters' brief panic to spur Drixlia into a hard gallop.
 Gelarios stared in shock as dark aura burst out Drixlia's forehead and spread across its body to form a tight, dense black curtain. The stallion's mind-boggling acceleration forced the aura into the shape of a bullet-shape as it crashed into the monster's ranks. The Stallion's insane speed and Kashi's ability to instantly use the ki wall immediately after learning it notwithstanding were surprising in their own rights, but they weren't the reason for the shock in Gelarios' eyes.
 The centaurs used their spears to create the formation because of the feedback each time the ki wall clashed against an enemy. The person at the head of the ki wall suffered the backlash. If a centaur used their physical body to emit the ki, they would have to directly experience the initial backlash on themselves. It would be like slamming their bodies (although armored with ki) into the enemy forces. The point of impact was broad, and hence not effective.
 More importantly, however, the centaur would also be forced to bear the impact all around their body at the same time, which would slowly damage them.
 To remedy this, the spear was introduced. The sharp spear point streamlined the entire ki force into a single point. This, not only made it much easier to pierce through the enemy forces, but also reduce the strain on the centaur. Rather than experiencing the backlash on their entire body, the feedback was concentrated on the arm. As long as the spear arm was sufficiently trained, the chances of accumulating injuries were low.
 Kashi and Drixlia, however, were not obeying this principle. By using Drixlia as the 'spear-point' Kashi was forcing the horse to bear the impact of smashing into these tough bodied blights. Most animals would have died on the spot from such a task.
 Kashi and Drixlia did not seem to care about any of this as they smashed into the blight forces with arrogant impudence. A massive explosion ensued as the first group of blights was blasted out of their path.

Drixlia thundered through the panicked blights, stubbornly grunting as it used his forehead like a battering ram to smash its way through the army and crushed stragglers underneath its powerful hooves.
 "Excellent Drix," Kashi praised as he patted the horse's neck. "Don't worry. It won't hurt much longer." Before Drixlia could process what the daeben meant, tens of blights around it suddenly exploded. Smoking arrows struck the earth behind the furthest beast.
 Atop the defense wall, Gelarios' eyes bulged out of their sockets as Kashi shot dozens of arrows into the monster army and reaped their lives like wheat. However what particularly drew his attention was the bow in the daeben's hand. Although it looked simple, the chief's heart involuntarily quickened each time the string was drawn.
 Kashi grasped [Ferulic's Practice Bow] and unleashed hell upon the monster army. Each arrow sentenced the monster it hit to death, and the daeben's experience points began to climb at a rapid rate.
 Kashi, however, was not interested in his own growth as he could feel Drixlia's explosive growth. The stallion's gait stabilized, and its speed increased as time passed. This was a result of the massive experience points it gained from its status as Kashi's 'mount.'
 In L.N.E, there were three ways for a monster or animal to increase its strength. The first and most common method was to kill and consume the flesh of other monsters and adventurers. The strength gained was proportional to the strength of the consumed beast. As could be expected, this did not apply to herbivores. A herbivore improved by feeding on high-level grass and plants. Unfortunately, this peaceful method meant that improvements were very slow. Usually, the effects would not show until the next generation.
 The second method was to either awaken a hidden bloodline, somehow boost the current bloodline, or transplant a rare, high-level bloodline from a monster to a weaker monster through special rituals. These methods were unreliable as they could only be performed by very select humes, and even then, success was not always guaranteed. However, its benefit was that it increased the base strength of a monster.
 The final, and perhaps the cheatiest method of all, was to become the pet of a Summoned. Summoned could share some of the 'experience' they got from killing a monster with their pets or mounts as long as the beast joined them in combat.
 Kashi and Drixlia had not had many chances to fight together, and the stallion's development had stalled as a result. It was getting to the point where Kashi's running speed was nearing its top speed. Kashi knew this problem and sought out a method to increase Drixlia's bloodline as there were not many opportunities to fight on horseback.
 Who could have guessed that an army of high-level monsters would deliver itself to the daeben's doorstep? Even better, Darian had inadvertently taught Kashi how to cover his biggest weakness: Drixlia's safety.
 The poor stallion was so low-leveled that a single strike from any of these monsters would have been enough to kill it ten times over. However, now, it was those very beasts who were causing the stallion's level to skyrocket at an impossible rate. Kashi had long since muted the system's notifications as the windows informing him of his mount's level were beginning to block his entire vision.
 Drixlia neighed in excitement and sped up, turning itself into a mobile battering ram. No one was more aware of its increasing strength than the beast itself. It had always felt a lingering fear that it would soon be abandoned as Kashi got too powerful for it. But if it got strong enough, why would it have to fear? Kashi would definitely bring it out to explore the world more often!
 Die For Me!
 BOOM!
Massive blue-colored ki exploded out of Drixlia's body as it resolved to kill as many of these blights.

"HAHA! You feel it don't you!?" Kashi roared with laughter as the beast's roiling ki brushed past him. "Okay then! Let's slaughter them!"
 Neeigh!
 Drixlia neighed in excited agreement, and more ki surged out of its body. Its ki roiled and mixed with Kashi's dark ki. The blue and black ki surged and morphed into the silhouette of a black horse with flaming blue hooves, mane, and tail.
 Kashi and Drixlia were hidden with the lifeform as it smashed through the beasts, the only evidence of their presence the life-reaping arrows that flew out of the image.
 "Horse and Man as One," Gelarios muttered as he stared at the silhouette that crushed its way through the army with a calm expression. Why was he calm? Simple, the old chief nearly had a heart attack when ki exploded from Drixlia's body. If he kept being surprised by everything the daeben did, how long would he have to live? It was much better to see the daeben as a monster. That way, everything would make sense.
 "Monster. Yes, monster." Gelarios tested the word on his lips and was not surprised to find that it fit perfectly. "Mhmm. He is a monster. Bring down the moon if you want, this old man won't flinch."
 "Chief?" A young soldier called as he walked up to Gelarios. "Should we send reinforcements to the other walls?"
 "No." Gelarios shook his head. "Take a few men from the other walls to help Darian clear out the vermin in the city. When the city's safe, bring all the spare men to this gate. We will reinforce the daeben."
 The soldier's brow furrowed in confusion. "Sir? It seems the daeben can handle it."
 Gelarios shook his head. "It might look impressive, but its ki he's burning. Ki! You must remember: the charging formation is created for short calvary bursts. No matter how strong he is, he will soon run out of Ki at this rate. The only reason he is holding on this long is because of that stallion."
 The soldier passed on Gelarios' order to a subordinate then turned to the chief. "I don't understand. What's special about that stallion?"
 "It's weak," Gelarios stated. "It's so weak that a single hit from these monsters would have instantly ended its life."
 The soldier was even more confused. "How is its weakness a strength?"
 Gelarios sighed. "It's so weak that it's leveling up at an impossible rate. Remember what happens when you level up?"
 The soldier's eyes widened as realization dawned. "Your mana and ki refill to the peak."
 "Exactly," Gelarios muttered. "Right now, the stallion is burning the majority of its ki before the next level up to reduce the daeben's burden. Look, the formation is changing color." Just as Gelarios stated, blue overtook the majority of the ki-formed stallion's coat. Curiously, however, the head and legs of the image remained black. "The daeben is smart," Gelarios praised. "He reduced the overall amount of ki he put in and concentrated on the legs and head since those determine the overall force of the beast."
 Gelarios sighed as he watched the rampage. "The young will truly surpass the old. At least, this should be the extent of his abilities. Nothing else can surprise me."
 As if on cue, ten thousand arrows shot out from ten portals that suddenly appeared around the horse formation and absolutely decimated the enemy troops. However, to the centaurs' shock, at least four thousand of those arrows shot to the walls. Before panic could even being to set in, Gelarios saw a small portal appear in front of him.
 "Get down!" The old man screamed in fright as four thousand arrows converged on the portal. Unfortunately, the mana-enhanced arrows were far too fast. Gelarios' heart stopped as a dark mass consumed his entire vision.

Luckily, [Homing Arrow] was as effective as advertised, especially on a stationary target. The arrows zipped into the portal and smashed into the remnants of the monster army.
 It took Gelarios a moment to process what just happened. The old man nearly pissed himself in fright as his life flashed before his eyes. The embarrassment and fear exploded in the form of rage, "ARE YOU TRYING TO KILL ME, BOY!?" Gelarios roared in rage and had to be stopped from jumping down from the wall by his tribesman. "DON'T HOLD ME! I Must Teach This Boy A Less—"
 Thunk!
 The threat died in Gelarios' throat as an arrow stabbed into the battlement in front of the chief. The old man noticed a note at the end of the arrow and weakly pulled it out. He unfurled the dry parchment and paled when he noticed the note had been written in blood. However, that momentary fright instantly turned into incredulous laughter when he read the contents.
 [Please Help. I've Run Out of Arrows.]
 Gelarios handed the note to a subordinate as he surveyed the battlefield. Only a few dozen monsters remained on their side of the battlefield, and the daeben was picking off these unlucky survivors. The chief knew the time was ripe for a counterattack.
 "Chief Gelarios, the village is clear!"
 Gelarios looked down and saw Darian below the wall with the assassins that had accompanied him into the city.
 "Chief, the troops are ready!"
 Hundreds of warriors gathered below the gates, eliciting a huge grin from the chief. Gelarios trotted down the battlements and stood in front of the city gates. "Excellent! We can't let these kids take all the glory! Let's show these monsters the power of the Dora tribe!"
 "OOH!"
 The ground shook from the collective roar of the centaurs as Gelarios gave the order. "Open the gates!"
 A few centaurs pulled the gates open, and the centaur army frantically charged out of the enclosure. Gelarios led the army and met up with Kashi and Drixlia who had collapsed the formation. Gelarios had plenty he wished to say to the impressive youth, but there was no time for that. He instead motioned to a group of centaurs who came forward with a massive crate. They dropped the crate on the ground and opened it to reveal thousands of arrows. Gelarios stated with a smile, "Here are the arrows you requested."
 "You have my thanks. I'll pay for these later." Kashi grinned as he dismounted and unceremoniously put the entire crate in his inner world. He climbed onto Drixlia's back and looked at Gelarios. "Where area do you want to attack first?"
 "We'll split into two squads and attack both sides," Gelarios stated. The Dora tribe's town was built with its back to a large stream, so there were no threats from that side. The village's wall was constructed in a semi-circular form with no real edges so it would be very easy for the monsters to ambush the army from behind if they chose to focus on one section of the wall. "The first squad will go with you and attack the east, while Darian and I will raise hell at the west. Whoever finishes first will reinforce the other."
 "I'm afraid I cannot agree with that strategy," Kashi refused with a shake of his head. "No offense, but you've seen the way I fight. I won't be as effective in large-scale battles if I'm in a group."
 "I understand your zeal, but you should not be too hasty." Gelarios shook his head. "I saw the exhaustion on your face when you unleashed that move just now. It must have consumed all of your mana. You at least need time to recover."
 "Oh, do not worry about that," Kashi said. "I've already recovered most of it during this talk."
 "Yes, you should be worrie—I'm sorry, what did you just say? You've almost recovered?"
 Kashi nodded. "Yes. I should be back at my peak in another thirty seconds."
 Gelarios' heart tumbled, and his face turned red in embarrassment. "Y-yes, that may be so, but your formation is currently depending largely on your horse. Impressive as its been, its level speed will soon slow down to the point it won't be able to burn as much ki as its been doing so far. Do not underestimate the formation's ki cost. You might just find yourself without ki in the middle of your battle."
 "Ah, don't worry about that either," Kashi reassured the chief. "My ki regenerates faster than the formation absorbs it."
 Gelarios began to doubt his worldview. Was there such a large gap between the Summoned and Residents? "B-but I saw you reduce your ki to only the formation's head and legs."
 "You noticed that? As expected of a chief," Kashi praised the chief. "I did not see why I should waste my ki on the entire body when I could have it concentrated on the forehead and legs."
 Gelarios finally understood. Kashi did not 'reduce' the amount of ki he poured into the formation. Instead, he gathered all that ki into the key regions of the formation to strengthen it. The chief began to feel like if he stayed around the daeben any longer, he would begin to doubt everything he knew about the world.
 "I will take the army east," Gelarios conceded. "Please join us when you're done."
 "Do not worry. I'll be quick," Kashi promised. "I also want to see how the centaur battle." Kashi spurred Drilxlia into a light jog as he headed to the western corner of the wall. He suddenly recalled an important matter and called over his shoulder before Drixlia broke into an aggressive sprint. "Please see if you can keep capture some of the Direwolves alive. There's something I want to check."
 Gelarios watched as ki blossomed around the charging pair and morphed into the horse formation. He turned his head to look at his men with a challenging grin. "Do you want to be outdone by that brat?"
 "NOOO!" 
 "In that case, let's clear out these bastard monsters, and show that daeben what we're made of!"
 "OOOH!"


 *****************
 *****************
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:
 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Sarah Kinkade
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer
 The High Council: Paul C. Bergeson (@facemaster), Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj




 *********
 Picture of the Day
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Five years since I first created this character, and I have finally found a picture that perfectly fits the Feminine Swordsman Prince image I had in my mind during her inception.
 Ladies and Gentlemen, I give you Shoko.

 

Chapter 26: Battle for Dora (Conclusion)



 Dora Tribelands, Kirkcour Woods.
 2:45 pm, 17th Banem 1092.
 Boom!
 Loud explosions continuously rang out from the midst of the monster army west of Dora's walls. The centaurs that manned Dora's west wall gulped hard as they watched a daeben and his horse continually blast their way through the monster army with alarming force. The centaurs clenched their fists until their knuckles turned white. Win! Win! Win! The centaurs, who until then had been staring death in the face, felt a surge of adrenaline rush through their blood as they watched the monsters they feared get slaughtered by the daeben.
 "Win Kashi-dono!" A sudden shout erupted from the wall, and the soldiers looked in shock at an old centaur whose strong gaze watched the battle below. Only at this moment did the centaurs realize that dozens of civilians had left their hiding places to join the soldiers on the wall.
 "Nubar-san, please, it's dangerous here! Return to the shelter." A group of soldiers tried to convince the old man, but he was having none of it.
 "Hmph! We know our fate lies in these battles, what use it is to hide at this point?" The old man retorted with a huff. "Let this old man see his fate with his own eyes."
 The captain on the wall felt a little awkward, but in the end, acceded when the old man promised he would leave if the situation took a turn for the worse. Just as the captain was about to turn to the wall, a child broke out of the cluster of civilians and eagerly galloped over to the battlements.
 The filly propped herself over the battlements, eyes gleaming as she caught sight of the daeben within the sea of monsters. Just as a rough hand grabbed her shoulder, she cupped her hands over her mouth and screamed at the top of her lungs, "Kashi-Sama! WIIIIIIIN!"
 Silence descended on the wall as every one instinctively looked over to that battlefield. At that moment, even though he should have had no way of hearing her call, Kashi suddenly raised his right hand into the sky and flashed a thumbs up!
 A sudden charge, like an electric spark, flashed through the warriors on the wall, and raucous cheers soon erupted.
 "Win Kashi-dono!"
 "Kill them all Kashi-sama!"
 "Kashi!" "Kashi!" Kashi!"
 Buoyed by the chanting on the wall, Kashi continuously wreaked havoc among the monster lines. Unfortunately, the daeben's initial momentum carried over from the north side had been significantly whittled down over time, so despite the fact he was still winning, the battle took longer than anticipated.
 Kashi had originally estimated he would be able to wipe out the beast army with a few strategic [Gilgamesh] strikes. Unfortunately, the monsters quickly adapted to the OP skill. The monsters used the time delay between Gilgamesh's portal opening and the arrows shooting out to defend themselves. The blights manipulated large roots to shoot out from the earth and block the arrows.
 The blights also attempted to use these roots to lay traps for the daeben, but his eyesight was far too sharp. Just before the roots shot out of the earth, there would be a slight bulge as the earth above gave way. It was very subtle and almost invisible to the regular human eye, but Kashi caught it every single time. Not only that, but Drixlia outperformed itself by nimbly changing directions even at high speed. The way it rapidly decelerated, veered off, then accelerated was more akin nimbler species like leopards or lions than horses. This was a clear sign of its rapid improvement from continuously leveling up.
 Kashi meanwhile did not lose hope despite losing his trump card. If he couldn't take them out en masse, then all he had to do was kill them individually right? The daeben shot arrow after arrow, rapidly taking down every enemy he came across. He lost count of how many monsters he had killed, and how many times he'd strung the bow.

Kashi could only follow this arduous path, even as the monsters formed a sea around him. His arms ached, and his eyes had begun to grow tired from searching out hidden attacks. He could feel the onset of a pounding headache, but he stubbornly continued fighting. There was no other option. If he fell here, the monsters would reinforce their friends at the east wall and decimate the beast tribe.
 Puchi! Puchi!
 And so he persevered, while his arrows rained down on his enemies. Kashi gritted his teeth and winced as another piercing headache pounded his skull. He knew he had begun to feel the stress of mental fatigue. While things like Ki, Mana, and Health could instantly be generated over time, Stamina could not. A person needed rest to restore their stamina.
 Kashi had been fighting ever since he entered Kirkcour Woods. His battle against the marilith, while seemingly simple, required a ton of mental calculation to accurately predict and dodge her attacks. Furthermore, he continued fighting immediately he reached Dora. Worse yet, he was fighting multiple feral beasts who had no set attack patterns. He was forced to keep an eye on every single corner of the battlefield while simultaneously attacking and counter-attacking.
 Kashi sighed as he was forced to admit that Syel was definitely better than him at fighting hordes of monsters. After all, as a mage, the vampire didn't need too many calculations. Keep a distance and bombard the enemy with AoE skills. Kashi, on the other hand, excelled at combat against a single enemy.
 Still, despite his internal grumblings and misgivings, Kashi managed to wipe out the monsters on the west wall within an hour.
 The warriors and civilians on the wall wept as they stared at that lonely figure bathed in blood. The daeben's back stood straight, but they could see the fatigue in his eyes and the way his bow dragged down his left arm.
 "KASHI-SAMA!"
 No one knew who led the shout, but soon enough, thousands of roars shook the earth as the excited centaurs screamed out the name of the brave warrior who risked his life to save them. The centaurs raised their fists and pounded their chests as they called out to the indomitable daeben.
 On the bloodsoaked fields, Kashi panted with a weary smile on his face. "Not so loud," the daeben jokingly scolded under his breath. Despite his pounding headache, the daeben looked up at the cheering centaurs with a triumphant grin and pumped his fist to the sky. "Hey, Suzuki, you feel that? Doesn't feel so bad to be appreciated does it?" Kashi chuckled as he felt a presence snort within him. "Ah, hell. Who am I kidding?"
 "Time to clean up the other side," Kashi said and spurred Drixlia into a gallop. They traveled along the shallow portion of the stream that bordered the southern wall until they reached the eastern front. Kashi's eyes gleamed as he saw the battle unfolding before him.
 The centaurs fought like true cavalry troops. The massive troop formed a gigantic arrow that pierced through the monster horde. They would charge in, wreak havoc in the monster horde, then charge out before the monsters killed their forward momentum. While effective, Kashi could see that the centaurs were not used to large-scale battles. There was no formula or tactic to their charge. Everyone simply added ki to the arrow and burst into the army. Whenever it seemed the momentum was dying, they would quickly force their way out.
 Just looking at them, Kashi could already picture a number of ways to better utilize their skills. Blame all the manga and anime he'd read, but some fundamental war tactics were ingrained in his head, and if it wasn't for the fact that they were in the midst of battle, and the centaurs lacked the required training, Kashi might have already implemented some of those tactics.
 The daeben suddenly wished Absalon was around. There was no one more adept at training soldiers than he was. Besides, Kashi knew his anime acquired tactics could not compare to that man's. Be it the Battle for Riven or the Battle for Aygorzi, Absalon had proven himself to be a man who thinks outside the box, and adept at commanding troops.

Kashi, however, did not have time for hopes and dreams. He took advantage of the fact that he came upon the monster army's rear to immediately launch as many [Gilgamesh] strikes as his mana allowed.
 It must be noted that at this point, the monster army's numbers had already been considerably whittled down by the centaurs. In fact, they might have been done already, were it not for Kashi's weird request to leave some animals alive. Because of this request, they had to pay special care to only injure some direwolves, slowing down their overall progress. How could they have expected that the daeben would be the one to run out of patience?
 Gelarios' eyes widened as thousands of ki infused arrows tear the remnant troops to pieces. He looked over the corpses to the daeben who nonchalantly galloped towards them amidst loud cheers with a bitter smile. "You are quite efficient, Kashi-dono," he said as Kashi came up next to him.
 "Too bad it only works as a surprise attack," Kashi lamented as he drew abreast of the chief. "I'm glad to see you are unharmed."
 "Likewise, Kashi-dono," Gelarios frankly stated as he clasped the daeben's forearm. He then looked over his shoulder to the fields where several injured direwolves lay listlessly on the ground. "What do you want with those? I'm afraid they are not long for the world."
 "You'll see," Kashi said with a mysterious grin. "More importantly, I implore you to have your men escort your tribe to Lymar and spare a few warriors to follow me to Tulpar."
 Gelarios frowned. "Why?"
 "I understand it's a big ask," Kashi stated. "However, it is impossible to face this foe on so many fronts. We've already seen what happens when your forces are divided. I cannot promise I'll be around to thwart another such attack. If we want to completely defeat this enemy, we have to be certain our people are safe."
 "Defeat?" Gelarios' eyes widened in shock. They had never considered defeating the enemy. Surviving alone took up all the time they had. Yet this daeben was talking about defeat? "Can you defeat them? We don't even know where the enemy is!?"
 Kashi gestured at Darian. "Darian-san already found their headquarters."
 Gelarios turned to face the young warrior. "Is this true? You found their main camp?"
 "I swear on my honor," Darian solemnly swore.
 Gelarios looked at the youth, then back at the daeben. "What exactly is your plan?"
 "Lure the tiger out of the cave," Kashi stated. "From this person's actions so far and Darian's intel, we can tell they have a massive army at their disposal. If we were to attack the camp under normal conditions, we would have to contend against their army. Even if we win, it'll be a hard victory, and there'll be plenty of time for them to escape long before the battle is over."
 Kashi looked at Darian. "That's why we need to bait them."
 Gelarios' eyes widened. "Bait?"
 "Yes, bait," Kashi confirmed. "We need a bait they can't resist to either lure them or the massive army out of their camp."
 "Are my people the bait in this scenario?" Gelarios' face hardened, and he glared at the daeben with a steely gaze. "You would put the lives of innocents in harm's way?"
 Kashi's aura suddenly turned cold as he glared at Gelarios. "Do not fool yourself. Everyone's life is already at risk." The pressure relaxed as Kahi's eyes warmed. "However, don't worry I'm not so maniacal that I would throw away innocent lives for the sake of victory. I aim to consolidate the forces of all the villager in one location. This way, you can fortify and defend yourselves from any attack."

"Also, we'll force the enemy to attack us with full-force," Gelarios supplemented with a thoughtful expression.
 "Yes," Kashi confirmed. "If we can draw out the main army, we can send a strike team to infiltrate and cut down the mastermind."
 Darian noticed Gelarios' hesitation and quickly added, "I support Kashi-dono's strategy. We cannot afford to keep waiting for a miracle to happen. Right now, the enemy is still underestimating us, and we have Kashi-dono here. There is no better time to launch a counterattack. In the worst case scenario, we perish, but at least it will only be after we have exhausted every option to live! Please, Chief Gelarios, consider this!" Darian hastily bowed as he implored the old stallion.
 Gelarios' brows scrunched together, but Kashi did not give him any time to ponder further.
 "We have to get moving to reach Tulpar before nightfall," Kashi said. "My apologies, but I need you to make your decision now."
 Gelarios' eyes twitched. "And if I disagree?"
 Kashi shrugged. "I will still go ahead to rescue as many villages as I can because I need the shamans alive to help me with a ritual. Once that's done, I'll leave. While I want to help you guys, I'm not suicidal enough to fight for people who are not prepared to risk their own lives."
 "Shamans?" Gelarios' eyes twitched. "What do you want with our shaman?"
 "Kashi-dono wants to improve his stallion's bloodline," Darian explained. "The chief already confirmed it has a superior bloodline locked away in its blood."
 Gelarios looked at the daeben. "If that's what you're after, why are you helping us further?"
 Kashi shook his head. "I like to finish what I've started. Besides, my conscience will bite me if I leave after seeing such a situation without lending my assistance. Of course, in the event you don't do your part, my conscience will understand and let me be when I leave."
 Gelarios eventually sighed and nodded. "Fine, I get your point. I'll send one-thousand soldiers with you to Tulpar. The rest will escort my people to Lymar." Gelarios took out a wooden token that had two golden winged horses facing opposite directions carved on it. He handed it to Darian and stated, "Show this to Odiss when you get there. It'll make negotiations easier."
 "Thank you, Chief!" Darian saluted and tucked the token into his bag. "Kashi-dono. Just a moment while we sort out who will accompany us on this journey."
 "Alright," Kashi agreed and spurred Drixlia to canter over to the battlefield where he caught sight of several, severely injured direwolves. The daeben dismounted and walked over to one such monster. He looked at the rage and hatred in the beast's eyes and revealed a slight smile. "Well now, I know you hate me, but you're just gonna have to obediently lie there and be my test subject."
 Kashi did not wait for the direwolf's reply. He placed his hand on the wolf's injured abdomen, and green light shot out of his hand and shrouded the beast's form. Moments later, the light disappeared along with the direwolf.
 Kashi waited, and when he did not feel any adverse effects 'looked' into his inner world. He found the direwolf, fully healed, aimlessly wandering about the field. With a thought, the daeben appeared in front of the beast.
 The direwolf sprang back as the strange figure appeared in front of it. It stared at Kashi for a few seconds then approached the daeben with its head down. To Kashi's shock, it laid on the grass and rolled over, exposing its belly. It had completely surrendered to him.
 Kashi glanced at Yggdrasil in shock. "What's going on?"
 A light breeze caressed the daeben, and his eyes widened as new information flowed into his brain. Apparently, this was a phenomenon called [World Suppression]. Any being placed in his world would automatically be suppressed forced to accept his rule. This suppression would not be used on friends of the daeben, or people he explicitly stated it should not be used on.
 This was the reason the eggs had rebelled so strongly. Fortunately for Kashi, now that the eggs were suppressed, they would forever see him as their master, same as this beast. It was the same authority held by Ferulic and Aethir in Destia. Yggdrasil, however, made sure to point out that this suppression would most likely fail on intelligent species because their guards were up.
 The only way to successfully suppress an intelligent being was to first destroy its own mental state. This required more than just beating the person, but also the systematic destruction of their psyche. At the very least, it was not something that could be achieved in a short period of time.
 Kashi was not as interested in the ability to suppress intelligent beings as he was the first. What would happen if he amassed a large number of powerful monsters and placed them in his world? Wouldn't he become a walking beastmaster? Kashi had already begun to imagine great things when Yggdrasil dropped cold water on his plan.
 First, Kashi did not have enough mana to support too many life forms. Second, those lifeforms needed to feed, so Kashi had to provide them with food. Which meant Kashi needed to find some herbivores to populate his world quickly. Finally, until all the elements were complete in his world, it was unable to support the birth of new life. Meaning Kashi could not just hunt a couple of rabbits and let them breed.
 The daeben 'returned' to the real world with a lot of thoughts in his head. He would find a way to fix these problems in time. Until then, however... Kashi walked around and placed the injured direwolves in his world. Whenever his mana ran out, he would sit and wait a few minutes before continuing his search. As fate would have it, he managed to find two badly injured Eagles that survived his initial attack. He placed those two in his world and finally stopped. In the end, he had acquired 34 Direwolfs and 2 Eagles.
 Kashi's world still had enough mana to support many more, but he stopped regardless because there was something else he wanted to try later. And he was not sure just how much space that would require.
 "Darian asked me to tell you he's ready."
 Kashi's eyelids jumped, but he managed to retain his composure as he turned around to face the cold-faced assassin that seemingly appeared behind him. The daeben smiled and patted Shadow's shoulder. "Alright, let's get going..."
 

 *****************
 *****************
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:
 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero,  Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Cristopher de Jesus
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer
 The High Council: Paul C. Bergeson (@facemaster), Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj

 


 

Chapter 27.1: Clinging Souls

          
 Rhatheh, Daggerfall,
 3:35 pm, 17th Banem, 1092.
 The cold air of death milled over the once bustling village, subduing the atmosphere. Warrior orcs patrolled the streets, gazes hardened in rage as they passed empty houses and charcoal sooted ruins. These buildings served as a stark reminder to the orcs, such that they would never forget the horror that was committed at this place.
 Several tents were erected outside the village where the orcs not on duty rested. None of the orcs were willing to enter the village if they did not have to. Even those whose houses survived the fires chose to set up camp outside. The memory of their loved ones and the gruesome scene they saw still freshly haunted their minds, and as a result, they could not bear the thought of sleeping in their own beds.
 It was toward this scene that a company of dwarven soldiers approached from the North. The company comprised roughly one-hundred soldiers. It was a number large enough to serve as a deterrent, but not large enough to induce a significant threat. This number of soldiers already showcased the dwarfs' attitudes toward the upcoming negotiations without a single word being spoken.
 The dwarfs were willing to negotiate and did not look down on the orcs' authority.
 Fifty orcs flanked the company at either side and escorted them to the village gates. The orcs glared at the dwarven soldiers, hoping for some sign of treachery. At that time, they would not hesitate to cut them down! Unfortunately, (or was it?), the dwarfs so far, seemed to be on the up-and-up. They had not made any suspicious movements and allowed themselves to be escorted to the gates.
 Grovitch awaited the company at the village's north gate. His eyes narrowed as he noticed the dwarf at the head of the company. His red, leather armor stood out against the stock armor the other soldiers wore. The dwarf's eyes were strong and held an unyielding conviction. His gaze did not falter even when faced with the hundreds of orcs camped outside the city gate, glaring at him with unshielded hatred.
 The lead dwarf raised his hand and stopped the company when they were roughly twenty meters from the gate. He then dismounted, and walked toward Grovitch, accompanied by three warriors, and two astoundingly fat dwarfs garbed in expensive civilian clothing that reeked of expensive perfume. The dwarfs, whose opulence was displayed by several gold chains squeezed out from within the company. Both dwarfs bore a striking semblance, varied only by the passage of time. The older of the two sported a dark grey beard while the younger of the two, seemingly in his early thirties sported a pure, black beard.
 Grovitch sneered as he saw the fear and hesitation in the civilians' eyes. 'Hmph! As expected of those cowardly dwarfs. We haven't even pulled out our weapons, and they're already pissing themselves in fright. To think our people were killed by these cowards!' The orc's face contorted in rage, but he eventually managed to control his emotions.
 Grovitch looked at the dwarfs in civilian clothing. "Which one of you is Rudega Farvulia?"
 "How rude!" The younger dwarf spat. "Who do you think you're speaking to with that attitude?"
 Rage burned in Grovitch's eyes, and he reached for his ax.
 "Wait! I apologize for my brethren's conduct," the lead dwarf stepped between Grovitch and the civilians and offered a bow in recompense. "I am Rudega Farvulia. You must be Grovitch Bone-Breaker. I wish we could have met under more favorable circumstances."
 "Farvulia!" The younger dwarf shouted. "You dare bow to a low—"
 "Shut up!" Rudega roared and glared at the dwarf. He glared at the older dwarf and warned, "Thonur, control your son, or I will discipline him myself!" Rudega began to regret bringing this wastrel father/son pair along.

Mokern Thonur, the older of the two dwarfs, was the dwarven lord of the Nuxvar province. He demanded that Rudega brought him and his son, Ungund along, and Rudega could not refuse. After all, Mokern was the lord of this region. Rudega would be considered to have overstepped his boundary if he carried out such a pivotal negotiation without the presence of the lord.
 Rudega's eyes burned with rage as he glared Mokern. Bringing them along was one thing. However, he would not tolerate their antics if they jeopardized the negotiations in any way. The stakes were far too high. It also helped that the Farvulian household had direct blood ties to the previous dwarven king. As a result, Rudega still had a modicum of seniority of these wastrel nobles.
 Mokern's features darkened after Rudega's outburst. However, only a moment passed before it was replaced with a smile. "Ah, apologies, Farvulia. It's my foolish son's first time outside our city. Please understand. I will ensure it does not happen again."
 "You see to that," Rudega huffed then turned to look at Grovitch. As expected, the orc had just released the grip on his ax. Rudega had no doubt of Ungund's outcome if he completed that sentence. He had just saved the dwarf's life, but he doubted Ungund would ever realize how closely he just danced with death. Just as Rudega feared, hatred and disgust momentarily flashed past Ungund's eyes, but with a nudge from his father, he lowered his head. Rudega was oblivious to Ungund's rage. He looked at Grovitch and said, "Please lead the way."
 Grovitch snorted. "Follow me," he said and led them through the city streets.
 "Sweet Mera," Rudega sighed beneath his breath as he took in the burned, and crumbled buildings. This was worse than he had ever imagined. Assuming at least one non-combatant orc lived in these homes at the time of the massacre... How many thousands of innocents were slaughtered here!?
 A large lump was stuck in Rudega's throat by the time they reached the city center. To the dwarf's surprise, a single tent was set up on a field of white. The dwarf stared at the white earth in shock. How extravagant. He did not think the orcs were the type for such opulence, let alone a small orc village like this. However, this was not the most important thing at the current time.
 Rudega turned to Grovitch, bowed and humbly implored, "Before we begin discussions, could you please point me to the graves. I wish to pay my respects."
 Grovitch's expression hardened as a dark cloud descended over his eyes. He pointed at the ground and said, "You're standing on it."
 Rudega's eyes widened, feeling like lightning struck his soul. His eyes shook as he once again examined the white ground. "This...This is ash!? 'Soul Clings to the Earth!?'"
 'Soul Clings to the Earth' was an extremely rare occurrence. It was a phenomenon created when innocent souls perished with extremely powerful resentment. Their resentment created bindings that locked the souls to the earth and prevented them from joining The Circle. This phenomenon manifested in the world in different ways. One of the rarest versions was the binding of the deceased's ashes to the ground of the crime. The only methods to release the souls were to either slay the responsible person and drip their blood over the area, or through the help of a powerful priest with strong holy energy (or necromancers who seized the wandering souls for their own use).
 Grovitch snorted. "My people are unresigned. They will cling to this plane until their death is avenged. For your sake, I hope you have a convincing case." The orc's eyes burned. "If not, at least you'll help pacify some souls."
 Rudega felt the collective glares of all the orcs. Their pain and hatred created a heavy pressure that pushed down on his shoulders. Rudega, however, did not let the pressure get to him. With a resolute expression, he got down on his knees and kowtowed three times. Each time, he smashed his head against the Earth with enough force to shake it. After the last bow, he sat on his knees and loudly swore, "I, Rudega Farvulia, hereby swear on the name of the Farvulia Household that I will do everything in my power to bring about the release you seek."
 Rudega rose to his feet and dabbed at the blood dripping down his forehead with a handkerchief. He looked at Grovitch, gestured towards the tent and said, "If you would please..."
 A hint of respect momentarily passed through Grovitch's eyes. If nothing else, this Rudega man had proven so far to be a man of respect and honor. He could not bring himself to completely hate the dwarf. However, his family still clung to the earth. Until they were released, he would not believe a single word that came from the dwarf's mouth. For all he knew, this could be an elaborate act to let down his guard.
 The light in Grovitch's eyes died down as quickly as it came. He threw a cold shoulder Rudega's way and led him to the tent.
 The tent's interior was as simple as you'd expect from a temporary meeting spot. A single furniture, a large bone chair sat at the end of the tent directly opposite the entrance. Durst sat in the chair with his ax on his lap, cold eyes measuring the dwarfs that entered the tent. Renark Ragelock and Guvern Dreamstone flanked the orc on his left and right side respectively.
 The trio discussed earlier and agreed Durst should lead the negotiations. It was no secret among the orcs that Durst was one of the most intelligent orcs among their race. It was just that he had no interest in power, hence why he was content with his small village. Guvern's presence had always been to legitimize the decisions made during the discussion. The arrangement clearly depicted the trust Grimlock had in Durst.
 Ragnaf Banbeast stood by the entrance. Together with Grovitch, they guarded the tent's entry point. Unlike all the orcs in the room, Ragnaf's eyes only held curiosity as he looked at Rudega. His instincts told him this dwarf was strong, and if it were not for Durst's presence, he might have already attacked, just to see what a battle against such a small creature would be like.
 In the end, however, Ragnaf managed to restrain himself and watched the meeting with a tortured expression.
 Oblivious to the young orc's thoughts, Rudega approached the Durst. He stopped a few meters away, clasped his right fist in his left palm and bowed. "Durst Blood-Drinker, your renowned name has graced the lips of thousands of bards in the north. It is an honor to finally make your acquaintance. I only wish it was under better circumstances."
 Durst's eyes remained cold, but he rose from his chair and approached the dwarf. "I have heard of you, Rudega Farvulia. They say you are a man of honor. I sincerely hope that to be the case." He looked at the father/son pair and frowned. "Your companions?"
 Rudega introduced the dwarfs. "Mokern and Ungund Thorun the lord and heir of the Nuxvar province."
 "Hmph!" Renark snorted in disdain. "To think you dwarfs dare to claim lordship. We've truly taken it too easy on you in the past years."
 "Not now Renark." Durst looked over his shoulder at Renark and shook his head. Renark snorted but kept his rage in check. Durst turned his attention back to Durst. "Sorry for that. Renark means well. We're just on edge, as you would understand."
 'You said 'Not Now' didn't you? Aren't you implying later is fine?' Despite his inner turmoil, Rudega stiffly smiled and replied, "I understand." He cast a gaze at the orc shaman in the corner, but seeing that Durst had no intention of introducing the orc, Rudega gave up and turned his attention back to Durst. "We can begin whenever you're ready."
 Durst suddenly sat on the ground. "Come, sit down. We'll speak with my people as witnesses..."
 

 

 *****************
 *****************
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:
 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Cristopher de Jesus
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer
 The High Council: Paul C. Bergeson (@facemaster), Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj

 

Chapter 27.2: Betrayal



 Rudega cast a wary look at Durst as he sat on the ground opposite the orc chief. He quickly motioned to Mokern and Ungund, who, despite the disgust on their faces, joined the dwarf on the ground. Rudega released a sigh of relief, as he had feared these dwarfs' pride would not allow them to sit on the ground. Luckily, it seemed they still knew the correct action to take in this situation.
 Durst, meanwhile, examined the expressions on the dwarfs' faces as they sat down. From Mokern and Ungund's disgust to the relief in Rudega's eyes; nothing left his eyes. He began to assemble a profile of the dwarfs in his mind.
 When Mukern and Ungund finally sat down, Durst spoke, "What was your role in the massacre of my people?"
 The dwarfs' expressions warped in shock and anger. What the hell? Who came right off the bat with accusations like that!? The proper procedure was to slowly feel each other out through dialogue before launching any accusatory remarks. This was because once allegations were thrown out, it could be considered as burning the bridges. It was quite tough to repair any relationship once charges had been tossed out.
 However, in this case, the orcs did not seem to care about decorum.
 "Durst-san, don't you think that accusation's a little harsh?" Rudega softly challenged. Although he was here to repair bridges, he was not going to roll over like a dog.
 "Harsh?" Durst snorted. "Sorry, but orcs do not play your stupid word games. When we want to know something, we ask. You can choose how to answer." The orc's eyes narrowed, and the atmosphere suddenly grew heavy with an unseen pressure. "Just don't lie to me. You won't like the outcome."
 Rudega snorted, and his aura scattered the pressure on the dwarfs. He glared at Durst, the anger in his eyes expressing his distaste for such intimidation tactics. "My people had nothing to do with the attack."
 Durst glared at the dwarf. His voice dropped low, and with no attempt to hide the threatening tone, he growled, "Are you calling my people liars? The only survivor of my people forced himself to live long enough to report this one message. You dare to insult the honor of a proud warrior?"
 Rudega winced as he felt a headache coming on. Shit, he had never expected there was an eyewitness. Damn you Brilith, what did you do!? He had been hoping it was mere speculation on the orcs' part. After all, the dwarfs were their direct enemy so it would make sense that they suspect them first.
 However, there was an actual witness. That certainly complicated things.
 Rudega gathered his wits about him and said, "Were you able to get any description on this dwarf?"
 "No," Durst replied. "He only had enough life left in him to report the existence of the dwarf."
 Rudega gritted his teeth. "Have you investigated further? Do you have an estimate of how many dwarfs were present?"
 "You no longer deny the presence of the dwarfs?" Durst questioned with a raised brow. He had expected Rudega to continue denying all the way to his grave.
 "You warrior had no reason to lie," Rudega replied in a grim tone. "There is no time to go back and forth over whether a dwarf did it or not. The important thing is to find the culprits and bring them to justice over such a tasteless massacre."
 "You don't seem to be lying," Durst said. He looked at the dwarf across from him with a tinge of respect. "We confirmed there were at least thirty murderers. One of them was very skilled. They single-handedly wiped out all the guards stationed around the village. The others entered the village and slaughtered everything that moved."

Rudega eyes widened in shock. "How do you know there were so many?"
 "Each person has their own method of killing," Durst explained. "Some prefer a quick decapitation, some go for the heart, some relish in causing pain while others try to end their targets as quickly as possible. People even have different weapons and methods of stabbing. As long as you pay attention to these details, you can guess a rough estimate of attackers."
 "That is... impressive," Rudega complimented in spite of himself. He had never seen an orc display this level of intelligence before. This Durst character; there was definitely more to him than met the eye. The dwarf's admiration turned to shock as he recognized a peculiarity in the numbers. "Wait. Did you say thirty? But there are hundreds of orcs. How could only thirty cause so much chaos?"
 "First, most of the villages' warriors were out on a food gathering expedition," Durst stated with guilt on his face. "But also, I believe they are an elite troop. The type that can only be fostered by a nation. No bandit group has experts with this much discipline and skill." Durst's eyes bore into Rudega's with an angry challenge. "Do you still think your people had nothing to do with it?"
 Rudega winced. This was why he hoped he would be dealing with a dumb orc. Smart people were too annoying. Give them a few clues, and they would break down a puzzle that the rest of the world would struggle on for months.
 Rudega realized the possibility of him being forced to give 'that' up was increasing with each passing dialogue. However, he was not sure what the orcs' reaction would be, which was why he was buying as much time to dig out what kind of man this Durst was.
 Rudega let out a sigh. "Truly, my people had nothing to do with it. I swear."
 "Oh?" Durst's eyes flashed as he glared at the dwarf. "But you have an idea who might be responsible?"
 Rudega shivered. Indeed, this orc was way too sharp. It was nigh unreasonable. "Yes, I might have an idea."
 "What!?" Renark, who, up until that moment had been standing behind Durst, growled in shock. "You know the cause of our suffering!? Why didn't you tell us sooner!? Why did you waste so much time? Are you buying time for someone!?"
 The atmosphere in the tent suddenly grew suffocatingly heavy as those within the tent pondered on Renark's words. Indeed, if Rudega knew all this while, why didn't he say anything? Could it be as Renark stated? Was he buying time for the culprit to escape?
 Grovitch's eyes turned blood-red, and he gripped his ax. If it were not for Durst's calm expression, he would have already struck. The orc relaxed the grip on his ax and continued coldly observing the meeting.
 Durst felt the cold tension in the room, but his mind was on something else. He looked over his shoulder at Renark and shook his head.
 Renark understood the cue. He took a step back and shut his mouth. Evidently, Durst was not particularly pleased with that outburst. Even though Renark brought up some good points, the timing could not have been any worse. They needed the dwarfs to tell them who was responsible for the crime, yet Renark's attitude might have just scared some truths out of them.
 Durst looked at the dwarfs and was surprised to see Rudega was similarly unaffected by the room's tension. However, the dwarfs by his side were petrified in fear, their faces pale-white. The orc could not understand why these two were brought along. They had offered nothing to the conversation and looked like they would crap their pants at the slightest provocation. However, it was not his place to question their presence. He turned his attention back to Rudega and apologized, "Sorry for my friend's outburst. He is quite upset."

"No need for apologies, I understand," Rudega nodded.
 "Good," Durst said, then proceeded to the main topic. "So, tell me who you think is responsible, and for the sake of my friend, why you didn't tell us earlier."
 "I had to be sure," Rudega said with a sigh. "I am not in the habit of throwing accusations without adequate grounds for suspicion. I needed enough evidence to justify my suspicion."
 Durst's eyes narrowed. "You have that justification now?"
 "Yes," Rudega acknowledged. "You said the attackers were an elite few, ruthless and powerful. In Daggerfall, there are usually only two groups with that kind of firepower. Orc cities and dwarfs. But recently, a new force has begun encroaching on these lands."
 Durst frowned. "You mean the wisben? No way. They battle straightforward without resorting to such tactics. Besides, wisben worship nature and life. They would never wantonly harm innocents this way."
 "Normally that would be the case," Rudega agreed. "However, what if I told you the one leading this charge was a Summoned?"
 Durst did a double-take. "Summoned? Those beings from another world?" He realized the severity of that word. Stories had been passed down for generations about the Summoned; these beings from another world who looked down on all the indigenous lifeforms. The Summoned were known as heartless murderers. They could wipe out entire cities and towns without the slightest remorse. Durst did not dare to imagine the consequence of having these plagues in Daggerfall.
 Durst swallowed his shock and looked at Rudega. "You believe the Summoned are responsible?"
 "I am ninety-nine percent sure," Rudega confirmed.
 "How can you be so sure?"
 Rudega's brows drew together as grief colored his features. "I am the one who invited them into our lands."
 "What did you say!?" Durst's expression instantly contorted in abject rage. His eye burned in fury as he recalled the empty-eyed corpses of his wife and daughter. Durst gritted his teeth so hard, blood dripped out from his mouth. His body trembled as he struggled to contain his rage while barely squeezing out, "You brought them here?"
 "I fully regret my actions," Rudega stated with a downcast expression. "I wanted her help in uniting the dwarven families. I did not think she would attempt to swallow us all."
 Durst struggled to keep his emotions in check. "This woman. What is her name?"
 "Brilith," Rudega replied. "Brilith Loneheart."
 Durst let out a sigh then grasped a piece of the soil in his hand. "Did you hear that? We now know our enemy. I vow to bring her before you and settle this grudge." Durst let the dust slide off his fingers then turned his attention to Rudega. "Okay, so the powerful backer is this Brilith Loneheart. However, it still does not explain the presence of so many dwarfs or how they knew the location of the orc villages. Someone has to have aided them. Was that you?"
 Rudega shook his head. "I never provided any information regarding the orcs, only the situation of my people. Besides, I live in the north. There's no way I could know the precise location of so many orc villages. Only, the region lord could have access to that information..." The dwarf's voice trailed off towards the end, as realization dawned. "No way. Please tell me it's no—" Schlick! "Ah!" Rudega screamed in pain as two swords pierced through him from behind.
 Rudega turned around, face blanching as he saw the terrible hatred on both Mukern and Undung's faces. Mokern's savage hatred morphed into a triumphant grin as he glared at the injured dwarf. "You have always been too smart for your own good," Mokern laughed with a savage smile.
 "M-Mokern, you..." Rudega coughed up blood, finding it extremely difficult to speak.
 Durst's eyes sparked to life. He picked up his ax and was about to rush to Rudega's aid when a strong sense of danger suddenly assaulted him. Durst panicked and instantly turned around, raising his ax above his head. It turned out to be the right decision as less than half a second later, a gigantic force crashed into the ax.
 Bam!
 Durst did not get a chance to recover after blocking the weapon. The assailant retaliated with a vicious kick to his abdomen. Durst winced all the air was knocked out of his lungs.
 Unfortunately for Durst, he was fighting on his knees, with bad posture, while the opponent was standing and had clearly readied themselves before attacking. The battle's outcome was long since decided.
 Durst painfully raised his head, and his eyes widened as they were met with the sharp glint of a metal ax. The orc roared in anger and rage as he faced his end.
 Clang! Krshh!
 Durst shouted in pain as the ax blade smashed into his left shoulder, its trajectory altered by a thrown handaxe. Blood splattered across Durst's face, but the orc's anger surpassed the pain. He grabbed the arm of his assailant and roared, "WHY!?"
 Grovitch and Ragnaf attempted to run to Durst's rescue, but Munerk and Ungund had other ideas. Ragnaf had been the one to save Durst's life earlier with the thrown handaxe. They would not give him that opportunity again. Munerk and Ungund took out a pair of spherical objects from their pockets and tossed one each into Grovitch and Ragnaf's path. They flung the final two at Durst then shielded themselves with a prompt Mana shield.
 BOOM!
 A massive explosion blew the tent sky high, drawing the stunned attention of all the orcs stationed in the city. Unbeknownst to them, an army in the distance took the explosion as a signal and began to approach the city. Meanwhile, within the dwarven ranks, the expression of a few dwarfs suddenly grew sharp with a deadly glint in their eyes.
 

 *****************
 *****************
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:
 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Gamma2626
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer, Paul C. Bergeson (@facemaster)
 The High Council: Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj

 

Chapter 28.1: Break Out!



 Rhatheth, Daggerfall,
 Three Minutes Earlier.
 A few orcs from Ragelock's tribe patrolled the village's perimeter alongside Rhatheth's orcs while engaging in animated chatter. The groups argued over whether the outcome of the negotiations would be war or not, and how large the potential conflict could get. The orcs' boisterous arguments were unceremoniously cut short, however, by a massive explosion that echoed out from the village's center.
 Rhatheth's orcs paled as they collectively turned to see a massive column of smoke rise from the village center. Frantic shouts exploded throughout the village as the orcs made to rush to the village center.
 Schlick! Schlick!
 However, it was this exact moment that dozens of orcs cried out in pain and disbelief as they were either ran through or decapitated by their Ragelock brothers. One such orc spun around and glared at the Ragelock tribesman who had backstabbed him.
 "Why!? What are you doing!?" The injured orc questioned with reluctant rage burning in his eyes. Although they had suspected this meeting might be a trap, they never thought it would be their fellow orcs who would betray them.
 The Ragelock tribesman did not say a word in reply. He brandished his ax above his head and struck at the injured orc. The injured orc cried out and hastily crossed his arms over his head.
 Thud!
 The ax heavily impacted against the orc's arms. The injured orc's right arm was cut clean off while the blade buried itself halfway through the left. The orc, already accepting its demise, glared at the traitor with red eyes. "You'll pay for this!"
 BAM!
 The injured orc suddenly kicked out, and successfully drove his foot into the traitor's stomach. The traitor blanched and doubled over as the air was knocked out of his lungs. The injured orc, rather than use the opportunity to escape, fished out a skullbone horn from his belt. He weakly placed the horn against his lips and heavily blew on it.
 Vrwoooo!
 The horn blared across the village, powerful, mournful and powered by an unrelenting rage. As if answering the call of this one horn, several horns wailed over the village, sending a message only the Rhatheth orcs understood.
 The orc who started the call let out a weak, triumphant grin as he watched the traitor rush at him with reddened, rage-filled eyes. He laughed as the traitor's ax descended on his head. "See You Soon!"
 Crack!
 "Schcuck!" The traitor cursed as he pulled out his ax from the crushed skull. He glared at the village, wondering what the message was. He could not shake off the feeling that something was wrong. The Rhatheth orc's first instinct when ambushed was not to fight back in anger but buy enough time to blow that bugle. If he did not know better, he would have thought the orc was expecting the ambush and was given clear instructions on what to do.
 Unfortunately for him, it turned out the traitor's instincts were on point.
 Within the village, the Rhatheth orcs were initially running toward the village center to check for the cause of the explosion. However, they all stopped immediately the horns sounded. The Rhatheth orcs cast unwilling, guilt-filled gazes toward the village center, but then formed small groups of three to five and charged out of the village. These groups slaughtered their way out of the village, not even hesitating when faced with the Ragelock clan members.
 Unfortunately for the Ragelock clan, most of their clan members were hidden in an elephant grass field a few hundred meters from the village. This had been the 'agreement' with Rhatheth, as 'insurance' against a possible dwarven ambush. Of course, recent events proved this to be false. These Ragelock 'insurance' was the true ambush force.

In the original plan, the Ragelock members in the village would gain the ire of the Rhatheth clan members through their betrayal. The prideful and angry nature of orcs would force the Rhateth clan to seek out and battle the Ragelock clan to the death as well as seek to protect their chief. This would buy enough time for the Ragelock clan hidden in the bushes to surround the village and wipe them out.
 But what was this!? The Rhateth were not following the script! In perhaps the most cowardly event in all of orcish history, the Rhatheh clan members abandoned both their leader and their revenge, to flee the town. By the time the Ragelock clan reached the village, the Rhatheth clan members had not only broken out of the village, but further scattered into the wind and ran in every which direction.
 What was worse, all the boars had been slaughtered by the Rhateth before they ran, forcing any would-be search party to conduct the search on foot. The Ragelock clan was enraged by these despicable methods and frantically chased down the escaping orcs.
 The Rhatheth orcs were not the only ones to experience the distaste of betrayal. Among the dwarven guards, those from Nuxvar suddenly stabbed Rudega's personal guards amongst the commotion. The attacks were so quick and ruthless that the massacre was over in less than a few dozen seconds. The Nuxvar dwarfs, after committing this murder, packed up their things and marched to the city center.
 Strangely, the Ragelock clan members pretended not to see the bloodstained dwarfs, almost like they had come to some form of prior agreement. The Ragelock clan members who did not join the chase followed the dwarfs to the city center. They gathered at the intersections leading to the center, with the dwarfs in front of the orcs and closely monitored the smoke, patiently awaiting the results.
 Their timing proved to be perfect as the dust from the explosion cleared to reveal the current situation. Surprisingly, it was not as the orcs had expected. The bombs thrown by Mokern and Ungund had indeed caused massive damage, a fact attested by Durst's missing arm and Rudega's missing ear and the large cavity in both warrior's stomach.
 Strangely, however, both men were somehow still alive, holding on to life through sheer stubborn will. The most shocking sight, however, was not that these two warriors were still among the world of the living, but that they were both held in Ragnaf's arms. Ragnaf had Durst slung over his left shoulder, and carried Rudega like a sack under his right arm.
 Mokern and Undung were safely tucked away in their little mana shield, while the orc shaman, Guvern lay in a pool of green blood on the ground. The poor shaman had been Renark's first target. It was the bloodlust leaked when Renark cut down the shaman that triggered Durst and bought enough time to dodge the first blow.
 Surely, if it were not for that momentary leak, Durst would have been the one laying on the ground. This was a testament to how well Renark had hidden his bloodlust this entire time.
 The man of the hour, Renark Ragelock glared at the orc opposing his final charge with disgust and rage. "Get out of my way!"
 "Make Me Traitorous Cur!" Grovitch cursed as he brandished his ax and glared at Renark while positioning himself between Renark and Ragnaf. Grovitch looked over his shoulder and roared at Ragnaf. "What are you waiting for!? Run!"
 "But!" Ragnaf shouted as he looked worriedly at Grovitch then surrounding orcs. If he left, there was no way Grovitch would survive this situation.
 "Don't worry about me," Grovitch soothed the young orc. "I might not be as smart as Durst, but I'm definitely just as strong as him. These punks can't take me down." He cast a gaze at the orcs and dwarfs surrounding the village. "Listen, Durst's tactics bought us a small window. Don't waste it!"

"Hehe, don't shout at the child, Grovitch," an old, haunting, weak voice joked.
 Renark paled and whirled around in shock to see the supposedly dead Guvern Dreamstone seated upright on the ground. Despite the fact there were two bowl-sized holes in his chest, the old shaman looked as healthy as ever, eyes sharp, piercing and filled with vitality.
 "Impossible!" Renark shouted as he stared at the old man. "This can't be! You're dead!" Renark's shock and fear were understandable. The core of his plan hinged on this old man's death! He had personally punched out the old man's heart and lungs, so he was confident of the old man's demise! Not even the orcs' impressive regeneration abilities could heal a wound of that magnitude so quickly. So, how should he explain the phenomenon before him? Wait, now that he thought about it...
 "Hahahahaha!" Renark burst out in laughter as he recalled a particular phenomenon. [Overdraw] or as it was known amongst the common folk, 'A life that had been pulled taut like a bow.' This phenomenon occurred when some factors coincided at the end of a person's life. It allowed them to pull together their entire lifeforce for one final attack or action. The most telling sign of this phenomenon was the fact that its user would, for a moment, adopt a strangely healthy appearance, sometimes even getting younger. However, once a minute had elapsed, or the attack had been used, the user would immediately pass away.
 It was a rare skill that was deadly when it caught the enemy unawares. However, since Renark knew what it could do, he had no reason to be so cautious. All he had to do was be on guard for the next minute. Oh, wait, make that fifty seconds, and this dangerous bag of bones would collapse all on his own.
 "Hehe, Ragelock," Guvern snarled. "I hope you've prepared yourself for the consequences." Dense, green mana swirled around the shaman's right hand as he pointed his palm at Renark.
 The traitor's eyes hardened, and he immediately braced himself for the incoming attack. 'Hmph! I still have that! It can at least block one attack.'
 To the shock of everyone present, a malicious grin spread on Guvern's face as his palm suddenly swiveled to Ragnaf. "Run! You fool!" Guvern ordered as a mandala suddenly appeared underneath Ragnaf's feet.
 Ragnaf's eyes went wide as a torrential amount of power flooded into his bones and muscles. He did not know what had happened, but he understood the severity of Guvern's sacrifice. The orc nodded and immediately charged out of the village center.
 "No!" Renark roared in rage as he realized he had been fooled by the old man. He made to chase after the fleeing Ragnaf, but the hated Grovitch blocked his path with a shit-eating grin.
 "You're not going anywhere!" Grovitch roared as he clashed against Renark's ax.
 Boom! Boom! Boom!
 The earth trembled as these colossal men battled, each angrier than the other. Renark pressed the injured Grovitch with numerous fast-paced attacks, angrily forcing the orc to succumb to his injuries. Grovitch for his part played the role of a powerful bulwark. He was steady and strong, weathering Renark's attacks with both ax and body.
 "Stop that bastard!" Seeing he would not be able to catch up in a short amount of time, Renark called out to men.
 Surprisingly, Ragnaf did not hesitate even as he faced the onrushing enemies. He sprinted at full speed until he was only a few meters away from the closest enemy. At which point, he stomped on the ground, buckled his knees... then jumped!
 "WHAT!?"
 The Ragelock clan members gawked in shocked as Ragnaf sailed over their heads. The young champion's leap took him several meters behind the army, in a feat of athleticism that did not belong to someone as heavy as an orc.
 Ragnaf landed on the ground with a loud thud then took off running out of the village. Some of the Ragelock clan members immediately gave chase, but an even greater number remained as if waiting for something else.
 Renark watched Ragnaf's escape with a complicated expression. He turned to the injured Grovitch and said, "Incredible. To think you would willingly throw your life away for that weakling."
 "I won't let you insult Durst," Grovitch spat. "That orc is stronger and smarter than you, and I combined. He's only stuck in this small town 'cause he's not interested in ruling."
 "And that's exactly why I said he's weak," Renark spat in disgust. He did not wait for Grovitch's reply but instead turned to Guvern. Uncharacteristically, he bowed his head and said, "I will not apologize, Guvern Dreamstone. My ambition does not allow me to remain in a small town."
 Guvern smiled and shook his head. "The future belongs to the young. Forgive this old man for stepping in." With those words, the shaman shut his eyes and breathed his last.
 Renark turned to Grovitch and let out a loud sigh. "Put down your ax Grovitch. You have completed your mission. You'll lose your life if you fight any longer..."

 

Chapter 28.2: Double-Cross!



 Grovitch snorted as he glared at Renark. "You speak like you won't cut me down the moment I drop my ax. Don't joke with me." The disgruntled general brandished his ax at the traitor. "Come, Ragelock! I challenge you!"
 Renark shook his head and replied, "I refuse." He ignored Grovitch's stunned expression and walked over to the Mokern and Ungund who had just put down their mana shield. A dark light danced in his eyes as he looked at the dwarfs. "I'm guessing the wisben put you up to this?"
 Mokern's gaze hardened, but his son, Ungund answered before he could speak. "Yes, but I cannot believe we had to work with a mere orc." Ungund frowned as he gave the sized up Renark with his eyes. "Unbelievable. All that power and no brains to go with it. You chose wisely to work with us, or you wouldn't even be fit to carry our shoes in the future."
 Renark's lips curled up in a smile, seemingly unoffended by the dwarf's insults. "Why? What's happening in the future?"
 Ungund opened his mouth to gloat, but Mokern hastily clamped his hand over his son's lips.
 Mokern looked at Renark and chuckled as he said, "Do not mind my son. He has delusions of grandeur. Our partnership was a success. It's important we focus on ridding ourselves of the external variables rather than worrying about the future."
 "Oh? That's too bad, I am an orc of the future," Renark lamented, but although the words were apologetic, the smile still remained. "I often wonder about the future before making any decisions. For example, what will come of our relationship in the future and what's the goal of the wisbens that forged this partnership?"
 Mokern's brows furrowed. "What are you talking about?"
 "What happens after we return with news of the betrayal? Both sides go to war. We both become the respective leaders of our races after the competition 'dies' in the war." Renark's smile intensified as a dangerous glint shone in his eyes. "But what comes after that?"
 Mokern's gaze narrowed. "A mountain cannot contain two tigers. When the time comes, we'll battle it out for the winner."
 "I see." Renark's expression fell as disappointment colored his eyes. "You're stupider than I thought. You still haven't realized that no matter who wins, the wisbens will be the ones to win in the end."
 Monerk's eyes widened in shock. "What are you talking about!?"
 "Go ask Durst," Renark spat and suddenly swung down his ax.
 "What are you doing!?" Mokern cried as he hastily set up a mana shield. Crack! Unfortunately, his efforts proved utterly useless as the shield smashed to pieces under the orc's strength.
 "Father!" Ungund cried out in shock and reached for his sword. Thud! He never got to complete the motion, however, as an arrow suddenly burst his head to pieces.
 "Ungund!" Mokern's desperate cried out, but Renark's ax split him in twain before he could process his loss.
 Mokern's guards met a similar end at the end of the orcs behind them. Within a few seconds, no living dwarfs remained in the town.
 Grovitch's eyelids twitched as he stared at the massacre. Even though he hated the dwarfs, something did not sit right with him. He warily looked at Renark and questioned, "What're you planning?"
 Renark leaked a grin as he looked at Grovitch. "You'll know soon enough. Now, drop your ax."
 Grovitch shook his head and his gaze hardened. "You need me alive for some reason, don't you?" The orc snorted and pulled out a short dagger. "Goodluck with that." The orc strengthened his resolve, shut his eyes, and drove the dagger to his neck.

"Watch out!"
 Grovitch instinctively reacted to the shout by opening his eyes, where he was met with the sight of a thrown handaxe inches away from his head. Despite wanting to die a moment ago, his body once again instinctively reacted, and he ducked below the thrown ax.
 BAM!
 Before Grovitch could recover, a pair of powerful hands grasped the back of his head and crashed his face against a sturdy kneecap. Blood burst out of Grovitch's nose and disoriented, but his attacker did not stop there.
 Renark drove his knee two more times into Grovitch's face, then tackled the disoriented orc onto the ground. He then proceeded to pummel Grovitch with terrible torrents of punches that left Grovitch bloodied and unconscious by the time he was done. He instructed a group of orcs to tie Grovitch and take him to a previously discussed location.
 Renark then looked toward the east, which was the direction Ragnaf had fled in. He assigned a few orcs to arrange the scenes to make it look like the dwarfs had launched an ambush and were killed in retaliation, then took a small contingent of one hundred orcs with him to chase after the only loose ends left in his plan: Ragnaf, but most importantly, Durst.
 Renark would never rest easy without confirmation of Durst's death.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Tulpar Tribelands, Kirkcour Woods.

 5:56 pm, 17th Banem 1092.
 The Tulpar tribe differed from most other tribes in that their entire village was located inside a massive cave. A giant wooden gate blocking the cave entrance was the only entry point to the town. Massive tall trees shrouded most of the area around the cave save for a patch of grassland about 30 meters wide in front of the entrance, and a road that led away from the cave, towards other parts of the forst.
 At this time, the wooden gate lay broken on the ground, and corpses littered the area, bearing testament to the terrible battle that was fought there. But, if one had been expecting the battle to have ended in the Tulpar Tribe's loss, then they would have been sorely mistaken as a peculiar sight was unfolding on the grassland surrounding the Tulpar Tribe.
 It seemed the Tulpar tribes-centaurs had somehow managed to trap the monsters in a tight circle, and because of how bunched together the monsters were, it allowed the centaur army to easily slaughter them with little to no retaliation. Looking at the overall damage, such a situation made absolutely no sense, a sentiment shared by many warriors as they mercilessly cut down the monsters.
 "Kill them all!" Darian shouted in excitement as he stabbed his way through the monster horde that previously surrounded the Tulpar tribe. Even as he hacked down the monsters, he could not believe how smooth this rescue operation had been. The centaur recalled how pensive they had initially been when they first arrived at Tulpar.
 An hour earlier, when they arrived at Tulpar, they had paled at the massive number of monsters attacking the fort – they almost doubled the amount sent to attack the Lymar. It seemed that the mastermind paid particular attention to this town and wanted it taken down at all costs.

Kashi, at the time, surveyed the terrain then suggested a couple of unconventional strategies that, at the time, did not make any sense. If it were not for the incredible strength the daeben displayed in Lymar, they might have laughed him off or looked down on him as a glory chaser.
 However, as it stood, the centaurs did adopt the daeben's crazy strategy. The first step was to split their forces into three units. The first unit, led by Shadow and Darian had 300 men and attacked from the north-west, while the second unit, led by Larsial and a commander under Gelarios called Casetes led a similar number of men, but attacked from the south-west. Shadow and Larsial's main jobs were to act as real-time communicators between Kashi and the two armies.
 The final unit of 400 centaurs remained with Kashi at a location several hundreds of meters down the road, out of eyesight. As per Kashi's orders, Shadow and Larsial's troops interchangeably charged at the edges of the monster horde, shaving off at least a few hundred monsters with each attack.
 Importantly, the charging parties never struck into the heart of the monster army, but patiently whittled away at the monsters at the rear guard. Initially, the monsters did not care about the loss of their companions because they could see the gates were about to come crashing down, but with every pass, irritation began to grow amongst the monsters.
 Darian and Casetes' forces began to experience more resistance during their raids, as increasingly more monsters chose to continue to chase after them even after they had disengaged. Despite this, Kashi only instructed them to keep doing the same.
 Eventually, a loud crash echoed throughout the forest, causing a visible stir within the monsters. The gate had finally fallen! The monsters excitedly charged at the soldiers behind the gate, managing to slaughter a few dozen within the short span of a second.
 However, as if predicting this exact moment, Kashi and 300 soldiers suddenly appeared behind the monsters, and he immediately emptied his mana to unleash [Gilgamesh], disguised within several volleys of arrows shot by the accompanying soldiers into the heart of the monster army. 
 BOOM!
 Terrible wails poured out amongst the monsters as several thousand were instantly routed in one second! This was the greatest loss they had suffered in the entire day, and it needed to be avenged!
 Kashi, however, did not seem to care for their vengeance. He immediately turned around and fled down the road with his troops. As they fled the scene, the monsters instantly 'made the connection.' This army was the same one that had been harassing them all this time. They had ignored these 300 warriors because they counted for nothing in the grand scheme of things, but if the centaurs had enough firepower to wipe out thousands at once, then they could not be allowed to live!
 Rooar!
 The enraged monsters ignored their original target and chased after the fleeing daeben down the road.
 However, the centaurs in the village, enraged at losing their brethren charged after the monsters, attempting to cut down as many as they could in this critical juncture. And so, a weird scene played out, with Kashi and his three hundred troops running ahead being chased by a horde of monsters, who were in turn, pursued by the Tulpar tribe warriors.
 At some point down the road, Kashi's troops suddenly split in half, revealing 100 centaurs charging down the path. The monsters could not stop in time and could only miserably cry out as the centaurs crashed into them, and destroyed their momentum like a brick wall.
 The monsters panicked and tried to dodge to the left and right, but 300 centaurs suddenly came charging in from both sides and boxed them in. Finally, the monsters attempted to turn back the way they came after realizing it was a trap, but they had even worse luck as they were faced with the sturdy Tulpar tribe.
 The Tulpar tribe were a reclusive, defensive tribe as could be seen by their remote dwellings within a cave. This trait of theirs translated to their primary choice of weaponry, which consisted of massive heater shields as tall as they were, and a spear or halberd.
 The shields proved handy, as the Tulpar tribesmen formed a wooden wall at the back and halted the monsters' advance. Recognizing the golden opportunity, several Tulpar tribesmen spread out and began to replace the Lymar tribe at the frontline, using their shields to block the desperate strikes. The Lymar tribesmen, meanwhile, fired arrows into the trapped monster army or stabbed through gaps in the formation, slowly but surely whittling down the monsters.
 Eventually, as a result of the centaurs' constant pressing, the monsters were bunched so tight they could not even find space to move, let alone attack. It was at this point the true massacre began.
 Kashi, Shadow, and Larsial jumped into the mess and began harvesting lives like they were wheat. Thirty minutes later, the final monster lay dead on the floor, allowing the centaur warriors to finally catch their breath.
 After a few moments of rest and respite, Kashi was taken to the tribes chief. Kashi explained his mission plan to the chief, who, thankfully, did not kick up much of a fuss. He willingly handed a medallion to the daeben and contributed 1000 shield warriors to the cause.
 Kashi thanked the chief, then once again set off with the new force. It was bound to be a very busy night for the daeben.
 

 

 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:

 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Gamma2626
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer, Paul C. Bergeson (@facemaster)
 The High Council: Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at: https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at: https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 A/N: Testing out new border styles. Hope you guys like it!
 Also, what do you guys think about this chapter? Lotsa mind games going on here it would seem.
 What's Renark's end goal?
 Will Grovitch survive?
 Find out next time on...
 


 

Chapter 29.1: Generals



 Derium Plains, Daggerfall,
 7:39 pm, 17th Banem 1092.
 

 Derium Plains was a vast savannah land east of Oerbora that bordered the Wazir river that cut between Daggerfall and Imperium. The moon shone overhead, brightly illuminating the earth with its beautiful light.
 *cough* *cough*
 Loud, desperate coughs punctuated the night's tranquility. The afflicted, Rudega Farvulia winced in pain as he weakly opened his eyes. He attempted to move his body but found he was too weak to move a single muscle. 'I can't believe I'm still alive,' the dwarf mused as he bent his neck either way and scanned his surroundings.
 Rudega was stunned to find he lay on a tree branch and he could make out Durst's heavily injured body on a branch above him. The erratic rise and fall of the orc's chest revealed he was still among the living, but Rudega could not be sure how long that would remain the case.
 Rudega's brain hurt as he tried to recall how he got here. 'Ah, that orc carried me after Mokern stabbed me through the back." The dwarf's complexion turned ugly as he thought of the smug, lazy bastard who nearly did him in. 'Just you wait, Mokern. I'll temper that brain of yours in my forge when I get back!'
 Rustle.
 The rustling of leaves drew Rudega's attention, and as it wasn't a windy night, the sound starkly stood out. The dwarf held his breath and tried his best not to make any noise as he peeked down to see who or what was approaching.
 Rudega released a sigh of relief when he saw Ragnaf walk out of the elephant grass with a giant bush rat in his hand.
 The orc's sharp instincts picked up the gaze on him, and he looked up to meet Rudega's weak brown eyes. Ragnaf dropped the carcass at the base of the tree, then climbed the tree to retrieve both Durst and Rudega. After placing them both on the ground, Ragnag tore the rat apart with his bare hands and handed a portion to Rudega. "Eat," he instructed. "We can't risk a fire."
 To Ragnaf's surprise, Rudega gamely accepted the rat carcass and began to chew on it without any change to his expression. The dwarf painfully swallowed a portion of the meat and started to feel some strength return to his body. He weakly reached into a pouch strapped to his waist and was relieved to find two bottles in there.
 Rudega retrieved the bottles from the pouch and looked at Ragnaf. "Here, feed one of this to Durst. It should help with his wounds."
 Ragnaf accepted the bottle with a mixed expression. "You're not like most dwarfs."
 "What? I'm not an egotistical bastard?" Rudega joked and scrunched his nose as he downed the contents of his bottle in one sweep.
 Ragnaf, encouraged by the dwarf's action, propped Durst's head on his knee and poured the contents of the bottle into his mouth. Luckily, Durst was not too far gone, and he reflexively swallowed the potion. Ragnaf heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the massive gash on Durst's shoulder begin to show signs of recovery. He looked at Rudega who had removed his armor. "You don't look down on orcs. I can't see the contempt in your eyes."
 "Kid, I don't have enough the energy to look down on anyone," Rudega bitterly laughed as he inspected his injury. The potion was doing its job. The holes in his chest were beginning to close up. However, he had lost far too much blood, and as a result, he remained weak. "When you see the things I've seen, you learn there are enough assholes and heroes in all races for you to equally distribute your hate."

Ragnaf's eyes widened. "You fought in the Great War?"
 "Since the day I could walk," Rudega replied and looked at Ragnaf. "Listen, kid; In this world, there's no shortage of evil things to hate if you go looking. It takes the truly strong to love despite all this."
 "I don't understand," Ragnaf stated with a frown.
 "Hehe, I didn't understand at first either." Rudega chuckled. "If we survive this, I just might talk to you all about it. Speaking of which..." The dwarf examined their surroundings. "Where are we?"
 "Derium Plains," Ragnaf's replied.
 "Derium Plains?" Rudega repeated in shock. "But that's east? If we keep heading in this direction, we'll hit Wazir river."
 "I know," Ragnaf stated with a severe scowl. "But I kept spotting wisben and orc scouts in every other direction. I'm not sure who's on our side right now, so I kept running east."
 "Smart move," Rudega praised as a line of cold sweat broke out on his forehead. If one of those scouts had spotted the orc, they would have long been dead. "They didn't notice you?"
 "No." Ragnaf shook his head. "I'm part wisben. I inherited my father's eyes," Ragnaf said as he pointed at his light-green eyes. "They can see very well."
 "Ah, I understand," Rudega muttered and sunk into thought. Moments later, he let out a defeated sigh and said, "Assuming they've already cast their net, there's only one place we can go."
 "Where's that?"
 Rudega's brows furrowed and he looked like he was seriously struggling with his decision. However, a moment later, his brow relaxed as he came to terms with the decision he was forced to make. "Let's go to Wazir river."
 Ragnaf showed an incredulous expression. "I know I'm strong, but there's no way I can carry you both and swim across the river. I'm not even sure I could do it on my own."
 Rudega shook his head. "We won't swim across, but go under."
 "Under?" Ragnaf's eyes flickered as realization dawned. "You guys—"
 Rudega revealed a guilty smile. "Yes. We've secretly built a few tunnels out of Daggerfall. It's meant to be an insurance escape plan in case we were ever overrun by orcs."
 "Or a backyard for an ally to invade the orcs," Ragnaf countered with a hard gaze.
 Rudega shrugged. "Like I said kid, in the real world, there's plenty of evil if you go looking."
 "Whatever you say, old man," Ragnaf snorted as he hoisted Durst onto his left shoulder. He walked over and once again carried Rudega like a handbag. "I'll let it slide this once."
 Boom!
 As Ragnaf sprinted down the landscape, Rudega could not help but wonder what the future held for their little party.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 

Glashtyn, Kirkcour Woods,
 8:13 pm, 17th Banem 1092.
 Boom!
 The earth trembled as thousands of centaurs clashed against even more. Blood dyed the ground as the centaur army cut through the monsters with a roiling vengeance. The beasts, surrounded and boxed in by the Tulpar shieldbearers, could do nothing but wail in torment as they were systematically cut down. Seemingly endless showers of arrows, shot by the Glashtyn tribe rained down on the disoriented monsters, and easily reaped their lives.
 Kashi looked upon the carnage from atop a nearby hill with Darian, Casetes and a Tulpar general named Balasius. The generals observed the slaughter with respect and awe in their eyes. They had never envisioned they could utilize such tactics to make battles as relaxed as this one appeared.
 How were these the same centaur tribes that had been plagued by the Blight for so long? Under Kashi's leadership, they were casually cutting down the monsters like wheat! He had even incorporated the Glashtyn's ability with the bow into his plan. So much so that his presence was no longer required on the battlefield.
 Kashi, for his part, could feel the generals' heated gazes, and he could not help but shake his head in embarrassment. Only the untrained eye would marvel at the simple tactic he was employing.
 This was the basic attract, surround and destroy tactic employed by Hannibal during the battle of Cannae. This was a tactic that allowed Hannibal's troop of 40,000 to completely crush 80,000 Roman soldiers. It was no wonder it was so effective. The only downside to this particular tactic was that it was next to impossible for modern military strategists to fall for the initial bait.
 Fortunately, this battle was against mindless monsters. The centaur army only needed to lightly provoke the monsters horde, and they would converge on the same target of their own volition, allowing the flanks to surround and lock them into the formation. Afterward, all that followed was a predictable slaughter.
 Kashi looked across the battlefield at the distant Glashtyn tribe. It seemed each centaur tribe had their specialties. The Lymar and Dora clan were experts with the spear, while the Tulpar tribe, with their huge stocky frames, excelled in defense as evidenced by the massive wooden tower shields they held.
 In contrast to these tribes, the Glashtyn tribe were quite skinny in comparison and excelled in archery and speed. Their preferred fighting style appeared to be sprinting within firing range of the enemy, letting loose, then quickly retreating. Their accuracy with the bow could only be beaten by the wisben tribes. Kashi could see them being adapted as a mobile archery unit, a deadly force on any battlefield.
 Kashi could not help imagining the centaurs fighting on their side. Damn, Absalon would have a field day with this force.
 "The battle is coming to a close," Darian reported, inadvertently drawing Kashi out of his reverie.
 "Mm... Let's go greet the chief," Kashi said as he spurred Drixlia onto a path that led down the hill.
 Why wasn't he in the fight?
 Kashi decided to let the centaurs have the taste of open combat against the monsters without his help. After all, the entire plan hinged on the centaurs putting up a tremendous fight while the daeben's strike team infiltrated enemy headquarters. If the centaurs got used to his game-breaking [Gilgamesh] shower, they might capitulate when it came to the real deal.
 As Drixlia trotted down the path, Kashi wondered what Absalon would think of his war-time decisions.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 

Aygorzi,
 8:10 pm, 17th Banem 1092.
 The Supreme General of the Hopeful Maggots' army, and appointed Auxiliary General of Rosendun, Absalon Pathfinder, rubbed his eyes as he studied a report file under the calming magelight. The general yawned and realized fatigue began to set in. How long had he been checking these reports?
 Absalon had truly lost count of how many hours he'd spent in-game on mundane, tedious tasks like these. Yet he could not deny the joy that arose in his heart from carrying out such a seemingly useless task. These tasks were a spice that was unavailable to him in reality.
 In real life, Absalon, or rather, Lt. Gen. Handa Hoshiko was a retired general with all the benefits that came with that. The general's life could not be said to be bad or good. His wife passed away from cancer a few years back, but they had two filial children who had gone on to live successful lives of their own. In fact, it was one of his grandchildren who suggested to the old man that he try out King's Journey.
 At first, Absalon hadn't cared much and casually bought the Virtual Gear. However, he was completely hooked by the time he felt the first burst of power from his in-game character. Absalon went on to found his own guild in that game, but because of how late he started, he never managed to break the ceiling and join the legends overlooking the world.
 Absalon ensured he did not make that mistake when Live No Evil came out. Not only was he one of the first to log into the game, but he took a few friends from the previous game and quickly set up their claim in Kerta. His expertise in strategic foresight aided him in swiftly clinching the spot as number one in Kerta, and he might have become King if it were not for Kashi's interference.
 At first, he had indeed borne some resentment toward the daeben. Who wouldn't? But the more Absalon carried out his role of general and saw Kashi's policies, he had to admit there was a reason generals rarely made good rulers.
 A general was a creature of war that belonged on the battlefield. Their viewpoints were almost always severely hampered due to their nature to seek victories at little to no cost to their own armies.
 Absalon knew that he enjoyed the battlefield. It was his calling. The ability to control the lives and deaths of thousands of warriors was a responsibility few could endure, but he relished the challenge. Every second of it.
 Knock! Knock!
 Absalon's inner thoughts were interrupted by a series of knocks on the door. Without looking up from the reports, he said, "Come in."
 Nyte walked into the room and looked at the general's weary eyes. "Absalon, you should get some sleep."
 "Don't worry. I'll sleep when I'm dead. Shouldn't be long now," Absalon joked as he raised his head from the reports.
 Nyte shook his head. He'd heard that joke a thousand times. He was past reacting to it. The warrior gave his report, "Syèl just arrived. He's drinking in the new tavern. From the looks of things, I think he'll stay the night."
 Absalon's eyes sparked open as the fatigue instantly washed away. "Good, keep an eye on him. I'll meet him first thing in the morning. What about Shoko?"
 "Ms. Shoko is with Jade at the dwarven forge," Nyte reported. "I think she'll show up at the tavern once she hears about Syèl's arrival."
 "Perfect," Absalon said as he released a sigh of relief. "The campaign will definitely run smoother with the help of those two monsters."
 "Absalon."
 "Yes?"
 "You're a monster yourself."
 "Nonsense."
 

 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:

 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Gamma2626
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer, Paul C. Bergeson (@facemaster)
 The High Council: Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at: https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at: https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj

 

Chapter 29.2: Glashtyn

           
 Glashtyn, Kirkcour Woods.
 8:23 pm, 17th Banem 1092.
 Kashi's negotiations with the Glashtyn tribe's chief went quicker than any of the previous discussions he'd had. The Glashtyn tribe, as they had suffered longer under the beasts' relentless assaults, had lost a large number of their forces to the monster invasion and itched for vengeance.
 Kashi, Darian, and the other generals had to remind the bereaved chief and generals of the Glashtyn tribe of their duty to preserve their bloodline before they relented and allowed some of their soldiers to escort the civilians to the Lymar village. Even so, over seven hundred specialized mobile archers joined the conquest to save the last town, Longma.
 Strangely, Darian pulled Kashi aside just before they set off for Longma. His brows were deeply-set, and his gaze was serious, yet slightly wary, causing the daeben to wonder what the issue was.
 "Kashi-dono," Darian greeted with an apologetic expression. "Forgive my question, but how do you feel about the beast-kin?"
 Kashi's brow rose, but he nonchalantly shrugged and answered, "Neither here nor there. About the same as every other race. Why?"
 Darian's brows locked together as traces of shame and guilt flitted through his eyes. "The Longma tribe are different from us. They could be classified as beast-kin if looked at from your perspective."
 "Beast-kin? More like demons," Casetes remarked as he joined the duo. He turned to Kashi, and the daeben could sense a hint of disdain in those eyes. "The Longma tribe are indeed centaurs as ordained by our god, but they are lesser creatures cursed by devils."
 "That claim has no proof," Darian countered with furrowed brows. "They are centaurs just like us."
 "Forgive me Darian-kun, but I am inclined to agree with Casetes," Balasius, the head general of the Tulpar tribe said as he too joined the discussion. "The Longma tribe are indeed a sub-species. But do not fear. As long as they are centaurs, we must protect them regardless, and so we shall."
 Kashi listened to the three generals, and a hidden light sparked in his eyes. "Sorry, I'm not following. What do you mean they're like demons?"
 "You have to see them to truly understand," Casetes said with a sigh that caused Kashi to frown. The daeben could hear the distinct tone of those who felt superior to others in society in the centaur's voice. "They look nothing like humans. Their upper bodies are covered in scales, and they have clawed hands twice the size of your head."
 "Mm, furthermore, the Longma tribe are savages," stated Balasius as he folded his powerful arms across his chest. "Strong, powerful savages, but savages nonetheless."
 "Yes, that's why, even though we are duty-bound to save them, you must remain vigilant," Casetes warned Kashi with a stern gaze. "The worst tragedy would be to lose you to friendly fire. We cannot predict what goes on in those savages' minds."
 "I will keep that in mind," Kashi replied in a flat tone. He looked at Darian and asked, "Are you of the same opinion?"
 Darian shook his head. "The Longma tribe might be a little wild, but I honestly believe that's only because it's the only way they know how to protect themselves."
 "Oh?" Kashi's eyes sparkled with interest. "Why do you say that?"
 "The Longma tribe has been ostracized for several centuries by other tribes for being too savage," Darian explained with a short sigh. "We do not share our technology, nor trade with them, yet we somehow expect them to keep up with our civilization. But whenever there's a significant threat to the centaur race, the Longma tribe is always the vanguard, shedding the most blood to protect our race." Darian frowned and glanced at Casetes, "Furthermore, we sow the seed of hatred in our foals when we tell them stupid, baseless stories like 'demon curses.' Frankly, if it were not for their undying loyalty to our god, they would have abandoned these lands ages ago."

Darian shrugged. "Then again, I might be biased because I fought alongside a few of the Longma tribe during my coming-of-age ceremony."
 Kashi looked at Casetes. "What do you think?"
 Casetes' brows furrowed as he sunk into deep thought. "I don't know. I have never thought of it that way."
 "Well, that's the good thing about life," Kashi said with a warm smile. "We get to learn something new every day."
 At that moment, a slender female centaur clad in leather armor and wielding a massive longbow strung over her shoulder trotted up to the trio. She bowed her head and introduced her identity. "Kashi-dono, Anatolia Tryphosa, general of the Glashtyn tribe has come to report. The troops are ready to move out on your command."
 Kashi smiled at Casetes, Balasius, and Darian. "We'll continue this conversation later. First, we must fulfill our obligations."
 "As it must be," Casetes, Balasius and Darian agreed and headed out to take command of their respective troops.
 Kashi looked at Anatolia. "We march now. I'm sorry. Your men must be tired, but we absolutely cannot afford to waste any time."
 "No need for concern," Anatolia boasted with a vengeful glare. "The Glashtyn tribe can fight for another five days without rest."
 "Thanks. I'll be relying on your tenacity," Kashi said and watched as Anatolia trotted off to ready her troops for the march.
 "You've come a long way from commanding a bunch of villagers in a swamp."
 Kashi's heart skipped a beat. He turned and glared at the assassin that at some point, rode up next to him. "What nonsense have you been teaching your horse?" Kashi jokingly admonished Shadow as he looked at the young man's mount. Somehow, the horse, just like its master, had learned to hide its presence. He could not understand why anyone would teach their horse such a useless skill.
 "How am I supposed to scare you if you can hear me coming?" Shadow replied in his trademark flat tone that made it impossible to tell if he was joking or not.
 Kashi's brows drew together in mock anger. "You do realize it's not normal to want to scare the shit out of your friends right?"
 "It isn't?" Shadow turned to look at Kashi, and for all the daeben's people-reading skills, he could not tell if the assassin's surprise was genuine or not. "But it's so much fun?"
 "Fun? You're handing out heart attacks left and right!?" Kashi berated.
 "Don't roller coasters, and haunted houses do the same thing?" Shadow countered. "They're fun aren't they?"
 "Well, I mean, those are different." Faced with Shadow's silent stare, Kashi doubted his own conjecture. "...Aren't they?"
 "Don't know. You decide." Shadow turned away from Kashi and looked at the troops below which had begun their march. Silence descended on the hilltop as the cool evening breeze rustled the tree leaves and grass. "Hey, Kashi, I never got the chance to say this, but thank you for finding us at Lew Creek."
 "What's this all of a sudden?" Kashi responded with a light-hearted chuckle. "You're not dying, are you?"
 "Hmph, I'll outlive you at the very least," Shadow countered with a snort.
 "I guess I now know why you keep trying to stop my heart."
 "It's only a matter of time," Shadow stated. He took a breath then added in a rare moment of solemnity, "I'm serious though, Kashi. You have no idea what you did for us when you picked us up at Lew Creek. You've shown us a world we would never have dreamed of." He looked into Kashi's eyes and said, "Especially Lune. If someone had told me Lune could be this happy two years ago, I would have killed them for giving her false hope. But you've made it a reality. For this, you will always have my gratitude."

Kashi's brows locked together in a tight frown and he waved his hands. "Enough with this talk of thanks. I don't know what you think I did, but I can assure you that the only reason I am standing here today is 'cause of you two. The man I am right now would not exist if it were not for every single one of you. So, don't ever bring this up again, or I will be forced to start bowing to every member of our party."
 With those words, Kashi patted Shadow's shoulder then spurred Drixlia to chase after the centaur formation.
 Shadow's eyes shone as he watched the retreating daeben and remarked in an almost playful tone, "How dishonest."
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Derium Plains, Daggerfall,
 10:02 pm, 17th Banem 1092.
 A lone silhouette rushed into an old, dilapidated village located a few kilometers from Wazir river. The houses, made from run-down thatch and cracked mud looked like it had not been inhabited in several years, and as a result, it was not surprising to find that a clan of goblins had made the run-down town their home.
 Goblins were tiny, green-skinned humanoid creatures that were roughly as tall as an average ten-year-old child. The derided creatures sported long, pointed ears akin to an elf's, and were often dressed in old rags scavenged from settlements of other settlements.
 Goblins in this world presented an annoying conundrum most monster classifiers. Their savage, scrapper-scavenger lifestyle and disregard for life suggested they should be classified as monsters, but they also possessed bare minimum intelligence and could speak the common tongue, which disqualified them from being monsters.
 Regardless of their status as monsters or not, the global dislike and disdain of goblins was an emotion shared by all races. As a result, goblins were usually exiled to the hidden parts of forests or old, abandoned ruins like this village.
 A pair of goblins chatting on the village street paled as a massive shadow suddenly loomed over them. The goblins paled in fright as they looked up and saw a gigantic, bleeding orc glaring at them.
 "Mercy, Mercy!" The goblins immediately knelt in fright and began to plead for their lives. They didn't even consider running or calling over their companions. Such was the level of their cowardice.
 "Are you sure this is the place?" Ragnaf questioned as he observed the kneeling goblins.
 "I'm sure of it," Rudega replied, then added, "You can put me down now."
 Ragnaf snorted and complied.
 Rudega looked at the kneeling goblins with a complicated gaze as he fished out a piece of paper and a pencil from his pockets. He drew a rough diagram then placed it on the floor on the floor in front of the goblins. "Don't worry, I promise we won't hurt you. We just want to know if you've seen this image."
 The goblins looked at the image then at each other. It was apparent they knew something but were scared to talk.
 "Hmph." Ragnaf's casual snort scared the living daylights out of the goblins, and they immediately spilled everything they knew.

Rudega looked at Ragnaf and chuckled as the goblins ran off. "It certainly helps to have an orc along."
 Ragnaf snorted once more and pointed toward the village's interior. "Let's go find this chief before Renark catches up."
           
 Rudega's gaze hardened. "You're right."
 Ragnaf looked at the dwarf. "Are you fine to walk?"
 "As long as we're not running away from anyone," Rudega replied as he walked ahead of the orc. The duo confidently made their way through the village. Their open stance caught the attention of several goblins who grabbed sticks and stones then fled to the chief's dwelling in panic.
 Rudega and Ragnaf stopped in front of what remained of an old duplex. Their gazes, however, were drawn to the goblin standing in front of the small mob that had formed in front of the building.
 This goblin was significantly different from the rest. It stood at least a head taller than the rest and held a sword in its left hand. Furthermore, it was dressed in old, but functional leather cuirass and its eyes shone with vestiges of intelligence.
 The goblin, upon seeing Ragnaf, immediately dropped its sword on the ground, much to the visitors' shock.
 The goblin stared at the two men and greeted them, "Name. Bok. No want trouble. What you want?"
 Rudega hid his shock. There wasn't enough time to look into this mutated creature. "Nice to meet you Bok. My name is Rudega. My partner's Ragnaf."
 Bok looked at the injured Durst slung over Ragnaf's shoulder and frowned. "Orc injured. You bring trouble."
 Rudega nodded. "Unfortunately yes, but we'll be out of your way in only a few moments." Rudega pointed at the diagram on his sheet of paper. "Once you take us to the room with this diagram, we'll disappear and never return."
 Bok looked at the sheet of paper and frowned. He felt uneasy, but the alternative was to force the intruders to search on their own. Who knew when whatever was pursuing them would catch up? "I know diagram. Come."
 Bok led the duo to the duplex's basement, where they saw the image of a broken hammer emblazoned on one of its walls.
 Rudega's gaze grew heavy as he approached the wall. This diagram represented the fall of the dwarfs. This spot, like a few others, were to be used during a do-or-die scenario for the dwarven race.
 Rudega shook his head and cleared his doubts. No use moaning. It was time to face the future, whatever it may be. The dwarf ran his fingers across the diagram and tapped specific locations in a cryptic pattern.
 Grrrooooo!
 The earth trembled as a section of the wall slid open, accompanied by a sound akin to the groans of a waking dragon.
 Ragnaf's eyes twitched as he stared into the dark abyss beyond the opened door. "Dwarfs and their tunnels."
 Rudega chuckled. "This is one of our deepest. It had to travel below the Wazir river after all."
 Ragnaf's eyes narrowed.
 Bok looked at the tunnel with a steady gaze then turned to Rudega. "If trouble come, I talk."
 Rudega's gaze hardened, but his eyes also held respect. "I would expect no less. Thank you and goodbye." The dwarf nodded then summoned a magelight and descended into the tunnel.
 "You're brave for a mere goblin," Ragnaf praised and patted Bok's head. He then followed behind Rudega before the door slid shut behind them.
 Bok waited till the door slid shut, then suddenly collapsed to the ground. "Uwaa, scary, scary," he cried to no one in particular. "Didn't think I'd actually fool them."
 

 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:

 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Gamma2626, Sven Buchheit
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer, Paul C. Bergeson (@facemaster)
 The High Council: Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince, Thund3rTank
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at: https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at: https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 PICTURE OF THE DAY
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Happy holidays from all of us over at Discord. May your finals be awesome and your holidays even better!

 Designed by Hyproxy

 

Chapter 30.1: Longma Tribe



 Longma, Kirkcour Woods.
 10:30 pm, 17th Banem 1092.
 "What the hell?" Kashi muttered in shock as he looked upon the battle occurring at the Longma tribe from an overhanging cliff.
 The Longma tribe was located at a small clearing within the forest, but unlike other tribes, they did not have any protective walls. Furthermore, their buildings comprised of simple large tents for each family. From the hill, it appeared very much like these tents were not placed in any determined order or formation.
 Anyone with the slightest intelligence could imagine what would happen to a village with such weak defenses in the event of a monster invasion. Or at least, it should have been obvious.
 At the moment, Kashi had begun to doubt his own intelligence.
 Hundreds of corpses littered the field below, but Kashi's sharp eyes could see that over 99% of the bodies belonged to the monster army, while the remaining 1% belonged to the daunting Longma tribe.
 Kashi swallowed hard and had to resist the urge to jump into battle when he saw the Longma tribespeople. The centaur generals' descriptions did not do the magnificent tribe justice.
 The Longma tribe looked like a cross between a dragon and a regular centaur. In fact, given the promiscuous nature of dragons, Kashi would not be surprised if that was, in fact, their origin.
 The horse portion of the Longma tribe centaurs was robust and sturdy, protected by hardened black scales grown strategically on their back, and the stifle. It was no surprise then that the Blights' wood-based attacks kept breaking against the Longma tribe's bodies as they ran through the monsters.
 The Longma tribe retaliated by stabbing and slicing up monsters with scythe-like bone spurs that grew at the end of tails that resembled scaled reptilian snakes.
 Kashi's eyes widened as a direwolf spat out a ki-blade at a Longma tribesman. The Longma tribesman did not falter. He continued his charge and the ki-blade shattered against the dense, interlocked muscles on his broad chest. He then grabbed the direwolf with clawed, demon-like hands with fingers that were longer than longer than Kashi's face. The Longma tribesman roared, and his massive, scaled arms bulged as he ripped the direwolf in half.
 The Longma tribesman seemed to sense Kashi's gaze as he turned and looked up at the hill, giving the daeben a full view of his face.
 Kashi finally understood why the other centaurs were not so accepting of this tribe. The Longma tribe indeed had more in common with monsters than they did humes. Humes were designed by Aethir to be aesthetically pleasing to the eye. This rule applied to all races, whether it was the humans, elves, dwarves or beast-kin. Even the drakul, after their transformation, carried a sense of security in their features.
 However, it seemed like Aethir had skipped over the Longma tribe. They could not look any more monstrous if they tried. Their facial features were sharp and angular, with bone-spurs jutting out of their chin and the sides of their heads to form massive horns. Their small eyes were sunken, and the bone structure of their skull made it look like they were always in a bad mood.
 Couple all these traits with sharp teeth you would expect to see in monsters like tigers, and you had creatures that, without context, anyone would assume were monsters. Even worse, their fighting methods were both primitive and savage, involving tearing their opponents apart with their bare hands and tails.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 

The Longma tribesman could not make out Kashi's full form from so far away, so he gave up, snorted and returned to the battle at hand. He did not care about Kashi's status. If he was a friend, good. If Kashi turned out to be an enemy, it would only mean more invaders they had to kill.
 Kashi looked down upon the scattered battlefield with a grave expression. The Longma tribesmen were scattered across the small clearing, fighting several monsters on separate fronts. He could not order the archers to fire for fear of hitting the Longma tribe nor could the cavalry charge into the crazy battlefield for fear of the same problem.
 The battlefield was very small, confined to the little clearing, and as a result, the centaurs would be forced into melee battle. However, Kashi knew that the centaurs' strength lay in their speed and power. A melee battle would be disadvantageous for the centaurs as they had a much larger frame and thus would sustain much more attacks than they could defend.
 Kashi would have considered sending the centaurs if they were fully decked out in plate armor, but as it stood, they were mostly naked. This was one of the primary reasons why none of the centaur tribes Kashi rescued ever considered leaving their town to engage in open melee.
 Furthermore, Kashi did not want to lose too many soldiers to this insane meat grinder. Kashi's fingers clenched and unclenched as he realized the optimal solution to this problem. The daeben looked at the generals by his side, grinned and said, "Esteemed Generals, here's the plan..."
 Fifteen minutes later, Casetes scratched his head and muttered as he watched Kashi and Darian charge down the slope. "How reckless."
 "Indeed," Anatolia agreed, then frowned. "But I fear what this might mean for the future of our race."
 "The future's still far," Balasius stated. "We can worry about that after we surpass this tribulation."
 "I suppose you're right," Anatolia grudgingly replied and folded her arms across her chest as she watched Darian burst out from the neighboring trees and tear into the monster army with Kashi by his side.
 BOOM!
 Several monsters cried out in pain as Darian tore into the enclosure. The warrior, in anticipation of the close-range battle, had traded in his spear for a massive halberd. It was one of three weapons Kashi had crafted as a present for Hektor, but he decided to gift it to Darian instead. After all, who knew how long it would take until Hektor's return? This weapon might no longer be suitable by then.
 Darian's initial charge did not last long before he was forced to stop by the solid cluster of monsters. After all, he did not have the added ki from his army. However, the centaur did not seem to care about this setback, and instead swung the halberd around him with wild abandon. The monsters cried as his ki tore them to pieces and an angry direwolf lunged at the centaur's exposed flank.
 Thwack! 
 Crash! 
 An arrow tore through the direwolf's head, and it crashed to the earth. The last thing the beast saw was the grin of the woman who sat on Darian's back.
 Larsial sat atop Darian's back and protected his flanks as the warrior charged out of the beast enclosure. The strange combination was something the daeben had thought of on the spot. The centaurs were mighty warriors whose greatest weakness were their long bodies. However, this issue was easily fixed by having an archer seated on the centaur's back to clear any attackers. By not needing reins, both hands of an archer on a centaur's back were free to wield a bow and shoot down any approaching threat.
 A small smile played on Larsial's face as she shot down any monsters that dare to approach Darian's flanks. As expected of that scary daeben. To think of exploiting the centaurs like this after only seeing them once. The only downside to this formation was that it was had to cover both flanks and the back at the same time. However, even this issue had been considered by Kashi.

"Reloading."
 Shadow's cold voice came from behind Larsial. The cold assassin was seated on Darian with his back to Larsial's, tasked with clearing out enemies at their rear. Shadow's 'reloading' referenced the brief moments it took to equip a new set of arrows. During those two or three seconds, Larsial had to increase her concentration to cover all angles. The same principle applied when she was close to running out of arrows. She would alert Shadow, who would then pull out some arrows to refill her ammunition.
 While Darian wreaked havoc in the monster army, he could not help but look across the battlefield at a single figure who tore across the battlefield like he was in his background.
 BOOM!
 Drixlia's hardcore training showed dividends as the monstrous horse tore through the monster army with scary ease, allowing Kashi to freely shoot down the surrounding beasts. The Kashi-Drixlia combination was like an unstoppable bulldozer turret.
 Nothing could stop Drixlia's charge. Its mighty hooves crushed traps laid by Blights while the ki-image around it blasted away any fools that dared to block its path. Worse yet were the hundreds of arrows that repeatedly shot out of the ki-image at speeds that surpassed human imagination.
 However, none of these feats stunned the onlookers as much as the accuracy of the shots. It was one thing to launch a volley at an area. It was another for every hit to be a fatal headshot.
 No one could understand how the daeben accomplished this except for the daeben himself. This was only possible because Kashi had combined the all-encompassing vision of [Mind's Eye] with the focus provided by [Keen Sense].
 [Mind's Eye] was a high-level skill that provided Kashi with a 3-D view of everything around him for at least 30 meters. [Keen Sense], on the other hand, was a low-level skill used to focus on a target and thus reduce the chances of missing. The skill's major downside was that it required its user to be stationary. When combined, [Keen Sense] focused on the monsters found by [Mind's Eye], and because Kashi was seated atop Drixlia, he passed the stationary requirement. Following this, Kashi combined [Rapid Shot] and [Mult-Shot] to produce the phenomenon where it seemed like dozens of arrows were being fired every second.
 Kashi had always maintained that there were no such things like useless skills, which was why he had never been in a rush to learn the next tier of Archery Skills even though he was overqualified. A hidden secret of King's Journey, and Live no Evil was that often times, the strongest were those who practiced the basics to the extreme and only sought out skills to compliment these basic techniques. If one were to just go looking for the next greatest skill, then they would be forever caught up in the trap of upgrading their skills without ever exploring their true potential.
 This probably played into why the Dimensional Painter class, despite how OP it was, only had a couple of combat skills that were expected to last its owner until the end of time. There were no avenues to 'upgrade' these skills into something else. If one wanted to improve the skills, they could only do so after perfectly understanding them.
 Kashi grinned as he emptied several quivers worth of arrows into the monster horde. This philosophy of 'Practice Makes Might' seemed to pervade all of L.N.E's leveling mechanics. The daeben could not help but wonder if the company was trying to instill this mentality into its players.
 Kashi pondered some more, then shrugged. This was not the time to debate philosophies. His eyes lit up as he spotted a member of the Longma tribe nearby. "Drix," Kashi prompted.
 Drixlia did not require further explanation. It snorted then increased the speed and force of its charge in the direction of that Longma tribeswoman.

The females of the Longma tribe bore a striking resemblance to their male counterparts, only differing in their slightly lither frames, and smoother facial features. Unlike the mares of the other centaur tribes, they did not grow breasts on their torso as it bore no functional purpose. In the case of other centaur tribes, the only evolutionary goal of the female breasts was to attract the eyes of potential mates.
 The culture of the Longma tribe made this evolutionary trait inconsequential to them.
 "[Gilgamesh!]"
 BOOM!
 The dreaded skill finally made an appearance.
 The Longma tribeswoman looked around in confusion as a thousand arrows suddenly shot down from a mandala above her head and shot down every single monster around her.
 "Catch!" Kashi called as he charged past her without so much as a word of greeting.
 The Longma tribeswoman instinctively reached out her hand and caught a sword Kashi had tossed over with great effort. The 30cm thick and 170cm longsword was the weapon of choice for the Tulpar tribe, used in tandem with their shields to attack enemies.
 Kashi had rounded up these powerful swords from the Tulpar army before setting off, with the intent of arming the Longma tribe. The Longma tribe was already so scary and powerful when fighting with their bare hands. What would it be like when such a force had a sword?
 Boom!
 That question was answered when the Longma tribeswoman sent dozens of monsters flying with the first, clumsy swing of the sword. The centaur revealed a sadistic grin when she saw the effects of using a sword. She let out a roar and actively charged into the monster army, swinging left and right with reckless abandon.
 Kashi sighed as he watched the rampant devastation while Drixlia made a beeline for the next Longa tribesman. 'Now, this is a race that was created for war.'
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:

 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Gamma2626, Sven Buchheit
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer, 
 The High Council: Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince, Thund3rTank, Facemaster, Luke Koschel
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at: https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at: https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 A/N: Been a few days since my last release. Sorry, I fell ill and didn't have the energy to write much. Still, in the recovery phase right now...
 Anyway, more importantly, Special Thanks to everyone over at Patreon! We've managed to cross the $400 mark! When I first started, I never thought this would be possible. Thank you, all of you for the continued patronage.
 Thanks to your support, we've managed to edit, rewrite and all around improve Vol.1 as far as Chapter 24! If we can keep up the pace, we might be able to slate the first volume's publication for a New Year's Release.  Once again, Thank you all for your support! I can't even explain how excited I am at the prospect of finally publishing a book of mine.
 I'm hoping on releasing it both on Paperback and e-book at the same time, but the process required for paperback's a lot more expensive. If you'd like to help, you can join the Patreon squad for as low as $1. 
 Regardless of if you join or not, I am forever grateful to all of you for reading and enjoying these series. Nothing makes an author happier than seeing people enjoying his books. 
 Come join our wholesome discord community. Our wonderful crew'll make you feel right at home. There's also a section for roleplayers, and I do pop up every now and then when I'm not writing or editing stuff. 
 See y'all soon!

 

Chapter 30.2: Longma Tribe (Part 2)

Kashi charged through the battlefield with staggering impudence, easily blasting all monsters out of his path until he reached the side of the next Longma tribe member. Similar to his previous encounter, Kashi wordlessly took out a sword from his inner world and tossed it to the warrior before galloping onward. The centaur, for his part, did not bother acknowledging the daeben's presence before slicing the surrounding monsters to shreds.
 Kashi pierced through the battlefield in this vein, either handing or throwing swords over to the centaurs, then letting them wreak havoc on the monster army without any significant assistance. This proved to be the best course of action, as, by the time Kashi handed out the last, one-thousandth sword, there were barely any monsters left.
 This allowed Kashi, Shadow, Larsial, Darian, and the Longma tribesmen to swiftly round up and eliminate, any and all traces of the monster army. Usually, the monsters would have run away following such massive losses, but it seemed whoever controlled them had ordered them to fight to their last breath. An order most likely issued to ensure the centaurs suffered the greatest loss possible.
 No one would have expected that it would backfire in this manner. The armed Longma tribe were like tigers that had grown wings. Their ferociousness absolutely decimated the monster army, and they only suffered minor losses.
 Kashi released a sigh of relief as he watched a Longma tribesman tear the last direwolf in half with his bare hands. Finally, phase one of the plan had been completed. The particulars of phase two would largely depend on the upcoming negotiations.
 Kashi's expression remained neutral as he approached the Longsma tribesman who tossed the torn carcass to the ground and glared at the daeben. "I assume you speak the common tongue?" Kashi questioned, his tone even and strong.
 The Longma tribesman remained silent.
 Kashi paused for a moment to consider his options. There were two classic approaches to a situation like this for every gamer. The first, and Kashi's personal favorite, was to prove your strength to the opposite party. Kashi knew he could bring a good portion of the Longma centaurs to their knees through his aura alone. The second option was to engage in a calm and rational discussion to try and bring the Longma tribe over to his cause.
 The downside to the second option was that for warring clans like the Longma tribe, an envoy who used words to try and convince them to do something would be looked down upon as weak and timid.
 If Kashi viewed the Longma tribe only as a capable fighting force, he would have proceeded to crush their wills and bend them to his cause. Fortunately, ever since the daeben embarked on the path of 'Uniting the Continent,' – and even more so in recent times – he had promised himself he would not treat any intelligent race differently from the rest.
 A conqueror's attitude was everything. If a conqueror went around treating some races better than others, that attitude would spill over to the common people when the war finally ended. At that point, it would only be a matter of time before the oppressed race broke out in civil war.
 With all these in mind, Kashi finally came to a decision.
 Boom!
 The Longma tribe paled as a brutal force burst out from the daeben. The centaurs trembled as they gazed upon what seemed to be a pair of daunting eyes glaring at them from within Kashi as if daring the centaurs to question its authority. However, before the centaurs could even begin to process their fear, the pressure vanished as quickly as it came.
 The Longma centaurs regarded Kashi with equal parts trepidation and respect. Only a true warrior steeped in years of bloodshed and chaos could unleash such a powerful aura.

"I'm glad I finally have your attention," Kashi said as he regarded the Longma tribesmen. "Now, may I have an audience with your chief?"
 "I am he," announced a massive centaur as he walked out of the crowd. The centaur was excessively huge, towering at over 10ft tall. His voice was deep and powerful, akin to the sound of thunder. Indeed, this much should have been expected of the chief of a warring clan. The chief judged Kashi and Drixlia through narrowed eyes then continued, "Who are you?"
 "My name's Kashi, Guild Leader of the Hopeful Maggots," Kashi replied with a stiff smile. Ah, although he'd indeed had some cool moments with the guild name, it still sounded off whenever he had to introduce the guild.
 Contrary to Kashi's expectations, however, the chief only nodded and held out his arm, "Agamios Longma, chief of the Longma clan. What brings you to our lands, Kashi?"
 Kashi smiled, instantly impressed by the chief's attitude. It took a special kind of mettle to look beyond the stupid sounding name. "I've been tasked with clearing out the source of the Blight. In return, the priests of each tribe will help my horse, Drixlia to improve its bloodline through some ritual."
 Agamios looked at Drixlia and nodded. "Indeed, I sense a powerful bloodline within your mount. We, the Longma tribe are not without grace. We shall send our priest when the time comes. You may leave us now. We must prepare for the enemy's retaliation."
 Kashi shook his head. "That is not good enough. What am I to do if you end up dying from the assault? I assure you, the enemy's retaliation will be ten times worse just to prove a point."
 Agamios' gaze hardened. He knew his to be true. The centaur village that was wiped out, Aethon had suffered their fate one day after wiping out the blights in a battle. His scouts had reported that the army that burned the village to the ground had stretched as far as their eyes could see. Agamios knew that the number they had successfully defeated today did not amount to a third of the scout's reported figures.
 However, despite the reality, Agamios was unwilling to work with the daeben. "Maybe so," Agamios admitted. "But I would rather perish alongside my brethren than be used by those who despise, fear and hate us. I do not want the last thing my tribesmen sees to be relief on the face of their allies. I will not allow it."
 "I understand how you feel Chief Agamios, but this is not the time to uphold grudges," Darian remarked as he trotted up to Kashi's side. He regarded the chief with apology in his eyes. "I know we have wronged your tribe on several occasions. However, this is a fight for our survival. Let us work together to overcome this foe so we can work toward healing old wounds."
 Agamios looked at Darian. "You must be Darian. My scouts reported you've run alongside them in the past."
 "It was my honor," Darian replied with his right arm across his chest. "Akol and Vasates saved my life on numerous occasions."
 "And you theirs," Agamios replied with a grunt. "However, you are one centaur. You cannot speak for the rest."
 Darian opened his mouth to speak but closed it soon after. He knew Agamios' words were true. Most centaurs saw the Longma tribe as something foreign, and thus feared and despised them.
 "Aren't you overthinking it?" Kashi questioned, interrupting the centaurs' discourse. "Why do you assume you are going to die? I already said I'm going to end the Blight. All you have to do is survive for two to three days alongside each other." Kashi looked to the side as Casetes, Anatolia and Balasius joined the group. "Surely you can manage that much?"
 Agamios frowned. "You sound confident. What guarantee do we have that you'll defeat the Blight?"
 "My Word," Kashi stated with an authority that did not brook any judgment. "The word of the Guild Leader of the Hopeful Maggots. Since I have given my word, it shall be so."

Agamios' heart shook as he stared at the daeben's majestic presence. In his entire life, he had never met someone smaller than him who could invoke the level of respect that was blooming in his heart. Some part of the chief's heart had begun to awaken, reflected in the quickening of his heartbeat. Suddenly, he was very intrigued. He wanted to see just how far this daeben would go. He wanted to see what he would accomplish! "Let's say I agree to your proposal to work together. What is your plan?"
 Casetes, Anatolia, Balasius, and Darian paid close attention to Kashi's following words. Until now, no one had asked for the specifics of Kashi's plan following the unification of the villages because the negotiations had all been between Kashi and the chiefs. They too wanted to know what his intentions were.
 Kashi looked at the expectant generals and chuckled. "The plan is simple. The centaur will create a fortress out of the Lymar tribe to protect themselves from the Blight's retaliation. When the perpetrator of this Blight learns of your new formation, they'll be forced to send the bulk of their forces to Lymar if they want to have any shot at eradicating you. Using that opening, a small strike force comprising my team and Darian will infiltrate the headquarters, deal with the source, and save the last priest."
 Agamios's eyelids twitched. "That's it? That's the extent of your plan? Four people charge into the enemy headquarters and save the day?"
 Kashi chuckled. "Don't sound so surprised. Taking out high-value targets is what I do best. These war-like battles are usually handled by others in my guild."
 "I watched him defeat a Marilith," Darian said to assuage the generals' doubts.
 This revelation shook the generals' hearts! Who did not know the Marilith? That monster was greatly feared by every tribe. The few Mariliths in Kirkcour Woods lived at the top of the food chain. Anyone who was stupid enough to cross one of those monsters suffered a terrible end. Yet, this daeben had killed one?
 "That's impossible!" Casetes was the first to voice his doubts. "Mariliths aren't something that can be killed so easily!"
 "Have you ever injured the Marilith? Seen it bleed?" Kashi questioned.
 "Of course I have seen a Marlith bleed!" Casetes muttered. "But that doesn't mean—"
 "If it can bleed, it can be killed," Kashi interrupted with a chuckle. "I just made it bleed more than you did."
 Casetes opened his mouth to object, but Anatolia cut him off, "Assuming what you say is true. You expect us to put all our lives at risk on the off chance you succeed? What do we do if you fail?"
 "Die," Kashi replied with a hard glare. His harsh reply caused Anatolia and Casetes to turn white. Both centaurs looked like they were about to explode in rage, but Kashi did not give them the satisfaction. "I do not know what impression you're under. I have put my life on the line continuously to save your tribes. Ask yourselves what would become of you if I did not come along when I did? Now, all I ask is that you put your lives on the line, same as I am. I do not think that to be an unreasonable request."
 Anatolia bit her lip then nodded. "You have a point."
 Balasius folded his arms and nodded. "Plan or no plan, the best course of action for the centaur race as a whole is to band together. Otherwise, the enemy can pick us off one by one." He turned to look at Agamios. "Our tribes may have their differences, but at the end of the day, we're all centaurs. We must stand together now so our children may run freely in the future."
 Agamios let out a sigh and nodded. "We will do as you have suggested for this fight." He said, then looked at Kashi. "However, I hope you take 100 hundred of my men with you."
 Kashi shook his head. "The purpose of a strikeforce is to remain incognito until we reach the target. One hundred centaurs will stand out too much."
 "If, as you've claimed, the mastermind sends out all his forces to attack the Lymar tribe, then he'll only have bareboned defenses remaining," Agamios brilliantly analyzed. "We can serve as a distraction to draw out the remaining forces."
 Kashi eye's sparked with interest as a plan began to formulate in his mind. "True. If we smear blood and dirt on your bodies, you can pass off as a force driven by grief and hatred. This mastermind has never met me, so he should have no reason to suspect it's a trap. But, isn't a hundred warriors small? Will they be alright?"
 "The Longma tribe is without equal on the battlefield," Agamios proudly stated. "We can quite easily handle this much."
 Kashi nodded his assent. "In that case, please choose those who will carry out the strike mission and have the rest travel to Lymar with the rest of the centaur army." The daeben looked at Darian and grinned. "From here on out, it's the real deal. Hope you're prepared."
 Darian's fingers gripped his spear with conviction. "I was born ready."
 

 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:

 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Gamma2626, Sven Buchheit, GodSpeed99, 
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra, Adam Whitman
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer, 
 The High Council: Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince, Thund3rTank, Facemaster, Luke Koschel
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at: https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at: https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj

 

Chapter 31.1: A Mother's Love(?)

          
 Aethon, Kirkcour Woods.
 11:35 pm, 17th Banem 1092.
 Ruumble!
 The earth trembled as over two hundred pairs of hooves thundered out of the surrounding forests into the deserted town. The moonlight shone on the small army and revealed them to be a force of 104 centaurs, of which 100 were composed of the Longma tribe. Darian, Larsial, and Shadow rode just behind Kashi who led the centaur contingent.
 As they approached the town, Kashi's brows furrowed. Thick, acrid smells of smoke and rot blew into his nose, and the daeben was overcome by a horrid premonition. Fearing the worst, Kashi spurred Drixlia into a hard gallop and raced to the town. The rest of the army picked up on the daeben's unease and subsequently increased their pace.
 Within a matter of minutes, Kashi reached the town gates, or rather what was left of them, and the sight that greeted him caused something primal within him to awaken from its slumber. The daeben's lips were tightly pressed together as he looked at the 'scarecrows' that adorned the broken gates.
 The scarecrows were fashioned by impaling branches through centaurs and raising them several feet above the ground. The branches, some big, some small, positioned the centaurs' limbs in humiliating positions like strings of abandoned puppets. And judging by the open-eyed despair and anguish in most of the centaurs' eyes, they had died a slow, painful death, devoid of honor.
 Kashi's eyes were grim as Darian, Shadow, Larsial, and Agamios joined his side. Without looking at any of them, the daeben asked in a dark tone, "Have any of you learned telekinesis?" The deafening silence that followed answered his question. "I see," Kashi muttered and dismounted.
 The daeben took slow, purposeful steps to one of the scarecrows. Kashi looked up at the tear-soaked, anguished filled eyes of the female centaur and followed her gaze to see a little colt a few meters away in a similarly humiliating position. The daeben could tell from the severity of the gashes around the punctured parts of her body that the mare had fought till her last breath to free herself and save her child. Unfortunately, not only had she failed, she'd been forced to watch her son slowly bleed out in front of her.
 How the colt must have cried. How he must have wept. How did the mother feel seeing the despair take over her son's eyes?
 Boom!
 Larsial paled as Kashi smashed the branches that held up the centaur mother with a single punch. The corpse lost its support and dropped toward the daeben. Larsial, convinced Kashi was too overcome with rage to notice his surroundings, opened her mouth to warn Kashi to move out of the way.
 Bam!
 Larsial's mouth remained open as she watched a massive surge of ki gush out of the daeben in the shape of a dragon's clawed hand and catch the corpse. 'You can do that?' Larsial looked at the daeben in awe and shock as the ki hand gently placed the body on the earth.
 Kashi, at the moment, did not care in the least what the others thought about him. The centaur mother's eyes arrested his gaze and dredged up old memories Suzuki had buried deep within. Those eyes. They were the same as that time in the fire. The desperation of a mother willing to do whatever it took to save her child no matter how futile it seemed.
 The only difference was that this mother failed to save her child. She never got to experience the relief of seeing her child escape to safety.
 Kashi sighed as he crouched next to the centaur and gently closed her eyes. "You can rest now. I promise I will find those responsible and make them pay," he promised as much to the centauress as it was to the monster raging within him. The fire in his soul seemed satisfied by this answer as the heat in his chest slowly calmed.

Kashi shook his head in resignation. Suzuki's relationship with his mother was a complicated sore spot that would not be healed for many years to come. Even Kashi himself who could be said to share the same brain as Suzuki could not explain the psychological hold she had over the young man. Was it hate or love that bound them or more likely a complicated mixture of both? Only a psychologist could answer that question now.
 The sound of footsteps to his side drew Kashi out of his thoughts, and he looked up to see the grim-faced Darian and Agamios. The Longma tribe centaurs followed Kashi's lead and began to cut down their brethren and gently place them on the earth. Kashi looked at Darian and asked, "Why have their bodies been left like this for so long?"
 Darian's jaw trembled with grief and guilt. "We did try sending parties out to give them a proper burial, but every party we sent was beset by the monster army. It would be lucky if one out ten survived the attack. We also could not afford to send the full army as that would leave our own homes vulnerable to the enemy."
 Kashi frowned. "How many days has it been since this village was destroyed?"
 "Four days," Darian replied.
 The daeben's brows furrowed even more at his answer. "Four days? So they have the power to wipe out an entire village. Why haven't they wiped out the rest?" Kashi felt like he had begun to pull on the end of this mystery rope. "How long have your villages been under siege?"
 "Just under six months now," Darian replied. "Initially, the attacks were limited to skirmishes between our hunting parties and a few loose blights. The situation only escalated to what you see now in the past few weeks. Tonight was the first time we'd experienced a push on this scale that seemed intent on wiping us all out."
 Kashi thought about it and wondered aloud. "If the enemy decided to wipe you all out today, why did he split up his forces rather than attack each settlement with the full army?" He looked at Darian with curiosity, "Does it have something to do with why no army was sent to your village?"
 Darian's pupils dilated as his heart skipped a beat. "Of course! Why did we not think of this!?" The agitated centaur cursed the high heavens for his foolishness.
 Kashi, unable to follow, asked, "What are you talking about?"
 Darian shook his head. "Kashi-dono, you must have noticed that the placement of our villages takes the formation of a spear if looked at from above."
 Kashi nodded. He had indeed taken note of that very fact from the very first moment Darian mapped out the location of the villages. It seemed just like he thought, it did play a vital role. The only question now was what?
 "The formation was passed down to us by our god several centuries ago to protect us from external forces," Darian revealed. "It is capable of producing incomparable power on the level of gods in desperate situations. Naturally, there are several restrictions in its actual use, but the fact remains that the power exists if one knows how to use it." Darian gripped his spear as he watched the Longma tribe go about their work. "There are two vital points on the formation. The speartip, which is the topmost tribe, and the handle, which is the bottom tribe."
 "For several centuries, the Longma tribe occupied the spear tip," Agamios stated. "We are the strongest tribe, so it made the most sense for us to hold this position."
 Darian nodded. "The village located at the spear tip also got a natural boost to their strength, so it only made sense for the Longma tribe to reside there. Unfortunately, their numbers began to decline after centuries of defending the centaur tribe from external forces. Someone had to switch with them or risk the extinction of our strongest tribe."

"The tribe that was chosen was the Aethon tribe." Kashi clarified. "But how does this explain why the Lymar tribe has not been attacked?"
 "Because the moment the Aethon tribe switched with the Longma tribe was the moment our enemies realized that the land itself was what made the Longma tribe so strong," Agamios replied. "I'm sure that a few centuries later, the Aethon tribe would have looked just like us. The land's strength is not just a blessing, but also a curse."
 "What!? Is this true!?" Darian shouted, stunned by the revelation. "Doesn't that mean you were like us? Why does no one know about this?"
 Agamios shook his head. "The chiefs of your villages are aware of this truth. But think about it? What would happen if our enemies knew for a fact they could become like us by staying in that land?"
 "Exactly what is happening right now," Kashi replied and looked at Darian. "You said the spear tip is for offense. Then what's your tribe's purpose?"
 "Our place in the formation is the last bastion of defense," Darian replied. "In a situation where the spearhead has been shattered, we provide a place to hide out the storm until we can rebuild."
 Kashi's brow rose. "How does that work?"
 "You did not notice because you were with me Kashi-dono, but our village is hidden in a mirage that is near impossible to penetrate unless you know the right process," Darian explained.
 Kashi shook his head. "The greatest strength of an illusion lies in no one knowing it is an illusion. The moment an illusion is exposed as such, it's only a matter of time before it is exposed." Kashi gritted his teeth. "I remember your father did not want anyone leaving the village during this period?"
 Darian nodded. "Yes, why?"
 Kashi sighed. "Old ginger is truly the spiciest no matter the world." At Darian's confused expression, Kashi explained, "Your father saw the enemy's endgame long ago and was trying his best to prevent it from happening. The enemy has been searching for the last village to obtain the entire formation. Unfortunately, he/she could never find your village because your hunters were always ensured they weren't followed on their way home. Furthermore, as you said, no one would realize where the illusion started and ended just by randomly walking into the forest."
 Kashi shook his head as he looked in the direction of Lymar village. "But what happens when a mass exodus of centaurs are headed in the same direction?"
 Darian's face turned white as a sheet as he whispered, "It will be too easy to track a large group back to our village."
 Kashi frowned. "I had initially thought we would have a few days to prepare and stake out the enemy camp before we attacked, but if my hunch is correct, the enemy's main force is already on its way to Lymar village. As for the illusion, I'm certain they already have a way to break it." Kashi looked at both centaurs and said, "I still don't know what the enemy's overarching motive is, but for now we can infer they are at the very least interested in your village's formation and derive joy in tormenting the weak."
 Agamios folded his arms and frowned. He looked at the daeben and asked, "So, what do you propose we do now?"
 "The plan hasn't changed," Kashi replied. "We lead a strike force against their headquarters and take out the entire army by destroying the source of the blight. The only difference is we'll be doing that tonight. We have to believe in our comrades to hold the fort while we complete the mission."
 Agamios nodded. "I understand."
 "That is indeed the best course of action right now," Darian concurred.
 "But first," Kashi said as he looked at the corpses on the ground. "We must send these brave centaurs off to the circle." Kashi, Darian, and Agamios joined Shadow and Larsial in assisting the rest of the Longma tribe to build several funeral pyres for the corpses.
 Thirty minutes later, Kashi solemnly stood in front of dozens of funeral pyres with Ferulic's Bow in hand. He took out Rosario's brush and drew a flaming rune on the bow. The daeben notched an arrow, whose head burst into flames as soon as it was strung. He looked at the centaurs and his companions, then at the funeral pyres. "Aethir guide your paths. May Alure welcome you with open arms, and grant you happier lives in the next life."
 Whoosh!
 The centaurs present watched the arrow as it slowly flew in the air, a small light in the darkness of night and despair. There was always hope in the world, no matter how dark it may seem. And all that hope needed was a spark, a catalyst, and it would set the world aflame with bright light.
 "Go Suzu, mother will be alright."
 Kashi's jaw was tightly set as the flames, and acrid smoke once again dredged up those desperate eyes. Only, this time, rather than relief, the eyes held hatred and blame. The final words she said. The words Suzuki never heard but could make out. The words he would that would haunt him for life.
 The words that destroyed Suzuki Mato.
 "This is all your fault."
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 A/N: Hey guys! I know updates have been spotty recently, but that's because I've been hard at work at editing Parallel Vol.1 for publishing on hardcover and paperback. And... Good News! It's finally been completed for both! Soon you'll be able to have Parallel Vol.1 on your bookshelf. It's been a wild ride, and I appreciate everyone who has helped me in any way, be it on Patron, by helping to proofread, or just offering moral support, and of course, let's not forget those who read here on Wattpad. Your continued support is what kept me motivated during these times.
 I'm aiming for a 4th January release as there is some tax stuff I need to get at my bank (thank you amazon) in order to release on Amazon. Until then, however, updates will be coming fast as my plate is finally free! 
 Whooohooo!!!
 

 


 

Chapter 31.2: The Monster in my Head

"Agamios-sama!"

 A scout's shout pulled Kashi away from the flames. The daeben turned to see a centaur gallop up to he, Darian and Agamios with urgent strides.
 Agamios looked at the centuar and sensing the situation's urgency, said, "Report."
 The centaur took a moment to catch his breath then reported, "We've spotted traces of a massive monster army headed this way."
 "How many monsters?"
 The scout swallowed hard as he looked at the daeben and said, "We couldn't make out their full numbers, but we're sure they're at least double the number that attaked us."
 "How far?"
 "About thirty minutes out?"
 Agamios' eyes twitched and he looked at Kashi with respect. "Looks like your predictions were right. The enemy has indeed launched a final offensive. What do you propose we do now?"
 Kashi's eyes narrowed as he looked at the scout. "Where you discovered?"
 "No," The scout refuted with a shake of his head. "We left before they could."
 Kashi released a sigh of relief at the scout's response. "Good. The enemy cannot know about the Longma tribe's presence here. It might cause the headquarters to raise their guard." Kashi looked at Agamios. "You and Darian will take the tribe and my people and circle around the army. Take as wide a berth as reasonably possible. We can't risk you getting seen."
 Darian's brows furrowed in concern. "What about you? How will you find us?"
 "Do not worry about me," Kashi reassured with a heartening smile. "Shadow and I have prepared for moments like this. He'll leave marks on the trees for me to follow. It will not be difficult for me to find you."
 "I understand, but why are you staying behind?" Darian asked. "Do you intend on wiping out the entire army by yourself? If so, why do we need the infiltration plan?"
 Kashi shook his head with a wry smile. "I cannot possibly take on an army of that size by myself. It doesn't matter how fast I regenerate mana or ki, my stamina will bottom out eventually. Besides, there'll definitely be a few marilith class monsters in this final army. A battle of attrition is far too detrimental."
 "Indeed," Darian nodded. "But if that's the case, what do you intend to do?"
 "If I were to be altruistic, I would say, I wish to thin out the enemy's numbers and stronger threats before they reach the village," Kashi said with a wry smile. "But, if I were to be truthful, then the truth is, I need to vent."
 Crrrack!
 A flash of lightning pealed through the night sky, accompanied shortly by a sharp clap of thunder. The light illuminated the daeben's features. His gruesome smile and blood-red eyes shone against the backdrop of his dark skin, and sent shivers like none other down Darian and Agamios' spine.
 Suddenly, Darian and Agamios felt like they no longer spoke to a daeben, but the personification of death itself. They could feel the deathly cold touch of the grim reaper upon their necks when they looked into the daeben's eyes.
 Luckily, the phenomenon only lasted for a brief moment, before Kashi's aura returned to normal. "I've got a monster inside me you see," Kashi explained. "Very few things in existence can trigger that monster, but once it has been awakened, it can only truly be sated with blood and pain."
 "Blood and Pain," Agamios murmured with a hollow expression. This was something he was all too familiar with. The Longma tribe's powerful bloodlust would often consume them during battle, and they would not regain their faculties until they had shed enough blood or suffered enough damage to pull them out of the trance.

"Yes," Kashi concurrerd with a light smile. "The monster is awake, but simmering right now. I do not want to go into the enemy's HQ like this. There's a good chance he'll disrupt my thoughts and I do not want to risk that. I do not want to die after all. So, I'm going to vent. I will offer up the blood of our enemies to sate the monster and put him back to sleep. Then I will escape join up with you."
 Darian swallowed hard and nodded. "Alright, I understand." He turned to Agmios and prompted the centaur chief, "We should start moving if we want to dodge the army."
 Agamios grimly nodded then regarded Kashi with a solemn look. "We of the Longma Tribe know what it feels like to have a monster of rage and bloodlust within us. You must learn to control it, or it will consume you."
 "Thank you. I shall keep those words to heart," Kashi said, then watched as Agamios and Darian left to organize the rest of the punitive force. A few moments later, the daeben let out a wry smile and said, "How long do you plan on standing there? Not gonna scare me?"
 "Not this time," Shadow muttered in a low voice as he walked out from behind the daeben to his side. "Not in the mood."
 Kashi, even though he had a good inkling what the answer would be, asked, "What's wrong?"
 Shadow's eyes narrowed as he looked at the daeben. "Your eyes. I don't like them. They scare me."
 "I didn't know you could get scared."
 "Neither did I," Shadow replied. 'There's always only been one thing in this world that scares me, and that's losing my sister. But right now, it seems I'm scared of losing you too."
 Kashi could feel the assassin's intense gaze on the side of his face. He sighed as he looked to the night sky and promised, "I'm not going anywhere Shadow."
 "You'd better not," Shadow said and finally took his eyes off the daeben. "Or else I'll find you wherever you are, even if it's hell itself and drag you back to apologize to Lunette."
 Kashi burst out in laughter and ruffled Shadow's hair. A serene smile played on his face as he said, "I can't have you haunting me now, can I? I'll be sure to stay put."
 "Don't die," Shadow said with a snort, then walked away towards his horse.
 Kashi looked at his palm, then clenched it into a fist as he muttered under his breath, "I don't know how long I'll be here, but I swear I will never die."
 "Looks like you're really loved by your friends," Larsial called as she walked over to Kashi with a teasing smile on her face.
 Kashi shook his head with mirth in his eyes. "Who would have thought right? I must've been a saintly doctor in my past life to have this much going for me." Kashi said as Shadow, Darian and Agamios approached him.
 "We are ready, Kashi-dono," Darian reported with a stern look in his eyes. "We will be leaving now."
 Kashi nodded his acknowledgment. "Ride safe, and may Aethir guide your path."
 Agamios raised his arm to his chest in a salute. "May your spear strike true."
 "Well, I'm an archer so I'm not sure how well that applies," Kashi joked, then raised his arm to his chest and added in a solemn tone, "but thank you. I will find you safe in two hours."
 Kashi shared a look with Shadow who sat atop his stallion. The assassin gave Kashi a curt nod then gallopped alongside Darian and Agamios as they escaped into the surrouding forests.
 "You are not leaving with them?" Kashi asked as he turned to look at Larsial who was stroking Drixlia's body.
 "I am here to watch you, and decide the fate of those under my command," Larsial stated with a sultry smile. "What better time to find out what you are about than when you are about to confront your inner demons?"

"It won't be safe," Kashi stated, though he made no effort to convince her otherwise.
 "I'll be with Drix-kun at a safe enough distance," Larsial assured. "You'll probably be exhausted when it's time to escape anyway. With me here, you'll have ample time to rest both mentally and physically."
 Kashi looked at her for a brief moment then shrugged. "Do what you want. It's a free world, or at least we're trying to make it one."
 "As you wish," Larsial said then led Drixlia into the forest to hide.
 Kashi watched her leave then walked north of the burning pyres and sat on the floor. As he felt the heat from the flames warm his back, the daeben thought back to Agamios' advice. "We of the Longma tribe know what it feels like to have a monster of rage and bloodlust in our hearts. You must learn to overcome it, or it will consume you."
 "You're wrong, Agamios-san," Kashi muttered as he looked toward the still forest. "What plagues me is not as simple as rage and bloodlust. It is not a sickness or abnormality that can be removed or trained away in time. It is a part of me. A critical part of me that I cannot tamper with. It is a force that can consume and destroy me any day it wants at will. I am nothing but a Resident in this body. I can be deleted the moment I break the established rules."
 Kashi's body trembled as he looked up toward the night sky. "Do you know what the worst thing is? The man who controls this body; the man who controls my fate, is also not in control of this monster. It has warped his mind on numerous occasions. Made him do and say things he should never have. That night, in the fire, he saw what the monster could do. He saw what it was capable of. That was the day he learned the truth. The truth each of us has to contend with. This is not a monster that can be controlled or overcome. This monster can only be sated temporarily. We can only put it at bay and try our best to ensure our lives and personalities forever run Parallel to it. For should we clash, we will always lose. Every single time. And it will end in our destruction..."
 Whoooo...
 A gentle breeze blew past, rustling the leaves upon which the daeben sat. As if influenced by the wind, a voice echoed in the depth of Kashi's heart. '...I'm sorry.'
 Kashi blinked, stunned by the apology, then burst out laughing. "Well, how's that for character development!?" the daeben joked. "You never once apologized to Razznik, did you?"
 'No, I didn't.'
 "Well then, I must be doing something right," Kashi remarked with a wry smile. "Wonder how much longer I have left if that's the case."
 'I won't—'
 "No, you will," Kashi interrupted. "Even if you don't, one day, when my purpose is complete, I will ask you to. That is our fate, and your curse. It is your punishment for what you did. You must create and watch us die, one by one until you are complete. Only then can you finally destroy the monster and truly live."
 '...'
 "Hey don't go quiet on me now. It's not like I blame you or anything," Kashi said with a bright smile. "You are as much a victim as the rest of us."
 Dudududu...
 Kashi's ears perked up at the low rumbling sounds of thousands of feet striking the earth. "But you know, I do not intend to live my life like a victim," Kashi said as he rose to his feet and dusted his backside. "I will not repeat the mistakes you and Razznik made. I will not give in to the fear, the anger, the hatred." The daeben flashed a toothy grin as he slowly walked toward the direction of the rumbling. "I will live my life to the fullest. I will learn happiness. I will learn friendship. I will learn what it means to love. I will learn to put my trust in others. I will learn what it means to build something great with companions."
 DUDUDUDUDUD!
 The earth trembled as what was once a low rumbling transformed to the sound of a thousand thunderclaps echoing through the night sky at once.
 Kashi grinned as the first batch of the monster army began to spill through the trees. "I will leave my name in this world. Even when I pass on, my name will live on in the hearts of my friends." Electricity and lightning sparked in Kashi's eyes as scales began to grow along his body. "So, sit back and relax, Suzu. I'll put that monster to bed real soon."
 By the time the entire monster army rolled out, they were met with a lightning infused Draconian glaring at them with a bright, toothy grin.
 "But I'll do it MY way!" Lightning flashed in the night sky, and the earth trembled from the booming thunder that announced the daeben's presence. "Because I am not you, nor am I Razznik. I am me..."
 The monsters froze in place, petrified by fear, and Larsial's eyes opened wide in shock as they gazed upon the personification of 'Lightning Tribulation.'
 The daeben's form disappeared amongst the lightning as a voice boomed over the entire forest, "My name is Kashi. Kashi of the Hopeful Maggots. Better Remember It!"
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:

 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Gamma2626, Sven Buchheit, GodSpeed99, 
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra, Adam Whitman
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer,
 The High Council: Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince, Thund3rTank, Facemaster, Luke Koschel
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at: https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at: https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 A/N: Hi Guys! Happy New Year in advance (or  Happy New Year depending on where you live). Hope you've all got your plans for the new year all mapped and written down. Wrote mine down at the start of this year, and I gotta say, I'm proud to say I successfully completed about 90% of my plans.  suggest you all write want you wanna achieve by the end of the year on a piece of paper somewhere or in your diary. Just something you can look back on at any point in the year and go, yup. I've completed that, only got this much left.
 Happy New Year y'all! Have a swell time. And remember. You are you. You are unique. Don't try too hard to be what everyone wants you to be. Live life the way you want. Go into the new year with your head held high and proclaim to the world.
 I AM _________ I will Live MY WAY!

 

Chapter 32.1: A Goblin's Fear

Derium Plains, Daggerfall.

 00:23 a.m. 18th Banem 1092.
 Crackle! Boom!
 While the monsters army in Kirkcour Woods trembled under the lightning tribulation wrought by the vengeful daeben, disaster encroached upon a small goblin tribe across the continent beneath the cover of a rare thunderstorm.
 Crackle! Boom!
 Within one of the run-down buildings in the dilapidated village, Bok comforted a litter of scared goblin newborns who wept in fear as the heavens rumbled and roared. The young goblin looked at the pouring rain with unease and trepidation. He had intended on fleeing the village immediately after Rudega left, but the thunderstorm had forced him to halt that plan. The little goblins could not travel in such a heavy storm, besides the pursuers would most likely have taken a break to hide from the thunderstorm.
 "Don't cry little ones, it's just a little lightning," Bok comfortingly said as he squatted over the children and patted their heads. "It'll pass after a short while." The goblin could understand why the babies were so scared as this was probably the first thunderstorm they had ever experienced.
 'It'll also be the last for most of them.' Bok's gaze lowered as he thought of the most likely outcome for these scared babies. Goblins were not recognized as humes and as such did not receive any protection from the civilized nations. Adventurers often hunted their kind either for sport or for 'righteous causes.'
 This all started who knows how long ago...
 Apparently, some desperate goblins somewhere had taken it upon themselves to rob and kill humes for food and resources. These crimes, coupled with the goblins' high birth rate and short maturity period led to a common fear among humes that one day, the savage creatures would proliferate across the continent like locusts and destroy everything they touch.
 The humes, in response, labeled the entire goblin race as savage monsters that should be cut down on sight to preserve the natural order. This order led to the near extinction of the goblin race as they were hunted down to the fringes of the continent. These savage executions eventually caused the desperate goblins to resort to cruel and sinister methods to ensure their survival. The entire race devolved into madness over several generations of constant persecution and retaliation, which ultimately resulted in the current reality where goblins either hid at the edge of the world or committed the worst of atrocities on hume settlements both as retaliation and to gain resources and strength to survive.
 Bok snorted, rage burning in his eyes as he thought of the stupidity and futility of the entire situation. The humes persecuted the goblins out of fear. The goblins retaliated out of desperation to survive. The humes, angered by the goblins' atrocities, oppressed them even harder. Unfortunately, all this did was push the goblins to the end of their ropes, and their subsequent atrocities were even worse. Be it the humes or the goblins, both sides had created a tail-eating serpent that would never end.
 Bok, although born with intelligence that was light years beyond the average goblin, knew he could not do anything to change the current state of affairs. As such, once he became the chief, he took his tribe to Daggerfall where those abandoned by the continent came to hide. While there, he planned to start a small community and see if it was possible to teach regular goblins to be self-sufficient, if only through hunting.
 Bok looked up at the goblin mothers who sat by the litters with reluctant pouts. He sighed as he realized this was something the goblins needed to work on. The complete lack of empathy between these mothers and their children was a severe weakness which also impacted how many of these babies would live past their first year on this continent. However, this kind of thing could not be forced. Bok decided he would do some further research into how to fix this particular trait. For now, though, the tribe needed to keep working on becoming self-sufficient.

Crrackle! Boom!
 "Aaaah!" "Aaah!" "Aaah!"
 Bok's eyebrows shot up as the babies resumed their crying after another peal of lightning. However, what shocked the goblin was the fear and terror in the mothers' eyes as they looked at something behind him.
 Bok's spine ran cold as he slowly turned around.
 Crackle!
 'No, it can't be!' Bok trembled as the lightning briefly illuminated a massive, dark silhouette at the doorway. The silhouette towered over the door, revealing a bulky, muscular frame that brought a terrifying existence to the goblin's mind.
 The silhouette ducked, then stepped past the door into the building. Sure enough, Bok's heart plummeted as he looked into a pair of dark grey eyes belonging to a member of the strongest race in all of Daggerfall, an orc.
 Bok instantly regretted his decision to stay. He should have fled the village with the tribe immediately after the dwarf left with his orc friends.
 "Skraaa!" One of the female goblins let out a sharp war cry as she took out a shiv hidden under her garment and rushed at the orc.
 Bok's heart leaped to his throat as he saw the look of contempt and disdain flash in the orc's eyes. "Stop!" The goblin cried as he turned and tackled the goblette to the ground. "Urgh!" Bok grunted as he felt a sharp pain in his abdomen. He, however, ignored the pain and screamed at the desperately flailing goblette, "Stop! Orc Strong! Can't beat! You anger, All die!"
 Reason seemed to replace fear as the goblette stopped flailing and let out a series of guttural sounds as she looked into Bok's eyes. Bok responded in the goblin's native tongue then looked at the other goblettes in the building and reassured them.
 Bok, after making sure the goblette would no longer take any drastic actions, released her and stood up. He winced as he looked at the shiv buried in his abdomen, and stifled a groan as he yanked it out. The bloodied knife clattered to the floor as he looked up at the orc with a powerful gaze. "Bok thank orc for mercy."
 The orc did not seem to take Bok's words heart as he only grunted and said, "Everyone, outside. Now."
 Bok's heart shook, and he attempted to bargain. "Me, tribe chief. I answer questions. Leave rest alone?"
 Unfortunately, the stone-faced orc was having none of it. "Everyone outside. Don't make me repeat myself."
 Bok kept a hand over his injury and spoke in the goblin tongue to the goblettes. Heeding his words, the goblettes obediently placed the goblin babies into baskets and followed the orc into the streets.
 Bok's eyes twitched. Dozens of orcs patrolled the streets, pulling goblins out of houses onto the street. With almost psychic-like accuracy, the goblins were weeded out of their hiding places and corralled at the center of a street. Bok obediently gathered with the rest of his tribe and faced the orcs with trembling in his heart.
 Eventually, after all the goblins had been found, an orc larger than the rest walked in front of the goblins and coldly beckoned, "Who's the chief?" If Durst were there, he would have recognized the orc to be Renark Ragelock.
 "I am," Bok fearfully said as he stepped forward.
 Renark looked at the goblin. "You speak the common tongue?"
 "Little," Bok replied with a shaky nod. It was not wise for a goblin to reveal themselves as intelligent. It often led to them being murdered to 'prevent a goblin uprising.'
 "Good." Renark snorted. "I won't harm you as long as you answer my questions truthfully."
 "Y-Yes. Thank you!" Bok gratefully said as he fell to his knees and bowed to the orc. "Answer all questions. Only truth. No lie!" Bok promised.

"Did a dwarf and two orcs pass by here?" Renark asked and closely monitored the goblin for any signs of deceit.
 "Yes!" Bok instantly answered. He did not dare lie for fear of the consequences if he were caught. "They go to house. Enter tunnel," he said as he pointed at the 'mayor's duplex.'
 "Smart choice," Renark gruffly praised. "Lead the way."
 Bok led Renark and a few of his subordinates into the building's basement and pointed at the broken hammer image on the wall. "Dwarf do something. Wall open."
 Renark frowned as he studied the image for a few moments, then said, "Dwarven enchanted lock. It'll take too long to force this open." He looked at one of his subordinates and ordered, "Bring the dwarf."
 The subordinate nodded and ran up the stairs. Moments later, he returned with a discheveled, scared dwarf in hand.
 Renark regarded the scared Uthman with a sneer. "Little dwarf, if you wish to continue living, I suggest you tell me something useful about this tunnel."
 Uthman eyes twitched as he stared at the hammer imprint in disbelief. Things must have really gone to shit if whoever the orcs were pursuing had chosen to use this passage. The poor dwarf had been kept captive by Renark ever since they left Oerbora, and as a result, had no idea what had transpired during the meeting. But judging from their current location, it could not have been anything good. Uthman looked at Renark with equal parts rage and fear and shouted, "What did you do!? Where's Farvulia-sama!?"
 Renark snorted, and his eyes burned with rage as he tightly gripped his ax. He glared at the dwarf, voice trembling as he struggled to control the rising rage and said, "Your clansman, the Thonurs betrayed us. They set a trap for Durst and slaughtered several orcs. Luckily, they did not account for us and we were able to surround and rout them before they could deal even more damage. But they severely injured and took Farvulia hostage as they escaped. We've tracked them to this location. Talk dwarf, we must get revenge for our people or else we'll take it out on every dwarf in Daggerfall."
 Uthman trembled under Renark's intense gaze. He could feel the orc's righteous anger and knew he would get burned if he did not give the orc what he wanted. Although he had been skeptical at first, Uthman did believe that the Thonurs could betray the orcs and Farvulia. If Renark had suggested that Farvulia did something underhanded during the meeting Uthman would not have believed him, but the orc's current story was quite plausible.
 There was also the matter of the final threat. Indeed, if Renark did not get his hand on the Thonurs, and was able to prove that the attacks were solely perpetrated by the Thonur household, this could lead to a nation-wide war.
 Uthman did not want that kind of responsibility on his head. The dwarf looked at Renark and honestly said, "These tunnel was built by the Farvulia household for the worst-case scenario where the dwarfs had to flee the country. This one travels underneath the Wazir river to Serisis."
 Renark's eyes narrowed. "I'm guessing this is not the only one of its kind. Where are the others?"
 Uthman remained tight-lipped.
 Renark snorted. This was a matter of life-and-death for the dwarven race. There was no way Uthman would so readily give up that information. Renark shifted his focus to more important issues. "Do you know how to open the door?"
 Uthman approached the door and just like Rudega before him, began to run his fingers along the diagram, injecting mana into several node points. Unfortunately, he stopped after roughty ten seconds with a grim expression. "The last person to access this changed the code after he entered. It'll take forever to crack if I'm working blind. But if someone saw them alter the code, I can use that as reference."
 Bok shivered as Renark looked at him and rapidly shook his head. "Goblin memory not good. No remember." This was a known trait among goblins, and why they were doomed to limited civilization growth despite their sentience. They had short-term memories and barely remembered anything past a few moments ago. The only memories they retained over long periods of time were their instinctual memories, those required to survive, their language, and finally lessons that were repeatedly hammered into their heads over a long period.
 Even Bok, with all his intelligence, needed to write down most of his ideas on the ground or stone to remind himself after his short-term memory kicked in. Only after repeatedly enforcing the idea in his head would it then permanently stick. He had only seen Rudega use the inscription once, following which he did not practice it or anything. It had long since been wiped out from his memory.
 Renark's gaze flashed. "But you saw what he did, didn't you?"
 Bok tentatively nodded.
 Renark nodded then took out a rink from a waist pouch. He inserted his mana into the device and connected to the only rink linked to it.
 "Well, well, Renark, I did not expect to receive your call so soon," a sultry voice called out from the sphere.
 "We have a problem," Renark flatly stated, ignoring the woman's tone. "I know you're close. Come, we need your help to catch Durst."
 "Alright, We'll be there in five minutes," the voice sweetly replied in a sing-song voice then cut the call.
 "Five minutes huh," Renark muttered with a dark expression as he pocketed the rink. "Yet I never noticed them..." The orc's eyes narrowed. This was the consequence of making a deal with the devil. He now had to look over his shoulder at every turn.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:

 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Gamma2626, Sven Buchheit, GodSpeed99,
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra, Adam Whitman
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer,
 The High Council: Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince, Thund3rTank, Facemaster, Luke Koschel
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at: https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at: https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj

 

Chapter 32.2: A Goblin's Fear (2)



 True to their words, three silhouettes appeared on the horizon five minutes later. Honne Onna, Grizzlydiamond and Rustyreaper rode up to the village on massive elks as large as stallions. These creatures were indigenous to Ederwood and were the preferred mounts for the wealthy and influential Ederwood residents.
 Renark stood at the village's entrance with Bok and Uthmar, eyes narrowed as the trio stopped in front of him and dismounted. The orc's muscles tensed as he glared at the heavily armored Grizzlydiamond. It was rare to meet a hume who rivaled an orc in size, but at 7 ft tall, Grizzlydiamond stood head to head with Renark. "Grizzly."
 "Ragelock," Grizzlydiamond greeted with a curt nod and a snort. Both warriors' hands instinctively reached for their weapons as they sensed the others' power. It was an almost primal instinct to defend themselves from the considerable threat.
 Luckily, Rustyreaper stepped between the men and defused the tension with a sweet smile before the situation escalated further. "Calm down boys, there'll be time for this later."
 Renark and Grizzlydiamond snorted, imposing subconsciously imposing dominance over the other, then softly relaxed their stances.
 "Thank you for listening to listening to little old me," Rustyreaper gratefully said with a short curtsey. A warm smile played on her lips as she looked at Uthman and Bok with curiosity then back at Renark. "So, what is this problem you need our help with?"
 Renark looked at Honne Onna with slight trepidation in his eyes. "I need your ability Honne-san. We need to get some information from the goblin's mind."
 Honne Onna looked at the frightened Bok with slight curiosity. "What could a goblin possibly know?"
 Renark explained the issue with the door. When he was finished, he looked at Bok and said, "He saw Farvulia open the door. We need that memory."
 "Never heard of a goblin being tied to an important quest before," Grizzlydiamond muttered with an intrigued gaze. "I wonder if there's something special about this one."
 Renark's eyes twitched. These damned Summoned and their 'quests.' They measured everything in this world in respect to how relevant they were to their 'quest completion.' Personally, he could not stand the way the Summoned looked down on Residents, but in this case, their prejudice worked to his advantage, so he buried his unease.
 Honne Onna walked over to Bok and squatted so he was at eye-level. Her playful, yet unfeeling eyes chilled him to the bone, a condition that only worsened when she smiled. Bok instantly felt like he had dropped into the seventh level of hell, and was faced with a high-ranking demon. Seemingly oblivious to the effect she had on Bok, Honne Onna asked, "What's your name, little goblin?"
 "B-bok," he answered as thick sweat poured down his forehead.
 "Nice to meet you, Bok," Honne Onna said. "We do not want to hurt you, I promise. Just look into my eyes."
 Bok, realizing he had no choice in the matter, looked into the commander's eyes. His heart skipped a beat as her pupils suddenly turned into a complex mandala. The mandala whirled in place and created an illusion of a whirlpool that sucked everything into her eyes. He glimpsed all sorts of horrors within the maelstrom and frightened out of his mind, attempted to shut his eyes and wrest away his sight.
 Unfortunately, he immediately found he had lost control of his body. Try as he might, Bok could not look away from the whirlpool. Within moments, his panic intensified as he began to feel himself get sucked into the vortex. He screamed and attempted to pull himself out, but it proved futile as, before long, he was completely sucked into the vortex.

Bok's heart trembled as he was thrown back to early memories he had long forgotten. From his birth in some dump to the death of his first clan by some righteous adventures. He recalled how he had run to another tribe and made his home there for many years. However, in the past year alone, he had been forced to seek out four new tribes as each tribe he ran to was destroyed by Summoned who saw them as something called 'Exp.' 
 The goblins' short-term memory had saved Bok from the anger and fear he should have felt from these traumatic events. Unfortunately, being subjected to these traumatic events in one go nearly drove the poor goblin to madness as he was overwhelmed by the negative emotions.
 Outside Bok's head, Renark heart lightly accelerated as he looked at the slack-jawed, empty-eyed goblin. He knew what the goblin was going through. That girl's eyes could draw out and amplify a person's worst memories, which made their minds much easier to manipulate and read.
 Unlike Bok, Renark had broken out of the illusion shortly after being subjected, but he would never forget the short horror of those few minutes. He had never experienced anything as sick or disturbing, would not wish it upon his worst enemy. But, right now, they needed information to chase down Durst. He could not allow Durst to live, or everything he had worked for could be jeopardized.
 Meanwhile, Bok, who was forced to repeatedly relive the worst moments of his life let out a soundless cry for anyone or anything to save him, to help him. But there were no replies to his pleas. The goblin desperately prayed, calling out to any gods who might be listening to please save him, but the continued torture proved no one was listening to his pleas for help.
 Eventually, the torture proved far too much for the goblin whose mental fortitude had never been too strong, to begin with. Bok felt his sanity shatter, which finally allowed Honne Onna free access to his brain. The young woman quickly sifted through the goblins shattered psyche for the part relevant to their mission.
 Honne Onna found the memory related to Rudega and pulled it out of the goblin's mind. Her eyes returned to normal, and she rose to her feet as Bok dropped to the ground in a near comatose state. Honne Onne ignored the goblin and chanted a spell. A few seconds later, she raised her hands, and a mandala appeared on the ground. A three-dimension playback of Rudega's motions as he opened the door appeared above the mandala, causing Uthman's eyes to bulge in shock.
 Renark who had seen this once before gripped his arms, as he was once again floored by the strange abilities of the members of the Winterleaf Clan. He had met three of the five generals, and each one possessed uncanny abilities he could not wrap his head around. If one were not aware of these skills, they would end up dead before the fight even started.
 Honne Onna did not care what effects her skill had on the onlookers. She looked at Uthman and asked. "Is that enough? Can you open the door?"
 Uthman's eyes narrowed as he looked at the image. Although Rudega looked injured and ragged, he could see that the dwarf was in full control of his actions. His motions did not seem rushed or panicked. But he could not be sure if this was because Rudega was truly fine, or if it was the dwarf's unwavering attitude in the face of danger. The image did not have anyone else in frame, so it was difficult to tell if Rudega was alone, came with allies or was forced here by enemies.
 Uthman glanced at Bok with regret. He should have confirmed the state Rudega arrived in, but that information was impossible to get in its current state. The dwarf really hated the current circumstances. He could force himself to give up his life if he could confirm Rudega's well-being. But what if Rudega was indeed in danger? Wouldn't he have given up his life for nothing?
 As someone who cherished his little life as much as Uthman did, this was an unacceptable trade-off.
 Uthman took a deep breath as his internal debate came to an end. He looked at Honne Onna and confirmed, "Yes, I can open it. But I'll have to follow if you don't want to get lost in the underground mazes."

Honna Onna's lips curled up in a knowing smile. "Smart way to preserve your life a little longer. Let's go then. We do not want those fools to escape."
 Uthman shivered and nodded. He glanced at Bok then shook his head and walked toward the house with the tunnel.
 Renark looked and Bok and moved to lift up the unconscious goblin. Grab! The orc's eyes narrowed as he glared at the owner of the armored hand that had grabbed his. "Grizzly. What do you think you're doing?"
 "I need this goblin." Grizzlydiamond flashed a toothy grin. "I'm only a few points away from a level up. He should do just fine."
 Renark's eyes narrowed. "He's too weak to have any bearing on your strength. Besides, we gave our word we wouldn't harm him as long as he cooperated."
 "You gave your word," Grizzlydiamond said as he tightened his grip. "That's meaningless to me. Also, if one goblin is useless, one-hundred should be enough right?"
 "I will not have you make a mockery of the orc's honor," Renark stated as he wrenched his arm from Grizzlydiamond's grip. "You will leave the village alone."
 "And if I don't?" Grizzlydiamond threatened as he squared up against Renark. The warrior's eyes suddenly turned into slits as a low guttural growl escaped his throat.
 Renark's eyes flashed, and he instinctively reached for his ax, but just as his fingers brushed his ax, his entire body grew shuddered as he felt pressure like anything he had ever faced. It felt like the eyes of an ancient demon had locked onto him and would judge the merit of his existence based on his next action.
 Renark trembled as he looked at two silhouettes on the horizon. The pressure he felt originated from the one on the left. The duo came into view after a few seconds and revealed themselves to be the beautiful wisben Guildleader of the Winterleaf Clan, Brilith Loneheart and her personal bodyguard, Roro.
 Brilith coldly looked down at Renark from her elk. Her gaze held the impunity and disdain of the noble families who knew they were born superior to the common folk. "Do you want to risk the lives of your men over a mere goblin? If that's the case, feel free to pull your ax."
 Brilith's beautiful voice sounded like the alluring songs of a siren to the orc chieftain's ears. He had no doubt that if he did as she said, everyone in the town would end up dead.
 "There is no reason to needlessly shed blood," Renark said as he brought his clenched fists to his side.
 "Wise choice." Brilith praised as she dismounted. She looked at Renark and said, "Honne-chan's briefed me on the situation. Let's go see if the dwarf was successful shall we?"
 Renark stiffly nodded, then led the way to the house. He looked over his shoulder and grimaced as he watched Grizzlydiamond unceremoniously pick up Bok like a piece of luggage. The orc shook his head then pushed the goblin's fate out of his mind.
 Grizzlydiamond, meanwhile, carried the unconscious Bok to the street where the remaining goblins were corralled. He tossed Bok into the group of goblins and ignored the resulting panicked cries and shouts. He ordered the orcs to push the goblins as close together as possible.
 The goblins only numbered about 100 in total, babies and children included, so they did not occupy too much space when they were tightly squished next to each other.
 Grizzlydiamond nodded in satisfaction and took out a greatsword from his inventory. He channeled his ki into the sword then flung it into the sky. The sword hovered over the circle of goblins, then with a flick of his fingers, the blade crashed into the earth with the force of a piledriver. The resulting ki explosion instantly blasted every goblin to pieces.
 The orcs who were in charge of corralling the goblins also suffered slight injuries, but it was the kind that would heal after a few minutes. Grizzlydiamond had expertly contained the explosion, so it only erupted within a small zone.
 A level-up prompt brought a smile to the warrior's face. He did not spare a glance at the few corpses that did were not sent directly to the circle as he retrieved his sword and walked to the house with the basement.
 When Grizzlydiamond walked into the basement, he found the rest waiting for him as Ulthman had successfully opened the door. The tank grinned as he and Renark led the way into the tunnel with Ulthman behind them for directions. The rest followed behind the dwarf into the dark unknown.
 Meanwhile, back on the surface, a finger twitched amongst the pile of corpses.
 

 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:

 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Gamma2626, Sven Buchheit, GodSpeed99,
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra, Adam Whitman
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer,
 The High Council: Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince, Thund3rTank, Facemaster, Luke Koschel
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at: https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at: https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 A/N: Hi Guys! I know I set today as the release date for the publication, but someone offered to edit the entire book for free last minute, and how could I say no to that! I prefer to send out the book in its best version possible, so I've temporarily pushed the release for a bit. I should have more concrete information as to when it will be available soon.

 

Chapter 33: A Goblin's Resolve



 Derium Plains, Daggerfall.
 00:45 a.m. 18th Banem 1092.
 Shhhh... 
 Whlap! Whlap!
 High in the skies above the Derium plains, the rhythmic beating of massive, flapping wings cut through the occasional pauses between thunderstrikes. A silhouette nearly 10 meters long leisurely breezed through the clouds, uncaring of the peals of lightning that struck around, but somehow never hit it. In fact, it wasn't only lightning that avoided the creature but also the rain itself. The droplets curved around the creature like they were pulled by a magnetic force.
 A lightning bolt that struck dangerously close to the silhouette illuminated it in its light, revealing the hidden creature to be an Ephrium. Ephriums were beautiful, white-feathered creatures with the body of a four-legged, land-based lion with a wingspan that could grow as long as 20 meters wide. The majestic creatures boasted a long, slender neck that ended in a sleek, cougar-like head. Ephriums stood at nearly 4 meters tall and had pretty long tails that could grow up to 8 meters long, bringing their total length to just about 12 meters.
 They were beautiful, intelligent creatures which had found themselves on the brink of extinction after unchecked hunting had severely thinned out their numbers.
 A small, hooded feminine figure sat atop the ephrium's back, humming a sweet tune as she flipped the pages of a novel. The lady did not have a rein or saddle, but somehow effortlessly kept her balance on the creature's back without moving an inch. While she read, a red light began to pulse and glow beneath her cloak. The young woman, intrigued, closed the book and drew out the glowing pendant.
 "Such rage and despair," a sweet, airy, innocent voice remarked as she studied the pendant. "I wonder what could have happened." She patted the ephrium's back and said, "Ephrie-kun."
 The ephrium sensed its master's thoughts and descended from the clouds. It changed course and flew in a direction indicated by the pendant whose light gradually grew brighter with each passing moment. The ephrium slowed down as a small settlement came into view.
 The robed woman looked at the pendant then at the rundown village. "Over there, Ephrie-kun."
 The ephrium let out a small growl then dropped till it was only a few meters above the roofs and flew over the village, much to the shock and surprise of several orcs who were locked in combat against a faction that had popped out of seemingly nowhere. This faction, which wore body and face-concealing clothes in the fashion of mainstream ninjas, launched an attack against the orcs moments after Renark walked into the tunnel like they had been waiting for exactly that moment.
 The hooded figure ignored the skirmish in the town and patted Ephrie when she spotted a messy pile of corpses on the street. The pendant grew hot enough to scald her skin when Ephrie landed in front of the bodies, indicating she had reached her destination.
 A group of orcs nearby battling against assassins in dark clothing looked over at the woman, and more importantly, the ephrium behind her in wonder and shock. However, they were too busy trying to save their own lives to question what she was doing there and her purpose.
 However, while the orcs were fully occupied, the assassins were not. A group of assassins watched the attack's progress from rooftops, dropping in to assist if things got too hairy for the trainees. Among these assassins stood a young man dressed in gold, eye-catching ninja-wear.
 The eyes of this flashy assassin shone through the narrow space in his headwear as he admired the ephrium. "Go see what she's about," the young man ordered.

"Yes, Nightslayer-sama," echoed three assassins as they disappeared from the rooftop.
 Meanwhile, a white half-mask appeared in the hooded woman's hand as she alighted from the ephrium's back. She fixed the mask and walked over to the corpse pile. She was in the process of dropping to a knee to reach for the being that called out to her when three assassins suddenly appeared next to and subsequently lunged at her with daggers trained at her head, chest, and back.
 A pair of green eyes flashed beneath the mask, but she ultimately ignored the attacks as she gasped a small, burned hand.
 Bam! Clang! 
 "What!?" The assassin cried in shock as they slammed against an invisible barrier. The killers struck the shield with their strongest attacks, but there wasn't even the slightest hint of a tremor or crack. Helpless, the assassins were forced to watch the robed woman pull Bok out of the corpses.
 The assassins gaped as they looked at the goblin. Bok's body had been terribly mutilated by Grizzlydiamond's attack. Both his legs and his left arm had been blasted to bits, and what was left of his body was heavily burned, turning it into patches of red and black. However, despite this, the goblin's eyes opened wide, red and alert, carrying within them staunch defiance of death fuelled by rage and spite enough to drown several continents in blood.
 The goblin's bloodlust sent chills down the spines of the assassin. They were no strangers to the art of murder, but the madness contained in the goblin's eyes overwhelmed them to the extent of near submission.
 However, one person was not affected by the goblin's eyes. The young woman placed her right hand on Bok's throat. A green glow suffused around her palm as she healed the goblin's crushed throat. She smiled as she saw the shock and fervent desire in Bok's eyes. "Why are you so angry?"
 "They killed them. They killed everyone!" Bok shouted as he desperately grasped the woman's hand. "They keep killing us. No matter where we hide, they keep chasing us! I've had enough!"
 "Anger is good," the woman said as she observed Bok. "But anger without cause is equally useless. It is a tool you must use for your own devices. What do you wish to achieve?"
 Hot tears poured down Bok's eyes as the memories of the constant deaths of everyone he knew played continuously in his mind. The goblins' fear as they fled, the despair when they got caught, the laughter of the righteous adventurers. And the hated word, 'experience points' and 'level up.' "A world for goblins!" Bok cried out. "A world where we don't have to run and hide. A world where we aren't hunted for experience points!"
 The woman smiled. "The only way to achieve that world is to prove to everyone that goblins must be feared. We can help you make that happen. But, are you prepared to do what it takes to create that reality, no matter how evil the process?"
 Bok's heart skipped a beat. "I-is such a thing truly possible? You won't hunt us down?"
 The lady's lips curled into a wide smile as she took off her mask and pulled down her hood. The woman was revealed to be a young, sweet-looking, halben, with an air of naïve innocence about her. Her short sandy-blonde hair fluttered in the gentle night breeze as she flashed a beautiful smile. "We don't care about what you are, as long as you are willing to drown the world in the chaos it needs to be reborn." The halben let go of Bok's hand then held it out once more. "If you are willing to accept Chaos, take my hand."
 Bok's heart accelerated as he looked up at the woman's innocent smile. Something about her expression felt off. It felt like the longer he looked at her, the more pieces of cloth covering a painting was torn away. With each tear, a terrifying, ominous presence began to make itself known, and the lady's smile began to appear ever more treacherous.

However, despite the turmoil in his heart, Bok's rage won over in the end. The goblin gritted his teeth and grabbed the woman's arm. His eyes flashed with desperation as he swore with the last energy left in his body, "I don't care what I have to do! I must create that world!"
 "My name is Myra Locktree." The young lady's smile brightened her features as she placed the pendant in Bok's hand. "Welcome to the Chaos Order little one."
 Bok barely had time to register her words before he sharply bent in pain as a seismic amount of dark energy surged into his body from the pendant. The explosive power shattered bones tore muscles and ruptured blood veins as it rampaged throughout the goblin's body, forcefully modifying, improving and squeezing out the latent potential within his bloodline.
 Bok rolled on the ground, shouting in pain and anguish until his voice turned hoarse. He should have lost his mind, but the anger and rage in his heart kept his sanity intact. He refused to let himself die. Not until he had avenged his families. Not until he'd ensured he would never again have to live in fear!
 "Aaargh!" Bok cried through gritted teeth as his frame began to slowly grow. His limbs gradually regenerated while his height increased, which caught the attention of the assassin leader known as Nightslayer.
 Nightslayer observed Bok's transformation with equal parts greed and curiosity. "What the hell? That thing's evolving the goblin?" The assassin's interest in the situation took a huge upturn as he quickly surmised the possible applications of such a tool. He took a step off the roof and appeared just outside the barrier the woman set up.
 Nightslayer placed his hand on the dome and grinned. "Hey, why don't you put this down and talk with me for a bit?"
 Myra glanced at Nightslayer and shook her head with a regretful sigh. "Sorry, Master said I should not talk to strangers." After saying that, she turned her attention back to the rapidly evolving goblin.
 Nightslayer frowned. "Are you joking?"
 Myra did not respond. Judging by how intently she observed the goblin's evolution, she did not intend to talk anytime soon. As far as she was considered, Nightslayer might as well have been air.
 Nightslayer's eyes burned with anger at Myra's perceived disrespect. "Think you can insult me just cause I'm on an alt?" He taunted as he knocked on the shield. "If my main were here, this flimsy shield would be nothing."
 Myra still paid no attention to Nightslayer, as by this point, Bok had grown from the size of a ten-year-old to just over five-foot-five. The goblin had grown new, sturdy limbs, but nasty burn scars remained on his face and chest, a permanent reminder of the reason for his anger, and a kindle for the flame should it ever threaten to fizzle out.
 Nightslayer ground his teeth, his pride shattered by the halben's disinterest. In the midst of his rage, he looked at the docile Ephrie and laughed. "Hide in your shell if you want. I'll be taking your mount." The assassin tapped the dome and ordered his men to capture the Ephrium.
 Ephrie looked at the approaching assassins with disdain and let out a short cry akin to that of a bird's screech as it turned to look at its master.
 "Kill them," Myra lazily said.
 Whoosh!
 Nightslayer's eyes widened in shock as his body trembled from a heavy premonition. The assassin instinctively swung his dagger at five lights that suddenly flashed in front of him. The young man flinched as his arm trembled from the impact. He quickly examined the objects that floated in the air after losing their momentum and shivered when he realized they were feathers.

"Quick! Retreat!" Nightslayer shouted, instantly understanding the gulf in powers.
 Puchi! Puchi!
 "Aaah!"
 Nightslayer's eyes turned red with fear and rage as he watched the laser-like feathers cut through his men before they could react. The feathers did not stop at the nearby assassins, however, and spread across the entire village, cutting down every living thing it came across, orc and assassin alike.
 "Stop you damned beast!" Nightslayer roared as he teleported over the ephrium. Ephrie dismissively glanced at the assassin as twelve feathers shot out of its tail to impale him.
 "Fuck off!" In a surprising display of strength, Nightslayer's hands accelerated beyond and launched a dense net of ki blades that scattered the feathers from his descent. The young man straightened his body and 'kicked' against the air. This sent him flying through the brief opening with the force of a piledriver. A silhouette of a sharpened golden stake formed around the youth as he stabbed down at the ephrium.
 "Die!" Nightslayer shouted as he bore down on the stunned beast.
 Ephrie's lackadaisical look vanished as the stake bore down on it. The attack was too sudden, and in such close proximity that it would not be able to dodge in time. Nightslayer's triumphant grin reflected in the beast's pale blue eyes.
 Ephrie snapped. It snarled and opened its mouth as it raised its head to meet the stake.
 Boom!
 A concentrated energy beam suddenly shot out of the ephrium's mouth and shattered the aura surrounding Nightslayer to pieces. The young man was left defenseless as the beam struck him in the chest.
 Nightslayer coughed up blood as he was blasted high into the sky. Weak and delirious, he managed to look over the village and paled as he saw ephrium's feathers cut down the last set of orcs and assassins. Every soul that came to this village had perished except for himself, the goblin and those strangers.
 As he fell to the ground, Nightslayer cursed as he examined his HP which had dropped to a critical state. Even if he survived the fall, he doubted he would be able to move further.
 Nightslayer winced as his back hit the earth. Thud! Moments passed, and he tentatively opened his eyes, surprised to find he remained among the living. Fortunately, the impact was not as bad he had expected. It seemed something had kindly broken his fall. Nightslayer turned to the side to see what had saved his life.
 'Ugh' Nightslayer had to force himself not to vomit as he stared into the squashed eyes of a dismembered goblin corpse. The young man had never hated L.N.E's reality system as much as that moment! Even though he was grateful the pile of goblin corpses had saved his life, he did not appreciate being forced to look at them.
 Nightslayer inwardly swore as he weakly reached into his pocket for a potion. He uncorked the bottle and raised it to lips. Grab! A burnt hand grabbed the young man's hand before he could pour the contents down his throat.
 Nightslayer trembled as he looked up at the owner of the hand. A naked goblin with heavily burned skin towered over him, red eyes burning glowing menacingly in the night. However, upon remembering this was all a game, the young man recovered his bravado and immediately threatened, "Let me go if you know what's good for you."
 "That's right. You Summoned do not fear death," Bok coldly remarked as he began to tighten his grip. He ignored the young man's cries of pain as he crushed Nightslayer's wrist. The potion dropped to the ground, and Bok picked it up. He squeezed and the bottle shattered in his grasp, spilling the red liquid everywhere.

"You Summoned are the true locusts," Bok snarled with disgust as he grasped Nightslayer's throat and began to slowly squeeze. "You come to our world, steal and kill as you like, laughing all the time." The goblin kneeled on the assassin and drove his knee into the Summoned's chest. "This is because you do not fear death isn't it?" Bok said as he bent over Nightslayer, so his scarred face blotted out the sky.
 "I will fix that for you." Bok snarled as he slowly inched over Nightslayer, and tightened his grip over the young man's throat. "You will know fear."
 Nightslayer gagged and gasped as he weakly struggled to remove the goblin's grip. Tears streamed down the young man's eyes as his lungs seemed to burn while he fought for oxygen. Bok's face grew larger in his eyes till all he could see were the goblin's red, rage-filled eyes. The young man was so consumed by fear and pain that he forgot he could save himself with a simple log out.
 Luckily, L.N.E had an auto-logout function in case of extreme stress. Most pro gamers had this option turned off, but Nightslayer had forgotten to switch off the option as this was his secondary account. That oversight saved him from further trauma as it forcefully logged him out when the combination of fear, pain, and desperation surpassed critical thresholds.
 "Coward." Bok snarled as Nightslayer's body went limp in his hands. He angrily grabbed the assassin's head and forcefully tore it off the rest of his body. He raised the severed head and looked into the vacant eyes. "My world cannot be a reality as long as the Summoned exist." Flames burst out of his hand and reduced the head to a pile of ash that was blown away by the wind. "If I can't get rid of them, I will make them fear us. I will make every last one of them regret treating my kind as something to be 'farmed.'"
 "I look forward to seeing how far you go," Myra remarked with a smile. She observed the newest member of her guild and said, "You are free to do whatever you want. What's the first thing you'd like to do with this freedom?"
 Bok looked at Myra. "I would like to read."
 "Read?"
 "Yes, a library," Bok explained. "I would like to visit a library. The biggest you can find."
 Myra's eyes sparkled. "Interesting choice. I'm really looking forward to your accomplishments."
 "Thank you," Bok said in reply.
 Moments later, Bok, dressed in a shabby mishmash of clothing from the fallen assassins, sat bet behind Myra as Ephrie took to the skies. The goblin looked at the burning village as it receded from sight and hardened his resolve. This would be the last time he surrendered those he loved to the flames...
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:

 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Gamma2626, Sven Buchheit, GodSpeed99,
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra, Adam Whitman
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer,
 The High Council: Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince, Thund3rTank, Facemaster, Pumba
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at: https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at: https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 A/N: Damn, so many of y'all really like Bok. Dude has barely had any screen time! Well, he's fallen to the dark side now. Can he be revived? Is the dark side really the wrong side? Did Grizzlydiamond really do anything wrong? Aint this just a buncha 0's and 1's? Lemme know what y'all think!
 No matter your opinion, lemme hear them. One of the prevailing themes of this novel is the fact that there ain't no right or wrong answers! The world is rarely black and white. We all gotta understand the shades of grey before we go judging people's actions and opinions.
 Have fun y'all!

 

Chapter 34: The Chaos Order



 Aethon, Kirkcour Woods.
 01:01 a.m. 18th Banem 1092.
 Crackle!
 Tendrils of electricity crackled across thousands of mutilated corpses strewn along the scorched earth. A jumbled mess of body parts from beasts ranging from small wolves to massive marilith-class monsters burned under the night sky, casting a horrendous aura around the monster that stood within the flames.
 Kashi grinned as the dragon scales receded into his skin. He looked at the hooded figure that stood transfixed at the front of the army, and called out, "You are the leader of these motley crew are you not?"
 The figure looked at the shattered rink in her hand then sighed and threw off her robe.
 "As expected," Kashi joked as he gazed into the violet eyes of a beautiful, thirtyish-looking daeben. He tried to guess the woman's class from her attire but found it hard. She was dressed in a leather tunic and pants, with a pauldron and breastplate crafted from hardened leather for added protection. This type of light armor could be donned by any class. "You guys keep giving me a bad name, you know that?"
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 "You are Kashi, yes?" The woman calmly greeted, ignoring Kashi's jest.
 "Kashi?" Kashi repeated with a perplexed gaze, confused by the respectful tone. He pointed at himself and questioned, "You know me?"
 "News of your prowess has spread after your victory over Ruse," she replied as she gave Kashi an appreciative look. "We daeben respect the strong. You have acquitted yourself well for a man."
 "Well, I try," Kashi replied as he cast a glance at the thousands of monsters behind the woman. His hour-long rampage had cut down over two-thirds of their number, but this much still remained. The daeben inwardly cringed as he realized the reason he had not fought any monsters during the first few days he spent searching this forest. Every living creature had been infected by the blight and added to this army.
 Whichever way this battle ended, this forest was done for unless there was a divine intervention of some sort. Kashi shook his head as he realized he had just added a new burden to this already crazy complicated questline.
 Kashi looked at the woman and questioned, "Do you understand what you've done? You've doomed this forest."
 The woman's lips curled up in a malicious grin. "Some level of sacrifice is required to put the world in its right place. We do evil so the world may be righteous in the future. Surely you understand. You did not get to this place by being peaceful."
 Kashi shrugged as he said, "Listen, I'm not here to judge whether your actions are good or evil or any of that. You can do whatever you want, but you must, in turn, be prepared for the consequences." He looked over his shoulder at the ash-coated rubble that was once Aethon. "You made me see something unpleasant, so I destroyed some of you to vent. Sound fair?"

The woman's brow rose in surprise. "So, you will not pursue this further?"
 Kashi chuckled. "Why would I? Fighting's pretty tiring, you know? I'm done venting, so I'm going to leave now if that's alright with you."
 "Why should I let you do that?" the woman replied with a teasing smile. "This is a prime opportunity to take down the great Kashi. Who knows, I might even get promoted to a Primate."
 Kashi grinned. "Care to bet your life?"
 Boom!
 The woman instinctively backed off in fear as pressure akin to the weight of the world bore down on her. She bit her lips as she stared at the giant intimidating dragon head that appeared behind the daeben. Defeated, she raised her hand and said, "Fine, you win. You can leave. You won't be interfering in our business right?"
 Kashi raised a brow. "What business? We are technically enemies, right? I shall very much like to interfere in your business. Speaking of which, you are yet to introduce yourself."
 The woman's smile grew as she said, "I am an archbishop of the Chaos Order, Verlito Amberheart. You may refer to me as Verlito. Pleased to make your acquaintance, Kashi of the Hopeful Maggots."
 "Well, this is goodbye, Verlito-san," Kashi said as he turned around. "Hopefully we never again cross paths."
 "On the contrary, I expect we'll be meeting soon," Verlito said. "The sixth month is just around the corner."
 Kashi paused for a moment and looked over his shoulder. "So, the Chaos Order will be coming to the party?" He mused, then added with a light shrug, "Well, the more, the merrier. Maybe I'll finally get an answer to what you guys are really about."
 "I can teach you," Verlito called. "You just have to stay."
 "Sorry, I've got commitments of my own to attend to," Kashi replied with a brief wave then walked away.
 Verlito's eyes twitched as she watched the daeben disappear within the cluster of flames. She sighed as equal parts relief, shame, and anger washed over her. She was relieved she did not have to fight that monster, ashamed she feared the consequences of fighting him and angered that Kashi had revealed this weakness in her heart.
 Verlito shook her head to clear her thoughts. She walked to, then mounted an infected four-meter tall direwolf. She gave the command and the monster army resumed their march to Lymar.
 Kashi, meanwhile, weakly rested his head against Larsial's back while Drixlia galloped through the forest. Sweat poured down the daeben's body in droves as he fought to maintain consciousness. He did not want to risk sleeping, as he was not confident he would be able to wake up any time in the near future.
 Kashi could not thank the heavens enough for Suzuki's ability to retain a neutral expression no matter the circumstance. That acting ability had played a significant role in his bluff against Verlito as his fatigue had reached critical red levels. It wasn't even so much the physical exhaustion as it was mental.
 The daeben's brain had not stopped functioning at high capacity from the moment he entered Kirkcour Woods. He was either calculating the possible causes for the Blight, thinking up methods to squeeze out benefits for himself, figuring out the different centaur roles, or worst of all, engaging in a melee against the monster army.
 Monsters were unpredictable by nature. As a result, the Kashi had to ensure he was calculating and preparing for every possible combination of attacks while battling the monsters. The last hour had been the worst of the lot. While he only hunted small fry previously, he'd been forced to contend against several marilith-class monsters at the same time.

Kashi took it upon himself to destroy these monsters to reduce the strain on the centaur coalition, which of course required significant concentration on his part. He might be overpowered to the level of brokenness, but he was certainly not invincible. If he lost focus, all it would take was a few well-timed hits to put him into an irreversible situation.
 At that time, Kashi's massive health pool and rapid health regeneration rate would only increase the duration of his suffering before death. This was often known to philosophers as the phenomenon of ants eating an elephant.
 Kashi's eyelids fluttered as he listened to the rhythmic beating of Larsial's heart. "Shit," Kashi cursed as he sat up straight and rubbed his eyes. He looked at the back of Larsial's head and said, "Can you say something? I really don't want to fall asleep."
 Larsial looked over her shoulder with a strange look in her eyes the daeben could not recognize. "Let's switch. You won't fall asleep if you're guiding."
 "Good idea," Kashi agreed.
 Larsial stood up without warning and circled around Kashi who scooched forward and took Drixlia's reins, then sat behind him and wrapped an arm around his waist for support.
 "Mmhmm, this will work," Kashi remarked as he guided Drixlia through the forest while following the marks Shadow left on the trees. The daeben let out slow breaths as he emptied his mind until the only thoughts left were brief acknowledgments of the correct paths to take.
 Several minutes passed in silence until, Larsial, unable to hide her curiosity any further asked, "How did you get so strong?"
 "Hmm? Just like every other Summoned," Kashi replied. "Killed a lot of stuff, gained experience and increased my attributes."
 "No, that's not what I mean," Larsial stated. "The Chaos Order has many people stronger than you. It isn't your power or speed that I can't wrap my head around. It's your instincts. Your reactions. I've never seen anyone react as quickly or as appropriately as you did during that fight. Every step you took, every action you carried out produced the most optimal results with the least amount of exertion."
 "Ah, that's what you mean," Kashi remarked. "Well, everything I know, I learned through the sacrifices of my senior brothers."
 "Brothers? You have siblings?" Larsial questioned. She did not sense her heartbeat's increased tempo as she considered the prospect of two more Kashi-like people running around the continent.
 Kashi thought about it then shrugged and doubled down on the proclamation. "Well, you could call us that. We're too close to be anything else anyway."
 Larsial's eyes widened in awe as she imagined the figures that could train this monster. "Your brothers. How'd they get that strong? Can you tell me?"
 "Oh? You really want to know about them?" A smile spread across Kashi's lips as he thought of Razznik. "Are you sure you'll be able to handle the truth? They're pretty awesome you know?"
 Larsial snorted. "How great can they be?"
 "The Greatest," Kashi replied in a soft tone. He went silent for a few seconds, then began to speak in a low voice, "The eldest, Suzu's a pretty tough son-of-a-bitch. Growing up, life really didn't go his way at all. He dealt with it the only way he knew how, a pair of clenched fists and a bloody nose by the riverbank. You get to be pretty sharp when you are regularly ganged up on by people bigger and stronger than you. You learn when to retreat and advance, where to hit to deal the most pain with the least backlash and how to read the crowd's intention with only a few hints from muscle twitches and eye tracking."
 "Sounds like he's really strong," Larsial remarked as she recalled an image of a little daeben crying in a corner with a group of pure-blooded daeben children standing over her.

Kashi shook his head. "He might have been strong, but his actions were also damn near suicidal."
 "Maybe so," Larsial chuckled. "But I could have used that level of courage as a child."
 "How so?"
 "Things in the Chaos Order are very different than they were a decade ago. Back then, the daeben prioritized beauty over everything else." Larsial let out a bitter smile as she fondled a lock of her sandy-blonde hair. "We believed there was beauty in purity."
 Kashi fell silent for a brief moment as a picture took form, then asked, "How did you deal with it?"
 "With a lot of pent-up anger and alcohol," Larsial replied with a chuckle.
 Kashi's brows shot up. "You drank as a child?"
 "You should live with a dwarven family sometime. They begin drinking in the cradle."
 "That's crazy," Kashi remarked with stunned laughter. "In the Summoned's world, children in many countries are not allowed to drink until they are at least twenty-one."
 "Madness," Larsial exclaimed. "How do you manage?"
 "Well, many people ignore the age limit, but it also helps that there are no major wars in the Summoned's world," Kashi stated. "Then there's always the therapeutic online trolling."
 Larsial's brow rose. "Online? What's that?"
 "You know how every soul returns to The Circle after it passes?" Kashi mused after a moment. "Well, imagine if everyone could connect to it and communicate with each other while alive. Trolling is when someone connected to you keeps doing something they know pisses you off for fun."
 Larsial's head hurt as he imagined the scenario. "That's too many voices. I believe I would explode if I had to listen to Grewal's incessant singing. He never stops."
 "Well, I mean, you have the option to disconnect whenever you want," Kashi laughingly expressed. "Though I suppose it's harder to do so once you experience that level of freedom."
 "I'd suppose so," Larsial muttered and fell silent as she sunk into her thoughts. Several minutes later, she looked up and tentatively prompted, "What's your second brother like?"
 "Razz?" Kashi muttered as he looked off into the distance. "Razz saved us. He was the one who taught us it wasn't wrong to be angry. That we must learn to channel our focus our anger to achieve something—"
 "Anger is good," Larsial softly interrupted. "But anger without cause is useless. It is a tool you must learn to control, or it will control you."
 Kashi blinked, shocked by her words. He managed to keep the surprise out of his voice as he asked, "Sounds like something Razz would say. Where did you learn that?"
 "The pope taught me those words," Larsial muttered as she recalled the warmth of a kafu's snow-white fur as he hugged her ten-year-old self to his chest. "They are part of a set of teachings passed down by Lord Razznik."
 "I see," Kashi muttered as his eyelids twitched. "So your Order is based around worshipping this Lord Razznik?"
 "What? No!" Larsial vehemently refuted. "Yes, we all respect Lord Razznik, but we do not worship him. Lord Razznik hated the gods' hold over the common people and cut down them for their arrogance. He gave humes the opportunity to govern themselves and build a civilization without dependence on the gods. He would never abide anyone worshipping him as he does not view himself as a god."
 Kashi was left even more perplexed by her explanation. The Chaos Order had teachings, bishops and a pope. They had all the ingredients of a religion, but now they did not worship their god? What kind of religion did not worship a god? "Then what do you believe in? What do you worship?"

"The Chaos Order does not worship anything," Larsial replied. "We believe in the reformatory power of Chaos. Order leads to stagnation. Only Chaos can bring true change to the world."
 "You're losing me here," Kashi muttered as a sense of foreboding began to take root in his heart. "What is the overall end goal of the Chaos Order. Isn't there something every member is working hard toward?"
 "No, there's nothing," Larsial shook her head. "There is no overarching purpose. No afterlife to aim for. The only edict of members of the Chaos Order is to achieve their desires however they please."
 Kashi's heart violently trembled as that bad feeling grew worse. "Then what happens if the goals of two members of the Chaos Order clashes?"
 "They fight, and someone emerges the victor," Larsial stated in a matter-of-fact tone.
 'Well, fuck!' Kashi inwardly cursed as he finally realized the true terror of the Chaos Order. This was a giant organization with a spiel anybody down on their luck could latch onto. Furthermore, there were no forceful edicts that would chase away the weak-minded. It also explained why he had not met any suicidal members yet.
 The members of this organization were loosely held together by the teachings of Chaos, but beyond that, they were free to do their own thing and accomplish their dreams. However, this made it even harder to track the organization's goal, because their members could be doing their own thing while simultaneously achieving the overall purpose.
 Kashi did not believe Larsial's line about the organization not having an overall goal. No one started an organization this large without an end goal. Which left one of two things. Either Larsial was lying, or she did not know the end goal. It could be that her rank was too low to be privy to the truth. Kashi was more inclined toward the latter.
 Kashi gritted his teeth as he realized the severity of the situation. This was an organization formed through an ideal. He could cut down all the heads of this organization, but the ideals would live on in the heart of some beggar in the street somewhere.
 "We are told to remember the idea, not the man because a man can fail. He can be caught. He can be killed and forgotten. But four hundred years later an idea can still change the world. I've witnessed first-hand the power of ideas. I've seen people kill in the name of them, and die defending them. But you cannot kiss an idea, cannot touch it, or hold it. Ideas do not bleed. They do not feel pain. They do not love."
 Kashi burst out in laughter as he recalled a quote from his favorite movie. "Just perfect! An enemy I cannot stab to death. What do you think, can an idea be killed?"
 Larsial blinked, shocked by the question. "Huh?"
 "There is a way to kill an idea."
 Kashi's eyebrows jumped in shock. 'Twice in one day. Did Razz's challenge excite you too?' "Say, how does one how does one go about killing an idea?"
 Larsial, once again stunned by the question, only managed a weak, "I do not know."
 'Replace it with an even stronger one.'
 Kashi laughed as a cluster of centaurs came into view. "Looks like the Maggots will have to inject hope into some lost souls."
 '...That hurt you, didn't it?'
 Kashi grimaced. 'Yes, I regretted it the moment it came out of my mouth.'
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:

 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Gamma2626, Sven Buchheit, GodSpeed99,
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra, Adam Whitman
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer,
 The High Council: Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince, Thund3rTank, Facemaster, Pumba
 You Guys are the Best!!!

 Please Support me on Patreon at: https://www.patreon.com/Renoe_K
 Come bug me and join the community on discord at: https://discord.gg/fHRA2qj
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 A/N: Got some insight into some of the philosophies behind the Chaos Order. Not nearly all there is to them, but some of the veil is slowly peeling away the further Kashi crosses paths with them. What do y'all think about what you've learned about the Order so far. Would you ever consider joining them?  Personally, I can think of a few times in my life I would have been tempted by the offer.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 PICTURE OF THE DAY
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 The Ephrium from the previous chapter. Just a majestic creature in my opinion.
 Credit to Allagar on Deviant_Art for the design.

 

Chapter 35.1: Probing Charge

Somewhere in Kirkcour Woods.

 04:23 a.m. 18th Banem 1092.
 Dudududu...
 A centurion of centaurs galloped out of the forest led by Kashi, Shadow, Larsial, Darian, and Agamios. The leaders pulled to a stop at a clifftop overlooking a vast encampment in the valley below.
 Kashi keenly studied the kilometer-wide stronghold to devise a plan of attack. His lips curled up in a challenging smile as he realized the headquarters was much stronger than he initially suspected.
 The stronghold did not appear to be a temporary investment, suggested by the 15-meters-tall circular wall that surrounded the perimeter. Intriguingly, Kashi counted five wooden pillars placed strategically around the wall. Each pillar ran alongside the internal part of the wall and had man-sized, pyramid-shaped mana crystals encased at their apex.
 A final, sixth pillar was erected at the heart of the encampment, and there appeared to be a thin translucent film that originated from that pillar and spread to the others.
 The valley itself was populated by tall trees which blocked off most of the compound from sight. Kashi highly doubted this was a coincidence. The boss of this place was undoubtedly brilliant. However, there were two places in the valley which could not be covered by the trees. The first was a large building which housed the sixth pillar, and the second, and most interesting was a giant pit that with a diameter of at least 200 meters.
 Dark energy and aura bellowed from the pit like a sick, cursed volcano and spread to the surrounding forest. Kashi felt his skin crawl just from looking at the smoke. He instinctively knew he had found the Blight's source.
 Kashi turned from the pit and once again observed the film surrounding the camp. 'It can't be.' Kashi thought to himself as he dismounted and picked up a smooth stone from the ground. He flung the stone and watched with bated breath as the projectile sailed through the air.
 Clang!
 "No way," Kashi muttered in shock as he watched the stone strike some invisible barrier and slide off to the ground. The daeben picked another rock and threw it at the wall. He breathed a sigh of relief when the stone crumbled against the wall. Good, so the shield only protected the skies against airborne attacks.
 Kashi admired the barrier technology with the utmost respect. Say what you will about these Chaos Order's ethics, but their technology was undoubtedly leagues ahead of the continent. The daeben was grateful for their advancements in magitek (magic technology). It would certainly save the Maggots several months, or even years, worth of Research.
 That's right. As far as Kashi was concerned, the technology was already his.
 "Kashi-dono, over there," Darian prompted and pointed at the large building with his spear.
 Kashi utilized [Keen Eyes] to zoom in on the building and spotted an aged centaur chained to the ground in front of the mansion. Judging from the slow rise and fall of the centaur's chest, he appeared to still be among the living. However, Kashi could not tell how long that would last, especially now that the final battle had commenced.
 "I see him," Kashi confirmed then took stock of the security personnel. Just as they thought, most of the base had been emptied, leaving only a few hundred monsters behind for protection. But Kashi was more concerned about the dozens of humes leisurely patrolling the vicinity. Because of the trees, he could not accurately predict their exact numbers, but he estimated there should be at least a hundred or more.
 Kashi turned around and looked at Agamios and the rest of the centaurs. "This is it, ladies and gentlemen. The final push." Kashi pointed at the gaping hole. "That over there is what we need to destroy. Everything we do henceforth is for that one overarching goal. The faster we complete the objective, the quicker we can save those at Lymar."

"We understand the severity of the situation," Agamios confirmed with a stiff nod. "What is your proposed course of action?"
 Kahsi looked at the compound and frowned. "Initially, I intended on scaling the face while your burst through the front gate, but that does not seem to be an option this time." The daeben's frown softened into a smirk as he pointed at the wall. "So, I shall smash a hole through the side for you and your men. While you rampage from there, I, Shadow and Larsial will sneak around and head for the pit to destroy the Blight."
 "What about Aethon's chief?" Darian asked.
 "Remember what I said," Kashi reiterated, "Our top priority is to end the Blight. No one wants that centaur alive as much as I do, but we can't risk the lives of every centaur at Longma for his."
 "I understand," Darian replied with a tight tone. The centaur's gaze filled with even more respect for Kashi. Aethon's chief was the reason Kashi had begun this entire journey, yet he was ready to throw it all away for the centaurs. Was there a more selfless man in the universe? Unwilling to let the daeben sacrifice everything for nothing, he proposed, "What if we charge toward the Aethon chief? If the enemy believes we are here to save him, they might keep him alive as a hostage. And it will serve as an added distraction for you."
 'Darian, you beautiful centaur!' Kashi almost kissed the young 'prince.' Could he completely give up on fully enhancing Drixlia's bloodline after coming this far? Hell no! However, he'd noticed an opportunity to gain loyalty points with both Darian and Agamios. Those opportunities were rare to come by, and rewards gained from loyalty were exponential in nature.
 Kashi had taken an enormous gamble just then. He would have suggested that plan himself if Darian nor anyone else thought about it. This was one of those occasions where the bonus was very different depending on if the proposal came from himself or the other party.
 Luckily and thankfully, Darian Alshmeer had stepped up to the plate at the critical hour.
 "Yes, that is a perfect plan," Agamios chimed in with an approving nod. "We will decimate everything in our way after you open the path. But what should we do if we rescue the chief before you're finished?"
 Kashi's brows furrowed as he glanced at the pit. "There's a terrifyingly strong being inside that pit. I can feel its aura all the way from here. Our battle will not conclude in a short period." The daeben looked at Agamios with determined eyes. "Regardless of what happens, you must retreat once you begin to feel overwhelmed." A challenging smile curled up the daeben's lips as he looked at the pit and rapidly clenched and unclenched his right hand. "Our battle won't be something the likes of those people could interfere in."
 "We'll do as you say," Agamios agreed with a firm nod. He glanced toward the north with a worried glance. "I only pray we are not too late."
 "Do not worry, the enemy should just be reaching Lymar right now," Kashi consoled as he looked toward Lymar. "It's a race against time now," prompted the daeben as he climbed onto Drixlia and spurred him down the cliffside. "Let's do this!"
 The strikeforce roared with excited bloodlust as they charged down the cliffside.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 

Lymar Village, Kirkcour Woods,
 4:30 am, 18th Banem 1092.
 Verlito stood at the head of a 10,000 strong monster army, a curious smile on her lips as she watched the forest around her begin to distort and vanish as the powerful illusion shielding the final village in their conquest slowly crumbled.
 "So, this is where you were hiding," Verlito cooed as a broad mountain range appeared in front of her. A 50m wide ravine buried between two steep cliffs traveled up the mountainside to a distinct town situated at the mountaintop. The daeben clucked her tongue in praise as she observed the natural fortifications.
 The first centaurs had picked the best location in the entire forest to set up their final defense. The mountain range ensured the ravine was the only way to attack the village, and the tall passes allowed archers to snipe any incoming enemies. Verlito looked up, and she indeed spotted bow-wielding centaurs on the cliffs.
 Verlito had no doubt that the centaurs had placed traps and all sorts of fortifications on the path, but if they thought this would be enough to save them then they were in for a rude awakening.
 Verlito raised her hand and pointed at the village. "Charge!"
 ROAR!
 The earth trembled from the monsters' battle cries as they stampeded onto the path, eyes red with frenzied fury.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Chaos Order Outpost
 Dudududu!
 "What's that!?" A hooded sentry shouted in panic, shocked by the sudden ground's sudden shaking. "Is there an earthquake?"
 "No, it's something else," another sentry countered. She quickly cast [Levitate] which let her 'fly' upwards over the wall. She scanned the area and paled when she noticed the centaurs charging toward a section of the wall. "Sound the alarm!" she quickly ordered as she looked over her shoulder at the chained centaur chief. Had they finally come for him?
 Ding! Ding! Ding!
 Acolytes and priests abandoned whatever they were doing and began running toward the section of the wall prioritized by the alarm.
 The levitating woman frowned as she observed the charging centaurs. How did they intend to break through the wall? The tree trunks used for the walls were around a meter or two thick. There was no way the centaurs could break through that with charging power alone.
 Wiiing!
 The sentry's eyes went wide in shock as several portals suddenly appeared in the sky above the centaurs. She barely had time to process her shock before the wall faced heavy bombardment. Worse yet, despite shooting thousands of arrows at the same time, they all accurately struck a small area of about 4 meters tall and 8 meters wide. The sentry's eyes twitched as a small crack formed, then spread across the wall.
 "They're coming!" yelled the sentry as Agamios smashed into the wall.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Lymar Village
 "Brace for impact!" roared Balasius, the Tulpar tribe general, as he eyed the approaching monster army alongside his clansmen. The centaur general couldn't be more grateful for the terrain as it meant that despite being outnumbered 2 to 1, his troops did not have to defend against the entire monster army at once. Add the cover fire from the Glashtyn tribe stationed on the clifftop, and the battle suddenly did not seem so hopeless.
 Boom!
 "Hold!" Balasius encouraged his soldiers as the monsters slammed against the shields. He dug his hooves into the earth and leaned into the impact, then stabbed the beasts through small gaps with his 'short' sword. The centaurs hummed and hawed as they struggled against the monster army's momentum.
 "Aaah!"
 Balasius gritted his teeth when a Vine Blight extended its branches through the gaps and stabbed an unsuspecting centaur in the heart. The centaur, sensing her impending death, relinquished her spot and charged into the monster army, cutting down everything she could with reckless abandon.
 "Close that gap!" Balasius shouted as he made a mental note of the centaur who had smartly sacrificed herself to prevent the line from crumbling. Unfortunately, they were in the thick of battle, and there was no time to mourn the dead. Instead, he respected her passing by alerting the rest of the army to the danger, and added, "Conserve your ki! Watch out for the Blights!"
 "Damn you!" A centaur roared as a Vine Blight attempted to repeat the same feat on him. This time, however, the centaur congealed a solid ki coating over his chest which the branch struck to no avail. The centaur, enraged, temporarily let go of his sword and grabbed the branch. Before the vine blight could react, he pulled hard and yanked the Vine Blight out of the army, over his head and into a pack of red-eyed centaurs on his side of the line.
 The Vine Blight did not make it to the ground.
 "Excellent!" Balasius roared in praise. "Hold your ground!" The stalwart general looked toward the north with a pensive expression. "Please be quick, Kashi-dono."

 

Chapter 35.2: Rayatha Thorn

          
 Chaos Order Outpost
 "Tear them apart!" Agamios roared as the Longman tribe burst through the walls and made a beeline for the prisoned chief.
 "Stop there!" Several sentries shouted as the remaining five hundred or so monsters left in the camp clashed against the centaurs led by a marilith and a dire ape. Dire apes were 8-foot-fall ape-like creatures with four arms, two massive upper arms, and slightly smaller lower arms.
 The sentries utilized [Levitate] to gain a height advantage over the battle, then proceeded to bombard the invaders with fireballs and ice spike projectiles, without care for the monsters caught in the chaos. Evidently, the Chaos Order acolytes and priests stationed in this outpost consisted solely of mages.
 "Die!" Agamios roared as he burst through the flames and caved in a direwolf's skull with a single punch. He flipped the corpse around and used it as a club to smash in the heads of surrounding monsters. Blood and flesh exploded around the one-man battering ram as he continued his charge unhindered.
 "That's as far as you go!" A priest roared as he cast [Flame Tornado]. A thick flaming pillar rose from the ground and zipped toward the centaur general with the marilith close behind for insurance.
 Agamios' gaze narrowed as he charged into the pillar.
 Boom!
 The flame pillar exploded the second Agamios made contact and burned everything within five meters.
 The acolyte laughed and ridiculed, "Foolish be—"
 "Die." Agamios' deep voice interrupted the acolyte as he emerged from the explosion unscathed with a ki manifestation of a four-meter-tall centaur monster surrounding him. Before the acolyte could recover from the shock, Agamios' ki manifestation roared as it grabbed the stunned marilith's head.
 Agamios' rage-filled eyes looked up into the marilith's as a sneer curled up his lips, "I just need to make you bleed enough."
 "No, wait!" several acolytes cried with panic-laden voices. The marilith's importance could not be understated!
 Agamios ignored their cries. "Isn't that right, Kashi." The centaur let out a ghastly grin as his ki manifestation ripped off the marilith's head.
 "You will pay for that!" The acolytes roared as they charged up a massive spell to eradicate the general.
 Puchi!
 A spear suddenly stabbed through an acolyte at this critical juncture. The hidden strike blasted a bow sized hole through the man's chest, leaving no illusions to his survival. The acolytes froze as they watched the spear zip through the air into the hand of a distinct looking centaur.
 The spear had barely settled in Darian's hand before he once again launched it at the hovering acolytes. Vwhoosh! The spear blasted through the night like a shooting star and exploded through the heart of a hovering priest. The priest's eyes widened in shock as he wondered why his mana shield had failed.
 Darian's gaze hardened as the weapon once again returned to his grasp. "You will pay for your crimes!" Darian cried as he readied himself for another throw.
 Whoosh!
 Darian gaped, shocked as the sentries rapidly descended to the ground. The mages did not fancy remaining a sitting duck for the angry centaur. Hence they grudgingly traded their aerial superiority for their lives.
 "Good work kid!" Agamios praised as he stormed through the monster army. The pressure on the centaurs had significantly reduced as the mages lost clear sight lines to their targets.

Unfortunately, the Chaos Order was not one to roll over and lie down. The mages immediately switched to buff and guerilla tactics, increasing the abilities of the monsters on their side, while seeking out opportunities to fire missiles and restraining spells at the centaurs.
 ROOOAR!
 A loud roar burst through the battleground, and Agamios' eyes narrowed as he watched a centaur get pummeled to death by the enraged dire ape. "Foul beast!" The general roared as he burst through the battlefield. He grabbed a random wolf and flung it at the ape to catch its attention.
 The dire ape punched the thrown direwolf. The beast exploded on impact, sending blood splattering across the ground. The ape, however, did not appear to care, as it roared then charged at Agamios, likewise sending everything in its path flying.
 "Run!"
 "Clear a path!"
 Warriors on both sides shouted as they got out the way of these forces of nature.
 "Die!" 
 ROAR!
 The calamities clashed in an explosion of rage and bloodlust.
 BOOM!
 A massive shockwave blasted outward, knocking several weak individuals off their feet. The shockwave was so powerful, it spread far beyond the confines of the battlefield.
 Off in the distance, Kashi, Larsial, and Shadow paused as a strong wind blew past them. Kashi looked over his shoulder at the battlefield and frowned, "Let's be quick. People are depending on us."
 With those words, the trio blended into the night and dashed toward the pit. They did not encounter much opposition during their run as most sentries had been attracted to the battle. What little they met were silently and efficiently dispatched.
 Shortly after that, the pit came into view. Kashi, Shadow, and Larsial gaped in shock at the massive black hole. Now that they were this close, even Shadow and Larsial who were less mana-sensitive than Kashi felt goosebumps shoot up all over their skins. They felt like they were gazing upon the origin of everything evil and impure in the world.
 "Over there," Shadow prompted, and both Kashi and Lunette followed his finger to see a white-haired, old man stood at the mouth of the pit with a clear orb in his right hand and a magic staff in his left. The six foot six old man, who looked to be in his late sixties, retained the body shape of a peak thirty-year-old. He was dressed in green cotton pants and donned a loose jacket made from leaves.
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 Kashi visibly cringed, instantly recognizing the outfit. The all green, plant-based clothing, going as far as to make pauldrons out of wood bark. These, plus the staff, and the minimalistic outfit usually pointed to one class. Druids.
 Druids shared a mixed reputation in Destia. On the one hand, their ability to tame and communicate with beasts, coupled with their comprehensive knowledge of all things plant related could mean the difference between life and death for an adventuring party.

On the other hand, druids were often known to force their 'balance' ideals onto others. They believed humes should not hunt beasts, as they could not do so without destroying the world's ecological balance. Instead, they thought humes should seek to live among animals as equals and adopt a vegetarian life.
 During King's Journey, a civil war once broke out between a druid faction and a Summoned guild. After that war, many players began to playfully refer to druids as the PETA of the gaming world. A stigma also began to float around that only two kinds of druids existed on the continent: A sane druid, or a bat-shit insane druid. There was no middle ground between the two.
 Kashi, personally, did not buy into that stigma, as Razznik had run into quite a few druids during his many adventures. Just like with any other group, most druids he met minded their own business and lived peaceful lives. Unfortunately, the loud minority who forced their ideas down the throats of everyone else had ruined their reputation.
 'Hmm?' Kashi's attention was drawn to the orb in the old man's hand as dark aura from the pit poured into it. He then watched as the old man took out a vial from his satchel and poured the solution within onto the orb. To Kashi's surprise, the darkness in the orb began to show signs of clearing. Unfortunately, the progress stopped moments later, and the orb turned black as night.
 The druid frowned and crushed the orb in a vice grip, then looked in the direction of Kashi with a sneer, "You have come this far. Why do you still hide?"
 Shadow and Larsial's gazes turned pensive. The fact that the druid had spotted them was proof enough that he was nothing to scoff at. Kashi, meanwhile issued a lazy smile as he emerged from the trees with the assassins in tow.
 The druid's brows furrowed as he examined Kashi. He waited until the daeben stopped a few feet from him and muttered, "You appear familiar. Who are you?"
 "Kashi of the Hopeful Maggots," Kashi introduced himself, then his partners, "He is called Shadow, and she is Larsial." The daeben looked at the druid and questioned, "And you are?"
 "Rayatha Thorn," the druid replied in a flat tone. Recognition flashed in his eyes. "Kashi, you say? The Order has spoken much about you." Rayatha regarded the daeben with cold eyes. "Are you here to kill me, young man?"
 "That remains to be seen," Kashi replied with a light shrug. He pointed at the pit and asked, "What are you trying to accomplish here?"
 "Why, is that not obvious?" Rayatha questioned in an incredulous tone.
 "Humor me," Kashi replied.
 Rayatha glanced at the roiling, cursed aura billowing from the pit then back at the daeben. "I am working on a cure for the Blight."
 Kashi's brow rose. This time, it was his turn to give the druid an incredulous gaze. "You are joking right?"
 Rayatha's eyes narrowed. "Do you find this funny? This is my life's work."
 "Wait, you are serious," Kashi stated in shock. "Have you looked at the forest? How is that curing the Blight? You've been spreading it! And what does hunting the centaurs have to do with your cure?"
 Rayatha's eyes shone with the excitement of a scientist who finally found a student. "Do you not find it fascinating? The Blight has existed in this forest for countless years alongside the centaurs, yet they are completely immune to its effects."
 "The Blight does not affect humes," Kashi countered. "At least, it shouldn't."
 "The Blight does not have an immediate effect on humes yes," Rayatha confirmed with a nod. "But, it does if exposed long enough, over generations. There is a reason centaurs are the only sentient civilization left within this forest. The rest either perished or ran away over time as the effects worsened. Something within the centaur's bloodline holds the cure," Rayatha said as he looked at the pit. " And, I am very close to figuring it out."

"What does that have to do with massacring the centaurs?" Larsial questioned.
 Rayatha turned to her and explained, "One cannot run tests without a few test subjects."
 "You're wiping out the entire tribe," Kashi countered. "What about that says few?"
 "The entire tribe?" Rayatha blinked as if trying to recall something. "Is there something I forgot?" He muttered something under his breath, then looked up at the daeben. "Oh, yes. I remember now. The Order did request something to that effect. They have supported my research for several years. I lent the Order my army in return."
 Kashi frowned. "You keep saying 'them.' Are you not a member?"
 "Yes, I am," Rayatha murmured. "Something called Primate, I believe."
 Kashi's expression instantly turned severe. 'Primate.' That was the same level as Ruse, and Kashi could tell this man was much stronger than the flame mage. Furthermore, druids rarely used flame spells because of its destructive nature, which denied the daeben that natural superiority.
 This would not be an easy fight.
 However, before the battle began, Kashi intended to squeeze as much as he could from the druid. The daeben folded his arms and studied the druid. "Why does the Chaos Order want to kill off the centaurs?"
 "That I do not know," Rayatha replied and shook his head. "You must question the daeben for the specifics," The druid patiently explained then stretched his hand toward Kashi. "Now you know the whole truth. What will it be? Will you walk away, and let me complete this cure that will save billions for several generations to come, or die here?"
 "That is a generous offer," Kashi said as he walked to the pit's edge. "Unfortunately, I must refuse."
 "Do not step in there," Rayatha softly warned. "The Blight is too concentrated. You will instantly perish."
 Kashi looked at the druid and shook his head. "I do not know what to think about you right now. You do not look murderous, but you do not hold lives in any regard." Kashi shrugged and let out a sigh. "I suppose I shall chalk it up to the eccentric nature of a mad scientist."
 Rayatha's eyes narrowed. "Mad?"
 Kashi ignored the druid's rebuke and called out to his team. "Shadow, Larsial, capture him. I'll decide what to do with him after I put an end to this."
 "What?"
 Neither Shadow, Larsial nor Rayatha fully processed the daeben's words by the time he jumped into the pit.
 "Kashi!" Shadow shouted. However, a split second later, he stared, mouth agape when Kashi's skin lit up with a soft green glow. The daeben turned around and flashed a salute before dropping into the pit.
 "Impossible!" Rayatha yelled, breaking his calm demeanor for the first time as he watched the daeben descend into the pit. He glared at Shadow and Larsial with greed and excitement in his eyes, "You will tell me everything!"
 "I refuse," Shadow stated as he dropped into a battle stance.
 "Oh, we will certainly talk," Larsial taunted as she drew her daggers. "But only after you've been taken down a notch."
 
   
       
     
       
         
         
       
     
   
   
 
 
 SPECIAL THANKS TO MY PATREON STARS:

 Residents: Andrew Maurer, Eli Calabria, Rusty Reaper, Cobalt_Storm, Eli Romero, Niyeban, Sarah Kinkade, Gamma2626, Sven Buchheit, GodSpeed99,
 Adventurers: Hyproxy, Merlin252, Michael Barton, OlusholaAbidakun, Mental_Napalm, Jamie Ibarra, Adam Whitman
 Warriors: Caleb Ian Melton, Ragnaf, Cullen M Brewer,
 The High Council: Sly, Jacob Morgan, Antinium, StrikerPrince, Thund3rTank, Facemaster, Pumba
 You Guys are the Best!!!

