
Chapter One

Second Lieutenant Rachel Ortiz[ Not much in the way of physical description of Ortiz; make sure to fix that later...] sat alone in her quarters aboard the Confederation corvette CSS Leander. While the compartment, which measured two meters long by one point five meters wide, was listed as a stateroom on the small warship's deck plan, it was smaller than a solitary confinement cell in a Confederation prison. In a way, she reflected, a prison cell was exactly what it was. Three months had passed since her assignment as the commander of Leander's Marine detachment after her graduation from the Officer Basic Course on Quantico 17. She had been fourth in her class and had expected a good assignment. She had deserved a good assignment. Such was her surprise when she opened her orders to discover that she'd been assigned to the Marine Corps' 12th Guards Regiment, also infamously known as the Red Legion. She wore the regiment's patch on the left shoulder of her uniform. Turning to look at herself in the small wall mirror, she could see the patch with its red lion, rampant on a black background. When she had first put it on, she'd felt as if it had burned her skin like a brand. The Red Legion was the dumping ground for the worst of the worst in the Corps. Half of the Legion's personnel were prisoners, from non-violent drug users to soulless killers, who had been given the promise of a pardon in exchange for surviving twelve months of combat duty. The other half were malcontents, slackers, general ne'er-do-wells...and a few decent Marines, primarily officers, who were given the impossible task of molding them into a fighting force against the warriors of the Kreelan Empire. Some deserted, preferring to take their chances against the Internal Security Service and summary execution. Others kept a low profile, hoping to live long enough to transfer to another unit. And more than a small few reveled in the brutality and cruelty that were the rule, rather than the exception, in the Legion's twelve battalions. Six of those battalions fought as complete units, usually used to augment Marine divisions in major engagements. Those were the cushy assignments, and generally received better personnel (such as they were) and, even though they typically fought in large battles, had a higher survival rate. The other battalions, including her own parent unit, the 1st Battalion, were parceled out to the smaller Navy warships as on-board detachments commanded by junior officers such as herself. She snorted in disgust. Commander was a grossly optimistic term for what she really was. Prisoner, or perhaps hostage, would be more appropriate. In frustration and anger, she delivered a savage kick to the metal bulkhead below the fold-out desk where she was doing her best to focus on the Marine detachment's paperwork. A handsbreadth above the floor, the paint had long since been chipped away by the thick sole of the toe of her combat boots, revealing bare steel that was rusting in the ship's overly humid atmosphere. [ Clean this up a bit?]Forcing herself to calm down, she returned her attention to the screen in front of her. The administrative tasks for which she was responsible were her only real respite, for the mind-numbing paperwork allowed her to depart from reality for a short while. She stopped as she called up the next personnel record she needed to update, a flame of pure hatred, something she'd never known before coming aboard Leander, flaring in her core. The name on the screen was that of Staff Sergeant Besarion Khutashvili, the detachment's senior NCO, who was known by the less than affectionate name of Stalin. A convicted murderer who had been given the chance of a pardon if he fought the Kreelans as a member of the Red Legion, Khutashvili had instantly volunteered. He was big, easily twice the size of Ortiz, and the most brutal human being she had ever known. Everyone was terrified of him and he fed on their fear, lived for it. The damnable thing was that he also boasted a chest full of decorations earned in combat against the Kreelans. Feared as he was, he had survived more battles than anyone else in the platoon, and had even saved a few of his fellow Marines in the process.

As for Ortiz, "Stalin" treated her like he might a stray cat. The Corps insisted that an officer command the detachment, and even Stalin knew that he would never be promoted beyond his current rank. So he intimidated and cajoled the junior officers placed over him. She knew quite well from reviewing the unit records that those who went along with him lived quite a bit longer than those who didn't. Most of the latter suffered mysterious deaths, in combat or otherwise. To Ortiz's everlasting shame, she had given in to his intimidation, which was tempered by the promise of protection from the less savory of the detachment's personnel. She was willing to sacrifice her life for the Confederation against the Kreelans, but didn't want to die at the hands of this maniac. While she would die before admitting it, she was also grateful for his protection: the detachment boasted six convicted rapists who shamelessly tore her uniform off with their eyes every time she stood in front of them. Surprisingly, Stalin didn't care much about sex one way or the other. He just enjoyed killing. As long as she didn't get in his way, he'd told her, she'd be just fine. She kicked the bulkhead again, furious with herself for being such a tool, and a useless one at that. A sudden knock at the door almost made her yelp in surprise. "What is it?" She looked at the sturdy deadbolt she'd had one of the crewmen weld onto the door. It was locked. "Lieutenant!" It was Lance Corporal Waylon Davis, who had been released from a mental institution as a "salvageable" patient. He was completely crazy, but he was one of the few Marines in her detachment she felt she could trust. "You've got to come see this!" Resting her hand on her sidearm, which was strapped to her right thigh when she was awake and under her pillow when she slept, she went to the door and unlocked it. "Did the replacements arrive?" She'd been expecting two new bodies to replace a pair of Marines who had been killed in a brief but savage engagement with a Kreelan destroyer. "Yeah, el-tee, but...I have no words. You've got to come see." Ortiz pursed her lips as she considered venturing from the safety of her cabin. Stalin would eventually bring them around to see her, anyway, but she was possessed with the sudden perverse desire to actually do what she wanted to do, not just what he told her to do. "Okay," she said, throwing open the deadbolt. Following Davis, who mumbled unintelligibly to her, to the walls of the passageway, and to himself, not necessarily in that order, she made her way to the small galley that was reserved for the twenty Marines of the corvette's detachment. As she drew nearer, she could hear her Marines (she tried to think of them as hers, even though she knew that they truly belonged to Stalin) hooting and cursing. They sounded like a pack of dogs after a cat had been thrown into their midst. Forcing some steel into her spine while resting her hand on the grip of her sidearm, she stepped through the hatch into the galley. "What the hell's going on in here?" "Fresh meat!" Davis crowed from beside her, gleaming at the newcomers as he clapped his hands. "I don't believe it," Ortiz said to herself. "Believe it, lieutenant," Stalin said, stepping forward to clap one of his big hands on one shoulder of the smaller of the two new recruits, who flinched in pain as Stalin squeezed. "This one, he is nothing, but this one..." He put his hand on the other new Marine's shoulder, grinning as he contracted the muscles of a hand that could snap the bones of a man's wrist. The other Marine showed no reaction at all. The young man continued staring straight ahead, his face relaxed, serene. Stalin's grin faded, and he let go of the smaller man to focus all his energy on bringing the new one to heel. He was squeezing his hand so hard now that his entire arm was quivering, and Ortiz couldn't believe that the bones hadn't already snapped in the new recruit's shoulder. 

"That's enough, Stalin," Ortiz ordered quietly. The man glared at her for a moment, then smiled. But like with all his smiles, it never reached his dark, dead eyes. "As you say, lieutenant." He slapped both Marines on the back in a false show of camaraderie. "As you say." Stepping closer, Ortiz took a closer look at the two newcomers. The first one could have been any mother's son, not much younger than herself, who had signed up to be a Marine. The other one, however, was something else. His eyes were a brilliant green, like emeralds set into a face that wasn't white, wasn't black, but lay somewhere in between. He would have been handsome, gorgeous, even, had it not been for the scars that marred his skin, especially the one that ran vertically across the skin of his brow and cheek, above and below his left eye. Oddly, his skin was smooth, without the slightest trace of stubble or hair growth, as if all the follicles had vanished. But the same wasn't true of his hair: it was raven black, and she felt a cold trickle of fear when she saw that it wasn't cut in the mandated Marine style, but was formed into braids that flowed down his back, mimicking the style worn by Kreelan warriors. His shoulders were wide, his waist narrow, and he stood with a quiet confidence that was totally out of character for a mere private right out of training. The trickle of fear bloomed into a torrent when her eyes landed on the collar around his neck. Made of the same black metal as the Kreelans wore, it bore at his throat a strange oval sigil of a peculiarly beautiful blue, into which had been inscribed a Kreelan rune that glowed cyan as if lit from within. Then she noticed the short sword that he wore at his waist and the handle of a much longer sword, protruding over one shoulder, that he wore on his back. It was as if a Kreelan warrior, born of humankind, were stuffed into a Marine uniform and delivered to her doorstep. "Who...what the hell are you?" she asked softly. Those green eyes moved a fraction to stare directly at her, and she felt as if she'd been struck by a pair of emerald lasers. Holding her gaze, the stranger said in a heavily accented voice, "Private Eustus Camden and Private Reza Gard, reporting for duty, lieutenant." The room fell dead silent. Ortiz let out a breath of surprise. "So you're the one," she said into the hush. Reza cocked his head. "Lieutenant?" "You're the one we heard about on the news feeds," she explained, forcing herself to take a step closer, "the boy who was kidnapped from an orphanage and raised by the Kreelans as one of their own." "Then came back to us as a fucking spy," Stalin hissed into Reza's ear. He'd been circling the pair after Ortiz called him off, and was now standing directly behind Reza. "The Supreme Commander of the Confederation High Command would beg to differ with you, staff sergeant," Reza said evenly as he withdrew his orders from a pocket of his combat uniform and handed it to Ortiz. Eustus followed suit, handing her his orders. While he remained at attention, Ortiz could clearly see that he was angry. Taking their orders in her hand, Ortiz opened Camden's first. Flicking her eyes across the boilerplate text, she saw nothing out of the ordinary. Then she looked at Gard's and sucked in her breath. Instead of being undersigned and authorized by the Marine Corps Personnel Activity, which was typical for first assignments, his bore the electronic personal signature of Fleet Admiral Hercule L'Houillier. "You don't see that very often," she said under her breath. "Carrying Kreelan steel is a crime, little man," Stalin said as Ortiz was reading over their orders, reaching for the handle of the great sword Reza wore on his back, the weapon that the ancient armorer Pan'ne-Sharakh had crafted for him. 

Eustus caught the movement out of the corner of his eye and, breaking the discipline of being at attention, snapped his head toward the staff sergeant and was about to warn him not to touch it when Ortiz saved him the trouble. "Believe it or not," she said in a disbelieving voice as she folded up their orders, "he's authorized to carry them, or any other Kreelan weapon he happens across. So says Fleet Admiral L'Houillier." Stalin's hand froze a hair's breadth from touching the sword. His mouth curling into an ugly sneer, he pulled it away, but not before he saw Eustus looking right at him. "Eyes front, Marine!" Then he landed a brutal blow with a ham-sized fist against the side of Eustus's head. Or would have, had his hand not been intercepted by Reza's with the slap of flesh upon flesh that sounded like thunder in the confines of the galley. Ortiz blinked and her mouth dropped open in surprise. She wasn't sure what shocked her more, that anyone would dare stand up to Stalin, who must've outweighed Reza by at least twenty kilos of murderous muscle, or the incredible speed at which Reza had moved. But what amazed her more was the inhuman strength and speed demonstrated by the younger man. Somehow, in a movement that her eyes hadn't been able to fully capture, perhaps due to the poor lighting in the galley, Reza had whirled toward Eustus and wrapped his hand around Stalin's much larger fist, stopping it in mid-strike. And was now holding it completely immobilized. The other Marines were gawking at the sight, every bit as astounded as she was, as Stalin and Reza engaged in a silent battle of wills. The Georgian stared at his smaller opponent, a smirk on his face that Ortiz knew from horrifying experience was the mask of the murderer who lurked in the man's soul. If she didn't do something fast, he would kill Reza where he stood. But something inside her, perhaps a flicker of hope for justice, or even retribution, led her to keep her silence. Around the galley, the detachment's hustlers began calling odds for bets, and the others quickly joined in. They would bet on anything from cockroach races to the outcome of battles to help save them from the tedium of shipboard routine. "Twenty to one on Stalin!" said one of the hucksters. Another scoffed. "Please! Give me a hundred to one." She was surprised when Eustus, who had taken a quick look around at the others, dug into his pocket for his pay chit. He tossed it to the oddsmaker who'd called the hundred to one odds. "Put my next month's pay on Reza," he said in an almost casual tone. "All of it." To Ortiz, he raised an eyebrow and shrugged. "My parents could use the money," he told her before turning back to watch the standoff. He obviously knows something I don't, thought Ortiz , while also wondering how any of the losers would cover such a bet if Reza won. For a moment, she almost succumbed to the urge to do the same thing. Money out here meant nothing, anyway, and doing something, anything, to help put Stalin in his place would have been incredibly gratifying. But she didn't. She was their commander, and good commanders didn't bet against any of their own. Bastard that he was and as much as she despised him, Stalin still belonged to her. The standoff continued, the two men staring at one another as Stalin sought to push Reza off balance and Reza held him at bay, almost as if the two were arm wrestling. Stalin's arm, the upper part of which was as big around as one of Ortiz's thighs, had begun to shake, and tiny beads of sweat had broken out on his forehead and upper lip. Reza, by contrast, showed no reaction at all. He stood still as a statue, not wavering in the slightest. Stalin grimaced and grunted as he tried to thrust himself forward. With slow grace, Reza repositioned one of his feet, bracing himself, but without allowing their hands to move. The confidence of the oddsmakers began to falter, and a new flurry of betting began. Most of the wagers were still in Stalin's favor, but not at such outrageous odds. Lance Corporal Davis, whom Ortiz thought of as the Harmless Lunatic, darted forward to tie a weighted string around the joined hands of the contestants. At the end hung a bullet, just above the floor. Dropping to his hands and knees, he quickly inscribed a circle in ink about the length of his forearm, with the bullet dangling over the center. Cheers went up, now that the bettors had a clear win/lose line, and even more money and personal items were tossed into the kitty. Most of them began chanting, "Stalin, Stalin, STALIN!" The chant fell to ragged silence when a cascade of wet snaps echoed through the room and Stalin, stifling a scream, went down to his knees, clutching his right hand, the one he'd been dueling with. Every finger had been broken between the knuckle and first joint. With his left hand, Stalin snatched his knife (which, Ortiz had long since noted, was a thoroughly illegal Kreelan blade) from his belt. Reza countered by drawing the short sword at his waist in a blinding flash. Stalin blinked at the glittering blade, the tip of which rested on the pulsing jugular vein in his throat. "That's enough," Ortiz ordered. She'd tried to use her command voice, but to her own ears, and much to her shame, it came out sounding like that of a terrified little girl. "Both of you, put the weapons away. You've had enough fun for now. Davis, Shiloh, get Stalin to sickbay. Now." With a nod to his opponent, Reza took a step back and sheathed his weapon. Stalin shot Ortiz a venomous look before he did the same. "Aye, lieutenant!" Davis agreed with manic enthusiasm. Shiloh, whose ancestors hailed from the Pacific island of Guam back on Earth, was huge even compared to Stalin. He stepped forward and offered Stalin a huge paw. "Don't touch me!" Stalin hissed as he got to his feet. He glared at Reza for a moment, then his mouth curled up into an ugly smile. "I'm impressed, boy. But we're not done, you and I. Not done at all." Without another word, he turned and stomped out of the galley in the direction of sickbay. Ortiz turned to Davis and Shiloh. "Go with him and make sure the crew doesn't get in his way. They should know better, but..." "Yes, ma'am," Shiloh said in his basso voice. To Davis, he said, "Come on, lunatic." "Right." Davis bobbed his head as he and the giant followed in Stalin's footsteps. "Here, asshole." Eustus looked up to see his pay chit flying through the air, and he grabbed it. "Don't get used to all that money," one of the female Marines said, in a soft, deadly voice. "We'll get it back or flay it off your hide." In twos and threes, the Marines drifted away, all of them a lot poorer than they had been just a few minutes before. "Reza," Eustus said quietly, "what the hell have we gotten ourselves into?" "Hell is the operative word," Ortiz said in a wry voice. "Come on. We need to talk." Last updated 08/31/2016 07:18 EST [Author's Note: If you see any bloopers or have observations you'd like to share, please feel free to add a comment below, and the same for subsequent chapters. Oh, and please do feel free to click the little "star" to vote. Thanks! - MRH]

 

Chapter Two

Reza considered their situation as he and Eustus followed Ortiz through the narrow passageways that led to her cabin. He had engaged in a very similar contest with his friend Washington Hawthorne just before graduating from their Marine training. Hawthorne's motive for challenging Reza was to test his own strength and skill, not because he had anything against Reza. To the contrary, Reza considered him a friend. This "Stalin," on the other hand, clearly harbored ill will toward everyone around him, relying on his strength and size to intimidate and cow his comrades and, Reza gathered, Lieutenant Ortiz. The staff sergeant had a great deal in common with the enemy Reza and Eustus had faced during their training, Captain Markus Thorella. The main difference, Reza worried, was that Stalin had a much freer hand here than Thorella had enjoyed at the academy. He was not concerned for his own safety, but for that of Eustus...and for his commander. What strange beings the humans are, he thought for the thousandth time since returning to the Confederation from his home, from his love, in the Empire. Even when faced with the threat of annihilation, the humans still found energy and excuse to quarrel among themselves. Reza was bound to them by virtue of the blood and honor that had cost him everything that he had come to hold dear, but he doubted he would ever understand them. And he knew for certain that, beyond a handful of souls like Eustus, Nicole Carré, and Jodi Mackenzie, they would never understand or truly accept him. He would forever be an alien in their eyes. The thought brought a momentary pang of sadness that he quickly banished from his mind. "In here." Ortiz pushed open the hatch to a small compartment that served as the auxiliary sickbay. It was the only space in Marine country outside of the galley where more than two people could discuss something in privacy. "Close the hatch," she snapped after Reza and Eustus had followed her in. Eustus turned and did as she asked, dogging it shut, then spun around and stood at attention with Reza. With a scowl, Ortiz said, "At ease." She looked at them for a moment, her gaze shifting between them. "Do you idiots have any idea what you've done?" Reza glanced at Eustus, then said, "I saved a fellow Marine from potentially serious injury in an unlawful assault by the unit's senior NCO. Eustus will not press charges, I am sure." Eustus nodded agreement. Ortiz buried her face in her hands and burst out laughing. "Lord of All, please save me," she said. Dropping her hands to her sides, she went on. "Sure, that's pure genius: you won't bring charges against Stalin for an assault he didn't quite have the chance to commit, then you went and broke every finger on his trigger hand. I'm going to save wondering how the hell you did that for another time. And you," she jabbed a finger at Eustus, "you're an even bigger idiot for wagering a month's pay with those cutthroats out there. A month's pay at a hundred to one? You bankrupted the lot of them for who knows how long. And you knew that Private Long Hair here would win, didn't you? It was basically a rigged bet, even though you didn't start it. Am I right?" "Yes, ma'am," Eustus said. "But I didn't take their money." "Castle was the oddsmaker you gave your pay chit to. He's a scumbag, but when it comes to honoring wagers he's solid as a rock. He gave you the damn money." Eustus shook his head. "I locked the chit. He could add money to it from the others in local mode, but the transactions will dump the next time I use mine or they use theirs to buy anything or transfer money. They haven't lost a single credit, and the only thing I took from among their personal items were a couple bars of chocolate. And those weren't for me." He shot a sidelong look at Reza. She stared at him, an incredulous expression on her face. "Why would you do that? You don't even know these clowns, let alone owe them anything." "I don't steal from people, and I'd never take anything from a fellow Marine."

"That probably — probably — saved you from having an unfortunate fatal accident in the airlock." She leaned back against one of the sickbeds and folded her arms across her chest. "I've gotta tell you, you came to the wrong place to be a paragon of virtue, Private Camden." Eustus grinned. "Oh, I'm not that, ma'am." He hooked a thumb toward Reza. "He is." Reza favored him with a look of annoyance. Ortiz shifted her attention to Reza. "A paragon of virtue, huh?" "I make no such claim, lieutenant." She pursed her lips, then asked, "So, is it true, all that stuff on the news? You being brought up by the Kreelans and all that?" Reza nodded. "It is so." "If you'd been there all that time, why'd you bother coming back? You were an orphan without any family, right? What was the point? Why didn't you just stay there?" Hers were fair questions, and this was not the first time they had been asked. Even so, every word still cut him to the depths of his soul. "It was a matter of honor," he told her softly. "I made a vow when I first reached the Empire that I would not bring war to my own kind. For that, the Empress banished me." He would have liked to tell her how much he had sacrificed, but she could not understand, even had she believed him. No human could. "Bully for you. Now for the real question, which sort of gets back to our friend Stalin's concern: are you a spy? Are you going to stab my Marines in the back when they're counting on you?" "Your Marines are also my brothers and sisters in arms now," Reza told her, fighting to keep a rising tide of anger from his voice. Always, his honor and motives were questioned. His blood was beginning to burn, yet no voices sang to him, filling him with the spirit and will of the Empress and the symphony of souls of Her people. The Bloodsong within him, the spiritual bond that united the Kreela, had been silenced. Even now, after all this time, the palpable sense of loneliness was an agony to bear. Focus, priest of the Desh-Ka, he told himself. She does not understand what you are, and she, like the others, fears what she does not understand. "I swear to you that I will protect them to my last breath, at the cost of my life." He drew his dagger and, closing his left hand around it, drew the blade across his palm. A small trickle of blood fell and spattered on the floor. "In Her name, it shall be so." Wiping the blade across his sleeve, he replaced it in its scabbard at his waist. "Holy shit," Ortiz whispered. "You're as crazy as Davis." Shaking her head, whether in disgust or disbelief, Reza wasn't sure, she grabbed a tube of liquid bandage spray and said, "Here, give me your hand. Open your fist, dammit." Reza did as she asked, and observed quietly as she first cleaned the wound with an antiseptic pad, then sprayed the bandage over the cut. In only a few seconds it had set, acting like an artificial skin. "That's deep," she said, frowning. "I want you to have the ship's surgeon look at it." "It is no matter," Reza told her. "It will heal in a few days." "This?" She said, pointing to the cut. "Healed in a few days? I can see bone in there, Reza." He smiled, gratified that she had used his first name. Eustus answered for him. "I give him three days to heal. Four days, tops." She tossed the bandage tube and used antiseptic pad in the trash chute. "Whatever. But if you start another wager, Camden, I'll flush you out the airlock myself." "Lieutenant," Reza said, "may I ask you a question?" "You can ask all you want. Maybe I'll answer it."

Reza stood there, an uncertain look on his face. Rolling her eyes, Ortiz said, "That's a sarcastic way of saying go ahead, private." Eustus and Reza shared a look, and Eustus shrugged. "Yes, ma'am," Reza said. "I was wondering, why are you in the Red Legion? You are not like the others here." Ortiz laughed. It wasn't a happy sound; it was sad, bitter. "I wish I could tell you, Reza. I worked hard at the academy and did pretty damn well, if I do say so myself. But orders are orders, and my orders sent me here, just like yours sent you." "Then perhaps we have something in common, after all," Reza told her quietly. "Maybe," she granted. "I've got to admit that I'd sure love to have a couple of people I can really count on if the shit hits the fan, someone who can watch my back." A shadow of fear clouded her expression. "I think the only reason I'm still alive is that Stalin happens to like me for some reason. He treats me like a pet, and the others are too afraid of him to touch me. But eventually I'm going to do something that puts me on his shit list, and when that day comes my life is over. Today might very well have been that day." She let out a breath. "All I want to do is be a good officer and a good Marine, not the victim of some murderous lunatic." She stared at Eustus, and then Reza. "So what do you say? Can I count on the two of you?" "Yes, lieutenant," the two men answered in unison. "I'm going to hold you to that," she said with the faintest trace of hope in her voice. "Ma'am," Eustus asked, "why don't you just bring Stalin up on charges and send him back to prison?" "I can't," she said. Ortiz narrowed her eyes at his confused expression. "You didn't know, did you?" "Know what?" Eustus asked. "The standard articles of military justice are suspended in the Red Legion," she explained. "As their commanding officer during wartime I can administer corporal punishment of my choice, or even summarily execute them if I want to. The only thing I can't do is send them back to prison where they belong. And there's something else you should keep in mind: they don't send these guys to the Marine Corps Academy on Quantico 17 or any of the other regular training facilities. They send them to Quantico 9." Reza frowned. The Marine Corps had twenty-six designated "Quantico" facilities spread throughout the Confederation, most of them designated for various types of specialized training. The largest of them was Quantico 17. "Quantico 9 is a logistics base, is it not? On a planet with a low pressure atmosphere?" Ortiz nodded. "It is. And on the far side of that planet, thousands of kilometers of lethal terrain from the logistics base, is the training facility that turns these guys from cons into something that sort of resembles a Marine. And casualties during training, as you might imagine, are high." She didn't have to add that casualties in combat were far higher: that was common knowledge throughout the Corps. Eustus frowned. "Which means that the system weeds out all the weak or less violent ones that might be easier to command." "Exactly," Ortiz agreed. "The men and women you'll find in the Red Legion are the survivors, the hardest of the hard core. Most of them are hellacious fighters, but sociopaths have a bit of a difficult time fighting as a cohesive unit. In the Corps' infinite wisdom, the Legion is then leavened with regular Marines, mostly to fill the officer slots like mine. Most of them have been court-martialed and are given a second chance in the Legion." She grimaced. "And some, like you and me, just get tossed into the meat grinder to meet the quota of some pencil pusher at Corps HQ." "Our coming here wasn't random," Eustus muttered. "Why do you say that?" "Thorella," the two men said in unison. "He was our bane on Quantico 17," Eustus added.

Ortiz wrinkled her nose in disgust. "They made that pig an instructor at the academy?" "Do you know him?" Reza asked. "Only by reputation, which is bad enough. Jesus." She glanced at her wrist com. "All right, I guess we've screwed off long enough. I've got to get my weekly reports filed and you boys need to get yourselves settled in." She fixed them both with a hard look. "And watch your backs." "Yes, ma'am!" As Ortiz made her way past them toward the hatch, Reza touched her arm. As she looked up at him, he told her, "I will allow no harm to come to you." She smiled. "I appreciate the thought, but that's not a promise you can make, Reza." As she opened the hatch and stepped out, he said quietly after her, "Yes, I believe I can." *** After finding their assigned bunks in one of the three cramped squad bays, they stowed their gear in their assigned lockers before locking them shut. "Hey! Camden!" Eustus and Reza both looked up to see Castle, the oddsmaker, standing at the end of the bay with Shiloh looming behind him. "What do you want?" Eustus asked. "You didn't cash the bet. How come?" "I didn't want to steal your stupid money." Castle glanced at Shiloh, who raised his thick eyebrows in surprise. "Nobody's gonna love you for that, you know. Like you think they weren't gonna pay up. We always pay up." "Okay, you're right," Eustus said, stepping up to him, nose to nose. "I did the whole thing just to make a point, which was obviously lost on all of you." "And what point was that, Mr. Professor?" "That you never bet against Reza. Ever." Reza took a step forward, "Eustus..." "Oh, yeah?" Castle looked over Eustus's shoulder at Reza, then laughed. "I guess we'll see about that. See ya around, Marines." As he and Shiloh left, Reza came to stand beside Eustus. "I do not think that helped." "I know," Eustus said with a downcast expression. "I don't think I like this place very much." "You have a knack for understatement, my friend. Come, let us see if anything in the galley is edible, and if anyone knows how to properly cook meat." As it turned out, the food was passably good, thanks to the Navy cooks in the main galley who sent the food down in a dumb waiter after the Marines placed their order. A few of the other Marines were there playing cards with a battered deck. They gave Eustus and Reza cold stares before turning back to their game. The pair sat down at the table farthest away from the others, near a freshly painted bulkhead along the outer hull. Just as Reza was about to put a chunk of perfectly rare meat into his mouth, Davis, the lunatic, hustled over and sat down with them. "New guys," he said to the salt shaker after he snatched it out of Eustus's hand. "New guys. Love new guys. Don't you?" The salt shaker must have replied, because Davis went on, "I know, I know! I wish they weren't dead meat. That's how it goes sometimes, though. Much better when we get new guys replacing guys who made their time and can leave this chicken shit outfit. That doesn't happen very often, does it? No, not often at all. More like never." "What do you mean by dead meat?" Reza asked as Eustus tried, unsuccessfully, to grab the salt shaker from Davis's hand. The man's limbs were constantly in motion, his feet tapping, his hands — fork in one, salt shaker in the other — moving restlessly in random directions, his head bobbing to and fro as if he were listening to music no one else could hear. He simply couldn't keep still. "They just don't know, do they?" Davis asked the shaker in a sad voice, ignoring Reza's question. "No, they don't. Dead meat." Reza narrowed his eyes in surprise when he realized that he could sense Davis's emotions almost as well as he could his sisters in the Empire before his empathic link was severed. He could sense the emotions of other humans, as well, but at best they were like a very faint scent on the wind. What puzzled him was that he hadn't felt Davis's emotions earlier. It was like a switch had been thrown. Reaching out, Reza laid his hand on the man's arm. Davis stiffened and his eyes went wide, his head whipping around toward Reza. "Be calm," Reza whispered. "You are among friends here." "Friends," Davis repeated. His eyes blinked, then his gaze locked with Reza's. The random movements of his body ceased. "I don't have any friends here," he said in a dreamy voice, as if he'd been drugged. "No one does." "You do now," Reza reassured him. He could sense in Davis an ocean of suppressed pain. "He must've taken some sort of medication," Eustus whispered. "He wasn't like this when we met him." "Palaniadone three times a day," Davis said in a mechanical voice, "Dexatrine, Hypertromazine, Tri-oxyalanadone, Melanazine, two aspirins, and a laxative once a day, every day." He blinked. "The laxative is the only one I like." "What happens if you don't take all that?" Eustus asked him. Davis's face flinched as if Eustus had slapped him. "Bad things," Davis whispered. His hands began to tremble and tears welled in his eyes. "Bad things." Reza sensed a huge wave rising from the ocean of torment within Davis's tortured soul. "There are no bad things here," Reza assured him in a soft voice. "There is no pain, no fear." "No pain...no fear," Davis echoed, and the trembling ceased. The ocean within him gradually stilled. "What did you mean that we were dead meat?" Reza asked him again, hoping the question would not trigger another emotional tidal wave. "When Marines die," Davis said, "more come to replace them. The living replace the dead, on and on, forever and ever." His gaze shifted to the hull where the paint was new, and a single tear rolled down his cheek. "Right here, right where you're sitting, they died. My last two friends. They were sitting right here when the enemy destroyer appeared, opening fire on our ship. No warning." He pointed at the hull. "Out they went, right through there. The only thing left of them was blood on the edges of the hole. Dead meat. We'd all have died if a cruiser hadn't been with us. It killed the destroyer, but couldn't save my friends. They were the only two we lost. And I couldn't help them. I wasn't here." His eyes focused on Reza, as if truly seeing him for the first time. "That's why I can't have any more friends. They all die. You'll die. Soon. And I'll be all alone again." Blinking his eyes as if he were waking up, Davis looked down at his plate. "I'm not hungry anymore," he announced in a tired voice. Reza let him go as Davis stood up and slowly shuffled toward the passageway, dumping his uneaten food in the waste chute as he went. Reza looked at the meat still stuck on the end of his fork. A drop of crimson fell from the nearly raw steak to splash on his plate. With a sigh, he set it down. "Yeah," Eustus said, dropping his own fork into the untouched mashed potatoes before pushing away his tray. He looked at the hull beside him. "Damn." Please give this chapter a vote if you enjoyed it by clicking on the star... :-) Updated with changes as of 09/0616 at 15:10 EST

 

Chapter Three

Meals were the highlights of a typical day for the Marines, because eating was a brief escape from their otherwise boring routine. As the others queued up in the chow line, Reza and Eustus read over the standing orders posted on the communal board which hung at the aft entrance to the galley. "So," Eustus summarized, "we're basically stuck in Marine Country except for damage control drills where we learn to help the squids keep the ship from blowing up, or when general quarters sounds and we have to hop in our armor and do God knows what. Reading between the lines from the captain's orders, we're basically in an oversized brig." "It appears that way," Reza said, unable to keep the disappointment from his voice. "I must confess that this is not exactly what I was expecting." "At least we have PT with Stalin every morning except for Sunday to keep us entertained," Eustus added with a grimace as he read over the rather imaginative physical tortures that lay in store for the coming week. "That should be interesting." "It will probably be the closest you will ever want to come to combat," Reza told him. Leaning closer, he pointed to a series of quotes from the Holy Bible, one for each day of the week, that had been posted by Stalin. "What are these?" "Daily devotions to help us get through our trials and tribulations?" Eustus shook his head in bewilderment. "I never would've figured him for a godly man. Luckily for us, he should be out of action for a bit, so maybe Lieutenant Ortiz can—" "No," Reza said, turning around to face the passageway that came from the forward part of the ship where sickbay was located. While he had kept his second sight on Ortiz, watching over her like an alien guardian angel, he could sense Stalin's approach. "We are not that lucky." "Comrades!" Stalin grinned as he strode forward like they were all the best of friends. "Look. Look!" He held up his right hand, the fingers of which Reza had broken earlier. Eustus tensed. Reza put a restraining hand on his arm. "The ship's surgeon did not put it in a cast," Stalin explained. He flexed the hand slightly, showing a circular wound patched with liquid bandage just below the first knuckle of each finger. "He set the fingers, then drove thick surgical steel pins through the broken bones. Stahl, da? Stalin...steel!" He clapped Reza on the shoulder. "I should have you break the fingers of my other hand so he can make them all the same, yes?" He leaned closer and said in a soft voice, "And maybe I will let you do that after this hand has healed, and before I skin you alive." With another gleaming smile, he playfully slapped Eustus on the cheek, then went to take his place at the head of the chow line, cutting in front of everyone else while showing off his new enhancement. "You know," Eustus said, considering, "Thorella was a terrible human being. Evil, even. But he wasn't a lunatic. This guy is bad and a nutcase." "It is all an act for their benefit," Reza told him, nodding his head toward the other Marines who crowded around their platoon sergeant. "He is not a...nutcase, as you called him. He is a ferocious predator in a chameleon skin, probably more dangerous than Thorella. Do not ever forget that." "I won't, believe me," Eustus said. "I'm just glad you're here. If I had to deal with him and the rest of these jokers on my own..." He shook his head. "We are brothers, you and I. We shall always be so." With a grimace, he added, "Come, let us see if we can get something to eat this time without Davis spoiling our appetites." "Amen to that." They joined the end of the line, which seemed to move at a glacial pace as food was served down the dumb waiter from the main kitchen. 

Reza felt someone fall in behind him, could sense the hatred like heat from a flame. Turning around, he found himself facing a female Marine, as tall and broad-shouldered as he was. Her skin was black, a shade not unlike Washington Hawthorne's, and was covered in tattoos of intricate geometric designs. Her face, neck, arms...every centimeter of exposed skin was tattooed. She pointed at his collar. "You dress like them," she said in a voice that was much higher than Reza would have guessed, the Jamaican accent overlaid with fiery anger. "You wear your hair like them. The news said you talk like them and think like them." She leaned toward him, her nostrils flaring. "You even smell like them. You've got nerve coming here, wearing our uniform. You fucking traitor." "That's enough, Sergeant Walker." Lieutenant Ortiz stepped up behind her. "He's already gotten that lecture." With a look at Reza, she added, "More than once, I'm sure." "I don't trust him," Walker hissed. "You don't have to," Ortiz told her in a voice that was hard as steel. "You just have to follow orders. And I'm ordering you to stow that shit." "Yes, ma'am." Walker's voice was icy. "I'll come back later." Tossing her tray back into the bin, she stalked out of the galley. Ortiz watched her go, then turned back to Reza. "Her whole family was killed in a Kreelan attack. Her parents, husband, and two little kids, all of them put to the sword." "I grieve for her," Reza said softly. He had been deeply conflicted about Kreelan warriors killing children and the helpless, or anyone else who was not a warrior and could not raise a hand against Her Children in battle. It brought the Empress no honor, no glory, to slaughter the weak and innocent. But the Empress did not yet see them as beings with souls, for their blood did not sing. Humans were no more than animals in Her eyes, and it was a source of tremendous grief in his soul. The only thing he could do was to survive and hope against hope that someday he would be reunited with Esah-Zhurah, and that somehow he could convince the Empress that the slaughter must be stopped. But that would not happen today, and perhaps it would never happen at all. "I grieve for all of them." "Doesn't do them much good, does it?" Ortiz said as she moved past him and Eustus as the line shuffled forward. "That's not fair, lieutenant," Eustus told her. "Nothing in this life is fair, private, or haven't you noticed?" She glared at Eustus, then at Reza. After a moment, she shook her head. "I'm sorry. Mood swings. They're hard to avoid when we're all stuck aboard a tin can like this. Sleeping in a bunk that smells like dirty socks, not being allowed any room to move, let alone do real PT, and putting up with the squids treating us like the shit that comes out of the heads when they back up, which is about every two days." She snorted. "It's bad enough for the regular Marine detachments, but ten times worse for Legion units when the ship's captain doesn't trust us." She gestured at the rabble of convicts ahead of them in line. "And I don't blame him. I sure as hell wouldn't." Looking at the men and women ahead of them, she added, "It's a wonder we all don't just poke our eyes out to see if we can still feel anything." "Lieutenant," Eustus asked, "are we ever going to see action? I mean, other than just being blown to bits if the ship gets hit? Or are we just going to sit in this prison for the duration?" "Be careful what you wish for, private." Ortiz finally reached the ordering screen and looked over the choices for what the kitchen was serving up. "Hey! They've got enchiladas today, boys. Heaven awaits, 'cause sure as shit eating them'll kill you." She punched a few buttons on the screen, ordering the enchiladas anyway. "According to the logs of my deceased predecessor, which was a continuation of the log of his deceased predecessor, Leander has been in sixteen different engagements and managed to survive, which is pretty amazing in itself. But in the process, the entire complement of our detachment except for Stalin, Walker, and Davis has been killed off and replaced twice over. Once when the ship was attacked by boarders — and that doesn't happen often these days to warships — eight times when our detachment was sent aboard damaged civilian vessels to try to save the crews or passengers or fight off enemy warriors, and seven times during assaults on ground objectives in company with detachments from other ships. That, of course, doesn't include the casualties inflicted when the ship's taken enemy fire. The count so far is five engagements where Marines died." She shrugged. "This ship has the luck of the Irish, but it doesn't extend to us grunts."

The reference to the luck of the Irish meant nothing to Reza, for he had no idea who the Irish might be or why they were so lucky, but he understood her point nonetheless. Her meal appeared when the door opened on the dumbwaiter. She grabbed the plates and put them on her tray. Lifting the tray up, she sniffed at the enchiladas. "They smell like old socks. But you can eat anything with enough hot sauce." *** The rest of that first week aboard Leander passed without further incident. Stalin's physical training regimen was just as brutal as Reza had predicted, weapons training was mind-numbingly boring but took up lots of time, and the Marines happily rushed to their stations during damage control drills like rats freed from a cage to enjoy the brief period of relief from the monotony of their quarters. Stalin and Ortiz managed to fill up the rest of the Marines' time with a mixture of make-work and training. Beyond that, the Marines entertained themselves with gambling, watching movie reruns, reading, or, on occasion, fighting. Stalin would let them duke it out when an argument got physical, waiting until Ortiz appeared and put an end to it. The other Marines, except for Davis and occasionally Ortiz, ignored Reza and Eustus, and they returned the favor. By the end of the second week, Reza was coming down with what Eustus called "cabin fever." The problem was that Reza had no safe outlet to express his frustrations: one simply did not release an irritable priest of the Desh-Ka upon a group of unsuspecting humans without devastating consequences. Finally, fearing that he might do something dreadful, he brought his concern to Ortiz. "I need some open space for sword training," Reza told her. "Try opening an airlock," she said. "You'll have all the space you could ever need." "Please, lieutenant. This is not a joking matter. You do not want me going off, as you might say, on anyone." She folded her arms and narrowed her eyes. "When I asked you and Camden to watch my ass, figuratively speaking, that wasn't an invitation to ask for special privileges." Reza clenched his fists in frustration, trying to stem the tide of fury that had been roiling in his blood. He knew this was beneath him, that a warrior such as he should be able to endure whatever trial was set before him. Perhaps that was how he should view his current situation, he thought. It was a trial, and one that the warriors who raised him, Tesh-Dar most of all, would have looked upon as trivial, at best. The thought of Tesh-Dar shamed him. His mother in spirit if not in flesh, she had entrusted him with the gift of her powers and the trust of her heart, just as she had to Esah-Zhurah. And what would Esah-Zhurah, his love, think of his pitiful mewling? She would have whipped you when we were but young, he thought, with a sad smile. Bowing his head to Ortiz, he said, "I am sorry for being so selfish, lieutenant. Please forgive me. Permission to return to my bunk?" "Permission denied." Reza's eyebrows raised in an unspoken question. "As it turns out," she told him, "the captain was looking for some helping hands to scrape rust from the auxiliary water tank. It's about the size of our entire galley. If you'd care to volunteer for the duty, I probably wouldn't be annoyed if you took a little extra time to play with your sword. You're excused from regular duty while you're doing that." She leaned forward, poking Reza in the chest with an index finger. "But don't screw off in there. If the captain's not happy about the job you're doing, I'll lock you in and fill it back up with water. Got it?" "Yes, lieutenant!" Reza said, relieved. "Thank you." Ortiz snorted. "You won't be thanking me after you find out what a nasty job it is. No one else would volunteer for it, even for the chance to get out of our shoebox for a while. And take Camden with you. He looks like a lost puppy any time you're not with him."

The lieutenant had not been exaggerating, Reza thought later as he and Eustus used grinders and scrapers to clean the inside of the water tank. It shouldn't have rusted, the Navy chief who instructed them on the job had said, but it had been made out of inferior grade steel. Since replacing it would have required an extended stay in dry dock, the Navy had simply decided to use good old fashioned elbow grease to take care of the problem. And so, every two months, the tank was drained and a small team was sent down to clean it out. That small team this time around comprised Reza and Eustus. "Hey down there!" Reza, even with his acute senses, had barely heard the shout over the noise of the two grinders. He switched his off and turned to see the chief peering down at them through the access hatch. He gestured for Eustus to shut off his grinder. "Shift is over, jarheads." He took a closer look at their work. "Not bad. Maybe in another week you'll have it finished." Then he disappeared. "Another week?" Eustus moaned, setting down the grinder and stretching his muscles. "I'm going to die in here." Reza frowned. Only a week? He was hoping his opportunity for some open space would have lasted longer, but he would have to take what he could get, as Eustus would say. "I'm starving," Eustus said. "I'm going to grab some chow." "Do not wait for me," Reza told him as he knelt down beside a duffle bag that he'd put in one corner of the cavernous tank. "I may be a while. And be careful." "No worries." Eustus climbed the access ladder and closed the hatch behind him. Opening the duffle, Reza carefully pulled out his Kreelan ceremonial armor. After removing his human clothes, he knelt beside the stack of armor plate and black undergarment. Then, in the time-honored ritual, he began to transform into his Kreelan guise. This was the first time he'd been able to wear his armor since they'd left the academy, and with every piece he slipped on, he felt more himself. The warrior priest standing in gleaming black armor with the Desh-Ka rune in glowing cyan on the breast plate, this was his true self. Taking up the great sword that bore his name and that of Esah-Zhurah, inscribed on the blade as part of a poetic tale of their lives as written by Pan'ne-Sharakh, he began the movements he had first learned as a boy at Esah-Zhurah's side. He moved with liquid grace, the shimmering blade tracing arcs and lines through the air as he cut and thrust, his mind lost in the quest for perfection of each movement. While the sword was truly among the least of the weapons possessed by a Desh-Ka priest, mastery of the blade was also the foundation upon which all other skills were built. The labor of stripping rust from the innards of the water tank had served to warm up his body, and so he quickly dispensed with the simpler drills and moved on to those that became far more complex; the simplest of them was achievable by a master (or mistress) of the sword who was not a priest. But any one of the  movements that came after, that he had learned during the strange dream state while he had been in the great arena with Tesh-Dar and Esah-Zhurah, would have taken a normal swordsman a lifetime to master. The knowledge seemed to trickle into his mind during his dreams, there becoming memories. But he knew he had learned so much more in that instant, those long years, when the Desh-Ka Crystal of Souls had touched him with cyan fire. He could sense a great mountain of knowledge, of skills, behind an invisible barrier in his mind, like water behind a high dam. Try as he might, he could not reach past that barrier on his own. Memories came to him as they willed, as if some ethereal keeper controlled the flow. Perhaps, Reza thought as he whirled and slashed, that might not be so far from the truth. Could the Empress somehow still be guiding him, even with the Braid of the Covenant severed? Or perhaps the Ancient Ones who dwelled in the place beyond death? He still had so many questions, and no one to provide any answers. He was nearing the conclusion of the Third Challenge, a collection of movements combining sword and claw that were as intricate as they were deadly, when Ortiz opened the hatch and looked inside the tank. He had known she was coming, of course, for his second sight was always upon her, even when he slept. "Holy shit," she breathed as she watched him, or tried to. His blade was moving faster than the human eye could see. She knelt beside the hatch, watching him with wide eyes, as he finished the final movement. Climbing down into the tank, she came toward him. He could sense curiosity and fear warring within her, but curiosity finally won out. "Okay," she said. "Next time we're dirtside and go to some sleazy bar to get drunk and fight, you're definitely coming with me." Reza bowed his head. "As you wish, lieutenant, although alcohol does not affect me quite like it does you." "I didn't mean it literally, Reza. Or maybe I did." She looked up at him, trying to see behind his eyes, into his soul. "You really don't understand us, do you?" He managed a smile. "I am learning. Or trying to." Ortiz stepped closer. "After all that samurai stuff you were doing, you're not even breathing hard, and there's not a trace of sweat on your skin." She raised a hand to his neck, gently putting two fingers over his carotid artery, just above his collar. "Your heart rate is maybe seventy beats per minute, if that." "It should be slower," Reza lamented, looking down at his sword as Ortiz withdrew her hand, her fingers lingering for just a moment on the black living metal of his Collar of Honor. "It is hard for me to concentrate properly without..." He was about to say without the Bloodsong, but he knew it was something she could not understand. "Can't find your groove, huh?" "Something like that." She was about to say something more when the ship's klaxon began to blare. "General quarters," the tense voice of the executive officer, the XO, boomed through the passageway beyond the hatch. "General quarters, man your battle stations!" "Oh, crap," Ortiz breathed. "Here we go." Please give this chapter a vote if you enjoyed it by clicking on the star... :-)
 Updated 08/21/2016 07:27 EST

 

Chapter Four

As Ortiz dashed to the ladder, Reza turned to retrieve his uniform. "There's no time for that!" Ortiz shouted. She snorted as she began to climb. "Come as you are, Marine!" "Yes, lieutenant." Reza could not imagine what the others would say when they saw him in his Kreelan regalia. They will see you as you truly are, he thought. Whirling around, he turned to follow her. When he reached the passageway above, he slammed and locked the hatch behind him, then took off after Ortiz. The lieutenant, while much shorter, ran at an impressive speed through the narrow equipment- and cable-festooned passageway. She barely had to duck her head when she darted through the bulkhead hatches, encouraged by the shouts of the sailors who were responsible for making sure all the hatches, even the automatic ones, were closed to isolate the various compartments in case Leander was hit. "Move it, Marines!" one such sailor shouted. Then he caught sight of Reza. "Move...it..." The man's mouth fell open  and his eyes flew wide with surprise as Reza flew past him. "He's with me!" Ortiz yelled over her shoulder, not bothering to so much as slow down. "Now close the goddamn hatch!" She kept repeating "He's with me!" to other sailors they passed who were heading for their own battle stations. One of them whipped around so suddenly that he banged into a conduit junction box and went sprawling. Reza stopped long enough to haul him to his feet and propel him in the direction the sailor had been going before taking off after Ortiz again. Despite the serious nature of going to general quarters, Reza found he was grinning. This was the closest he'd come to being able to run free since he and Eustus left the academy, and it brought back bittersweet memories of running through the forests of the Homeworld with Esah-Zhurah in his youth. Ortiz shot through the aft hatch of the galley, which was the Marine detachment's assembly point during general quarters. From there, the captain would give them specific orders if necessary. Otherwise they worked with the damage control parties under the guidance of the XO. "Lieutenant!" It was Stalin, holding the upper half of Ortiz's battle armor, while Davis held the lower half. They had already suited up, as had the other Marines, who were quickly drawing their weapons from the arms locker.  "Kreelan!" Walker, who stood beside Davis, cried, bringing up her rifle as Reza entered the galley on Ortiz's heels. "Hold your fire!" Ortiz screamed. She skidded to a stop in front of Walker, grabbing the rifle's muzzle and pointing it toward the ceiling. "He was demonstrating some things about Kreelan armor and weapons for me," she lied, loud enough to be heard throughout the galley. "On my orders. Understand?" "Yes, ma'am," Walker said through clenched teeth, her gaze boring holes into Reza. "You must get in your armor, lieutenant," Stalin said. Pausing just a moment to make sure Walker wasn't going to act on her impulses, Ortiz stepped into the lower half of the vacuum-proof battle armor, helped by Davis. Then she bent over and held out her arms, wriggling into the upper half of the suit held by Stalin. Davis latched the waist couplings, after which Walker set — slammed might have been more accurate — the helmet in place and latched it. "Reza," Eustus called in a worried voice. "Your armor!" Confused for just a moment, Reza glanced down, thinking something was amiss with the armor he wore. "No, your other armor!" Eustus cried, pointing at the locker where Reza's battle armor was stored. "Marine detachment to the cutter, on the double!" The XO's order came over both the galley PA system and the individual suit radios. 

"Gard, stay here," Stalin ordered. "You can't fit into your battle armor wearing...that." Ortiz shot Reza an unhappy look and nodded agreement. "Marines, by squads to the cutter!" Turning toward the forward hatchway, which still stood open, Ortiz led the others out at a trot in single file, their armored feet hammering in time on the metal deck. Eustus shot Reza a look of helpless misery as he fell into his place in the first squad, which was led by Davis. Reza stood there a moment, glaring at the Marine battle armor that hung in its locker. He debated stripping out of his Kreelan armor and donning the vac suit, but even as fast as he was, he probably couldn't catch the others before they boarded the cutter. The passageway to the boarding gangway was only fifteen meters forward of the galley hatch, and Ortiz was probably stepping aboard the compact ship now. Making up his mind, he followed after them, palming the switch to close the forward galley hatch behind him as he went. He would rather face Ortiz's wrath than be left behind. *** Eustus was terrified. Except for the time he had saved Reza when Reza's combat suit had malfunctioned in a training accident, he had never before faced a do or die situation. No one had ever tried to kill him, nor had he ever had to kill anything more than the deer he sometimes hunted back home to put meat on his family's table. He also no longer looked at the Kreelans as nothing more than alien killing machines. His view of them as faceless enemies of humanity had forever changed after he'd gotten to know Reza. Reza didn't talk much about his time in the Empire, but he had revealed enough, especially about his love for Esah-Zhurah, that Eustus had come to think of the Kreelans as people. He knew that he was being naive, and that any Kreelan warrior he encountered wouldn't bat an eye at taking off his head. He also couldn't help it. "You'll do your duty," he whispered to himself. "Just aim and pull the trigger...kill or be killed..." "Camden, you're on the detachment push," Ortiz snapped. Eustus died right there from total embarrassment. Every one of the Marines had heard his little self-pep talk. The radio channel was momentarily filled with sniggers and guffaws from the other Marines. "Shut the hell up, all of you," Ortiz growled. "Get your heads in the game." A moment later she added, "SITREP from the captain! This is a search and rescue mission. A convoy was ambushed and a passenger liner got hit pretty bad. The Kreelan ships were driven off by the escorts, but warriors boarded the liner and some of the freighters. Leander is answering the convoy's distress call." Stalin was standing by at the hatch as the last of the Marines stepped aboard, counting to make sure everyone was accounted for. The cutter's crew chief stood beside him, his hand hovering over the button to close the hatch. "That is all, lieutenant," Stalin called over the radio, "except for—" Reza strode on board, his armor reflecting the cutter's overhead lights like a black mirror. The crew chief's jaw dropped and he went for his sidearm. Stalin grabbed the man's hand and shook his head  as he favored Reza with disbelieving look. "Dammit, Gard," Ortiz shouted. "I told you..." She realized that he wouldn't be able to hear her over the radio, since he wasn't wearing one, and her voice wouldn't carry past the helmet. "Goddammit," she cursed to herself as she switched on the suit's PA system. "I told you to stay aboard the ship!" "I must respectfully disobey, lieutenant." Looking at the panel beside the crew chief, Reza reached over and hit the control to close the hatch behind him. "We are wasting time."

While Eustus was tremendously relieved that Reza was with them, he was also afraid for his friend. Switching on his PA, he said, "Reza, what if we have to fight in vacuum?" "Then he'll have to hold his breath," Walker said in an acid voice. Ortiz came up to him, a look of fury on her face. "I'm not going to endanger the lives of the others for your stupidity," she told him. "I told you to stay on the ship for your own damn good, as well as theirs." She reached out and poked his breast armor, right in the center of the cyan rune, with an armored index finger. "You disobey my orders again and I'll shoot you right between the eyes. Understand, private?" Reza bowed his head. "I understand, lieutenant." Then he looked her in the eye. "I came because I believe I can help, perhaps more than you realize might be possible." "I—" Whatever Ortiz had intended to say was lost as Leander, with the cutter still docked, shuddered, and a dull boom echoed through the ship. That was followed by the unmistakable thrum of the ship's main energy weapons firing. Ortiz was nearly thrown from her feet and would have fallen had Reza not grabbed her and, in one smooth motion, pushed her into one of the stand-up restraints the Marines used for combat drops. "Take your stations!" Ortiz shouted as she nodded a silent thanks to Reza, who flipped down the restraint bar. "More Kreelan ships just jumped in!" The handful of Marines who weren't already strapped in did so, and Reza followed suit. He was opposite Stalin, who stared at him with emotionless eyes, a smile plastered on his face. Beside Stalin and closest to the hatch was the crew chief, who looked at Reza with a mixture of distaste and disbelief. "Stand by," the cutter's pilot announced in an anxious voice. A moment later the cutter was cut loose from Leander with a loud clang. "Maneuvering," the pilot announced. Reza wondered why she bothered to say that, for the Marines could see nothing. Being on the cutter was like being on a smaller rendition of the corvette; the Marines were blind and deaf inside a metal can, with no idea of what might be going on beyond the walls of their cage save for what the captain and crew might happen to tell them. It was a state of enforced ignorance that Reza found most unsettling. The Marines also had no sensation of motion as the cutter maneuvered, due to the effects of the ship's artificial gravity and inertial dampers. Without them, the cutter would have only been able to accelerate and turn at a fraction of its true capabilities without turning its human passengers into bloody paste. However, the Marines could definitely feel the sharp kick of a near miss, which was accompanied by curses from the pilot and copilot. "Stand by!" The crew chief called, raising a hand with two fingers in the air. "Two minutes!" The hull reverberated with a deep thrum and the artificial gravity fluctuated. "We've been hit!" cried the pilot. Above the Marines, the metal plating turned red hot in a line that ran halfway across the compartment and a shower of sparks erupted from an electrical conduit that melted under the heat. "Energy weapon grazed us," the crew chief said. Looking again at Reza, he said, "For your sake, I hope the hull doesn't blow out." "Do not worry about me," Reza assured him. The man laughed. "Believe me, I'm not." Then he shouted, "One minute! Exit the rear hatch!" "It's time, Marines!" Ortiz shouted. In unison, the restraints lifted and the Marines stepped out into the cargo area. Led by Ortiz and Stalin, they quickly formed into two lines facing the rearward hatch. Reza took his place behind Eustus. All of them reached for the safety lines that ran fore and aft above their heads. 

"I feel like I'm going to puke," Eustus said quietly over the PA after making sure he wasn't on the unit push. "You will be fine," Reza reassured him. "Yeah, right. You know that most casualties in boarding actions happen when the boat's about to dock and we're not in our restraints? If our cutter gets hammered and the dampers go out, we get splattered on the walls." "No warriors are near the airlock the pilot is approaching," Reza told him, "and the Imperial warships are otherwise occupied." "I wish I knew how the hell you know things like that," Eustus replied with a weak smile. A jolt ran through the cutter as it made forceful contact with the passenger liner's airlock. After checking the control panel, the crew chief announced, "Good seal, good atmosphere! Good luck, Marines!" Then he hit the button to open the hatch, and the twenty Marines prepared to charge forward into the stricken passenger ship. *** As the door opened, the lead Marines collided with a mob of screaming passengers who'd gathered at the airlock, hoping for a ship to come to their rescue. "Get back!" Ortiz screamed over her PA as the terrified civilians began to punch, kick, and claw their way past the Marines to reach the relative safety of the cutter. "We'll get you all off, but we can't take you all at once!" That only made the passengers more determined to be among the first to get off the stricken ship. Stalin raised his rifle, pointing it at the passengers over the shoulders of the Marines in the front rank. "No!" Ortiz made a grab for his weapon, then stumbled and went down as the Marines in front were shoved back by the crowd, knocking her over. Those Marines, in turn, tripped over Ortiz and fell as the passengers surged forward. Stalin and the others were swept aside as the civilians flooded aboard the boat... ...and came to an abrupt halt as they came face to face with Reza, who stood before them in his gleaming armor, his great sword of living metal drawn. Brandishing the sword over his head, he let out a blood-curdling war cry that echoed above the screams and shouts. "The Kreelans are in here!" a woman shrieked. "They're in the ship!" another one bellowed in terror. "The Blues have taken the ship!" In unison, they whirled around and began pushing back against their companions who were still trying to force their way aboard. The momentum of the boarders quickly waned as more and more of them picked up on the shrill screams that the Kreelans were in the cutter. Like a school of fish that had encountered a hungry shark, the passengers reached a collective tipping point and turned back, fleeing en masse from the airlock and back into the liner's passageways. "Everyone all right?" Ortiz asked angrily as Davis helped her up. "I think I peed myself," someone quipped. "All accounted for, lieutenant," Stalin reported after a quick head count. "No injuries." Ortiz shot him a furious glare. "If you ever try to shoot civilians again, there'll be more than injuries for you." Stalin shrugged, the gesture largely lost in his armor. He clearly was not moved by her threat. She looked up as Reza stepped forward, sheathing his sword. "Okay," she admitted, "maybe you coming along in that get-up wasn't the worst bit of luck we've had. Now let's get the hell off this boat." To the crew chief, she said, "Shut the damn hatch and don't open it unless one of us tells you. We'll gather up some of these sheep and bring them back in numbers you can manage. Oh, and have the pilot see if Leander or any of the other ships can come alongside. We're not going to be able to get all these people off with toy boats like this one." "Yes, lieutenant." The crew chief, who'd been knocked off his feet and nearly crushed by the civilian stampede — his vac suit wasn't armored like those the Marines wore — was still pale behind his helmet's faceplate. "Davis!" Ortiz called. "Let's get this circus moving!" The Marines moved quickly along the main passageway down which the civilians had fled. As they reached the first junction, Ortiz called a halt. The passageway that intersected the one they were on was very utilitarian-looking. "Probably goes to the crew quarters or engineering," Walker commented. The hatches were open, but when Walker cycled one closed, it blended into the artful wall decoration, with Crew Only inscribed in small but easily visible letters at the center of the hatch. "How big is this ship, anyway?" "It's the Venetian Star," Davis blurted. "She displaces four hundred thousand tons, is eleven hundred meters long, with eight casinos, fifteen restaurants, seven pools, and every possible entertainment option, all spread through twenty passenger decks for the enjoyment of seven thousand pampered passengers." "Where did you come up with that bullshit?" Ortiz asked. "Travel brochure," he said in a wistful voice. "I've always wanted to go on a cruise." Reza looked about him. They hadn't even reached any of the main passenger areas yet, and so he had not yet seen any of the luxuries of which Davis had spoken. Yet even the passageway where they were standing was fitted with plush carpet, beautiful wall coverings, and graceful light fixtures. He had stayed in what Jodi Mackenzie had told him was a very expensive hotel when he had first come to Earth, and it looked much like this. "What purpose could such a ship as this serve in war?" he wondered. "The war's been going on for a hundred years," Davis told him in a dreamy voice as he ran a hand over the expensive fabric adorning the walls, "and people didn't want to give up all their luxuries. Besides, the war isn't everywhere, you know. The Kreelans have never been seen in most of Confederation space, and ships like this have been sailing throughout the Rim and most of the core worlds for decades." "And every once in a while, one gets whacked," Ortiz interrupted. Stepping closer to one of the deck plan diagrams that hung along the walls of every passageway, she took a closer look at the layout of the huge ship. Four hundred thousand tons? Eleven hundred meters long? Seven thousand passengers? Shit. "I know that other Marine detachments are being sent aboard, but we're going to need a damn division to search this tub and a carrier to get them all off." "Not all of them can be saved," Reza told her soberly. He had been standing beside Eustus, staring off into space as he sent his second sight through the ship. "Everyone from main engineering aft is lost. The enemy warships targeted her main drives and lifeboats, intending to wound her and prevent the passengers and crew from fleeing." He blinked, returning his attention to his current surroundings. "The enemy landed in the bow and warriors are moving aft, killing as they go. Many passengers have barricaded themselves in their cabins, but the doors will not hold against Kreelan steel. Others have sought sanctuary in the forward theater, but there is no safety for them there. They will be slaughtered." Narrowing her eyes, Ortiz asked. "How could you possibly know all that?" "Because he's a damn spy," Walker hissed. "He's still one of them." Ignoring her, Reza told Ortiz, "The answer is...complicated." Ortiz snorted. "My ass." After chewing on her lip for a moment, she asked Reza, "How many do you think are in that theater?" "Lieutenant!" Walker protested. "You don't actually believe all this bullshit, do you?" "Why the hell not?" Ortiz snapped. "We don't have shit to go on otherwise, and we're not going to waste time wandering aimlessly through thousands of meters of passageways before this tub's hull finally gives out. We'll gather up everyone we can find as we go, but at least the theater is on the deck diagrams. It's an objective we can shoot for." To Reza, she repeated, "How many passengers are there?" "At least three hundred, perhaps more," Reza said. "It is very crowded." After a pause, he added, "Many of them are children." "Leander could take that many aboard," Ortiz mused. She turned to Stalin. "What do you think?" "If heading forward is where we can find Kreelans to kill," he said, grinning at Reza, "then that is where we must go." Please give this chapter a vote if you enjoyed it by clicking on the star... :-) Last Updated 08/31/2016 07:19 EST

 

Chapter Five

"Goddammit." Ortiz slammed her fist against the wall as a gaggle of passengers turned and fled from her detachment. She turned on Reza. "Every time passengers see you, they take off running the other way!" "Just wait until we meet up with one of the other Marine detachments that are supposed to be here," Walker added, giving Reza a stony glare. "As soon as they set eyes on him, they'll take care of the problem for us." "Then I will move forward on my own," Reza said. "You rescue the passengers, and I will try to slow down the advancing warriors." Walker moved closer, raising the muzzle of her weapon. It wasn't quite pointed at Reza, but was close enough that the threat was clear. "So you can just switch sides and join them to kill the rest of us? I don't think so." There was a collective murmur from the rest of the Marines, all save Eustus, who stood alone in defending his friend. "He would never do that! He—" "Shut your mouth, little man," Stalin said in an icy voice. Unlike Walker, he made no pretense at all about where he was pointing his weapon: he leveled it at Eustus's heart. "You are even worse, a traitor who loves a traitor." The dam Reza had built within himself to hold back the anger and resentment toward those who would never accept his honor finally broke and his blood flashed white hot with fury. His sword hissed through the air, the glittering blade slicing Stalin's assault rifle in half. As time contracted in Reza's mind, his body and sword moved with inhuman speed while the others reacted in slow motion. Pivoting to one side, he cut Walker's rifle in two, even as Stalin was just beginning to react to the destruction of his own weapon. Moving with the grace and power of a fast flowing river, Reza turned and slashed, making his mark upon each of the Marines except for Eustus, Davis, and Ortiz. When it was done, he allowed time to resume its normal flow. Stalin stared at the remains of his rifle, the rear half held by his right hand, the front held in his left by the fore grip. A fountain of sparks exploded from the destroyed electronics and power pack. "Shit!" Walker tossed the remains of her weapon to the deck as the power pack arced and flared. She looked up at Reza, her eyes now filled with fright. She found herself staring at the tip of his sword, which was a hair's breadth from her faceplate. "I will tolerate no more." While the words were in Standard, he spoke not in the voice of a lowly private, but as a warrior priest of the Desh-Ka. "Holy shit," Ortiz breathed. Taking her eyes from Reza. "Look at your name stencils." Each Marine's name was painted on the front of his or her chest plate in black letters. Now those names bore a pair of deep horizontal slash marks that went halfway through the metal. As one, they turned to stare at Reza. "If I wanted to kill you, all of you, I easily could," he told them, lowering his sword. "I do not need to resort to treachery or subterfuge to do that. Those things are unknown among Her Children." His voice softened. "I did not return from the Empire to do you harm, but to offer my sword and my life in your service." "Hey, why didn't I get some of those?" Davis's voice registered his indignation as he eyed the slashes on the other Marines' breast plates. He looked at Reza with a hurt expression. "I don't want to be left out." Reza's lips turned up in a sad smile. Davis reminded him a great deal of his surrogate father, Wiley Hickock. With a few flicks of his wrist, he granted Davis's wish. "That's better," Davis said happily. "Okay," Ortiz said in an unsteady voice, "you made your point." While Marine officers technically weren't supposed to carry rifles, she always did, along with her sidearm. Now she handed her rifle to Walker and drew her pistol. With a look of disgust, Stalin threw the remains of his rifle to the deck and drew his own sidearm. 

"But you're not just going rogue on me," Ortiz went on. "I want you to scout forward as fast as you can to that theater and hold off the enemy until we get there. I guess it goes without saying that you should avoid contact with the other Marines and don't scare the shit out of civilians if you can help it." She reached out and took his arm. "Then we all get off this tub together. I've had Marines die under my command, but I've never left one behind. Understood?" Bowing his head, Reza said, "Yes, lieutenant." "I'll go with him," Eustus volunteered. "He needs someone to watch his back." "No, my friend," Reza told him, glad that Eustus had offered. You have more courage than you know, he thought. "Not this time. I can move faster on my own." Turning to the deck plan, Ortiz focused the attention of the Marines on the way forward. "If I'm reading this right, we're going to have to go up two decks to the solarium, cross that and the shopping plaza, then drop down five decks to the theater. What do you think Reza?" She turned around. "Reza?" He was gone. "What the hell?" Walker gasped. "He was just standing right there!" Eustus sighed. "Get used to it. He does that all the time." *** Sai-Kel led her warriors aft through the angular passageways of the ship. She could not understand how the humans could build things that were so offensive to the senses. All around her were straight lines and sharp angles, utterly lacking in the grace found in even the simplest creations at the hands of the builders. This ship, and the others she had boarded in the past, had no sense of beauty or grace. One cannot expect such of soulless animals, she conceded. Worse was the smell. Humans smelled bad enough, with their sour sweat and the strong perfumes they used to mask it, but their ships were worse. The stink of the humans mixed with the noxious chemical odors of the materials from which they made their ships sometimes caused Sai-Kel's nose to bleed. The worst, however, was the smell of their fear. It made her stomach roil with nausea. She was near to vomiting now, so overpowering was the reek in the passageways and compartments. She would far more have welcomed cloying smoke, which was now beginning to seep through the air ducts from the wreckage of the ship's engineering section. Pausing in her advance, she nodded to a quartet of warriors who stood by, a pair on either side of the passageway near the endless rectangular doors along the passageways that led to sleeping quarters. One warrior of each pair sliced through the door's locking mechanism, the other warrior kicked it open, then the first stepped through. It was a process they all had performed many times in the past. The humans cowering within screamed in terror. Sai-Kel cringed, the sound clawing at her brain. The screams ended quickly, silenced by the swords of the warriors. Humans who did not stand and fight were killed quickly. Her Children did not delight in making animals suffer. The warriors quickly returned from their bloody work, taking their places now at the rear of the phalanx attending her. Each would take her turn at the slaughter, which was part of Her will but was not something in which any of Her warriors took pride. No, they longed to find human warriors that would offer resistance, who would give battle that would glorify the Empress. Alas, aside from two humans who had given good accounts of themselves in hand to hand combat, all she and her warriors had thus far come upon in this ship were the weak and the helpless. Raising a hand, indicating a halt, she looked at the ship's deck diagram, one of many that were affixed to the walls throughout human ships. She had always marveled that the animals could not find their way around without such things. Reaching out, she traced a path with an ebony talon toward a large compartment not far aft of her current location. Humans typically gathered when threatened, like terrified meat animals being hunted by a genoth, and she suspected that many would be there. 

"Here." She tapped her finger on the compartment in the diagram. Other such compartments were spread throughout the ship, but this was the nearest. She could not read the alien letters that spelled Theater. "I tire of slaughtering animals," she told her First. "Let us go here and see what we might find." *** Ortiz led her detachment into the solarium, which was made to look like the beach of a tropical island and was at least a hundred meters across. The Marines trudged across fine white sand, weaving their way between stands of palm trees, beach chairs, and tiki bars. Waves still lapped at the beach from the pool which, with the aid of holographic projection looked like an ocean that reached to the horizon. Looking up, she breathed a sigh of relief that the exterior shield was still in place over the enormous ceiling of clear panels overhead. "Just imagine the view if that was open," Davis murmured in wonder as he gawked at their surroundings. "Just imagine all this — and us — getting blown into vacuum through those clearskin panels," Walker chided. "The shield isn't armored, but it's a lot better protection than the glass." "Cut the chatter," Ortiz growled. Gunfire erupted off to their right, on the far side of the solarium, the distinctive sound of Marine pulse rifles hammering on full automatic. Ortiz's Marines dropped to the sand or found cover. "No contact!" Stalin called out. "I see nothing." "There!" Eustus blurted as he saw distinctive black-clad figures pour from one of the other entrances to the solarium, focused on the Marines on the far side that were still blocked from his view. "Where, dammit?" Ortiz snapped. "Sorry, ma'am! Two o'clock, behind that restaurant." "I don't see anything...wait, there they are!" Kreelans spilled out into her field of view. "Contact right!" Ortiz shouted. "Engage, but watch for friendlies!" As one, the Marines opened fire, the energy bolts of the rifles tearing into the Kreelans who had no idea their flank was totally exposed. The detachment's two pulse guns chopped the restaurant to pieces, giving the other Marines a clear field of fire into the entire Kreelan formation that was now reeling on the sand-covered beach. "Shit," someone hissed as more Kreelans boiled out from another entrance on this side of the restaurant. "Get down!" Stalin bellowed. Ortiz and the others who weren't already prone on the sand dove to the ground as a volley of the lethal alien throwing stars whistled overhead. "Cut 'em down!" she ordered as the newly arrived Kreelans charged their position. Fire from the rifles and pulse guns raked the approaching enemy, but the Kreelans didn't make it easy. The warriors had an uncanny ability to dodge aside at the last moment, even while running across the powdery sand. Dozens went down, but dozens more continued to sprint toward Ortiz and her Marines. "Grenades!" Ortiz ordered. The Marines were already prepared. The word had barely escaped her lips when a dozen gray spheres sailed from her line toward the approaching enemy. Some reached their programmed proximity detonation height and exploded about three meters above the ground, while others were swatted away or sliced in half by warriors who leaped into the air, slashing at the incoming weapons with their swords. "Wow!" Davis exclaimed, as if he were watching a circus act. "Goddamned acrobats," Walker cursed as she swapped in a fresh power pack for her rifle. "Shit!" She dodged aside as a bolt from a pulse gun fired by the Marines on the far side missed the hundreds of intervening Kreelans to sail a centimeter above her head. 

"This is not a good position," Stalin observed. "Ya think?" Ortiz chewed her lip. "Our orders are search and rescue, not to get tied down in a shootout. Stalin, have first squad keep these bitches busy. Second and third squads, head for the forward exit." That was where they were originally headed when they'd stumbled into this firefight. "And keep your heads and asses down!" The attention of the Kreelans was split by another detachment of Marines that suddenly appeared out of what must have been a maintenance access way in the middle of the holographic projection of the ocean horizon. The newcomers opened fire as they spread out over the narrow deck on that end of the pool. "That's our cue," Ortiz said. "Go!" The men and women of the second and third squads jumped up and scrabbled across the sand toward the ornate hatch that led forward while Stalin and first squad poured fire into the Kreelans. Over a hundred bodies littered the beach, yet more warriors continued to emerge into the kill zone. "Second squad, cover!" Ortiz ordered as second and third squads reached relative safety. "First squad, move your asses!" Stalin and the members of the first squad ran toward the others, with Stalin bringing up the rear. Just before he reached the exit, he slowed down, then stopped, his eyes fixed on the enemy. "Stalin!" Ortiz ran out and grabbed his arm, intending to haul him out of harm's way. "Look," he said, gesturing toward the enemy. "They are pulling back." "What?" She looked at the Kreelans, and her mouth fell open in surprise. Stalin was right. They were retreating. But Kreelans never retreated, she reminded herself. Never. They either killed every human in sight or died trying. The two other Marine detachments began brandishing their weapons in the air in celebration. But something odd struck her about how the Kreelans were acting, beyond the fact that they never retreated. Normally when pulling back, some of the retreating forces were turned around to face the enemy, to offer at least token resistance, but none of the Kreelans were doing that. They'd simply turned their backs on the Marines and were running from the solarium as fast as their sandaled feet could carry them. "They're not running away from us," she said. "They're running toward something else." "It's Reza." Ortiz and Stalin turned to face Eustus, who wore a worried expression. "They found out he's here." *** Sai-Kel gestured for her warriors to slow as they approached the end of the passageway. Before them lay an enormous open plaza that, from the display of various wares, she took to be some sort of marketplace. Screams and human gunfire echoed down the passageway from somewhere beyond the plaza, but the plaza itself seemed deserted. And yet it was not. Her senses twitched and her hand tightened on the handle of her sword as she slowly eased forward, her warriors right behind her. They can sense it, too, she thought as she picked up on the growing sense of anticipation building in their Bloodsong. But what was causing it? Coming to the end of the passageway, she slid against the wall. The strange sensation was trilling in her blood, inexorably drawing her forward. Leaning forward, she peered around the corner and gasped at what she saw. There, near the center of the plaza, stood a human clad in Kreelan armor. He stood tall, his legs shoulder width apart, the tip of his great sword resting on the deck, blade pointed downward, his hands clasped on its handle. His head was bowed, his eyes closed. Around his neck was a Collar of Honor, and at his throat was the unmistakable rare blue of a genoth eyestone with the rune of the Desh-Ka inscribed upon it. She pulled back, her eyes wide with surprise. "Reza," she whispered to herself in disbelief. Then she stepped out into full view. The priest of the Desh-Ka opened his eyes and favored her with his gaze. "Come," she said to her warriors, and together they filed out into the plaza. They quickly formed into ranks behind her, just as the tresh did at the kazhas. As one, they followed Sai-Kel's lead when she dropped to one knee and saluted. "We offer thee our humble greeting, priest of the Desh-Ka." "May Her blessing be upon you," Reza replied as he returned her salute. "Do you seek the right of challenge?" "What warrior worthy of the name would turn away from such an honor?" "Come forth." Getting to her feet, the strange sensation Sai-Kel had been feeling transformed into breathless elation. She had no expectation that she would survive personal combat with Reza, but she could think of no greater honor for the Empress than to die by his hand. She approached him, he who was the consort of Esah-Zhurah, and again knelt. The blade of his sword glittered before her eyes. "Rise, Sai-Kel," he told her. They had never before met in the flesh, but he would know her name as he would any of Her Children by the first five pendants, the Five Stars, that hung from her collar. After she had gotten to her feet, he said, "I would ask you of my love, Esah-Zhurah. Do you...do you know how she fares?" His question brought on a wave of sadness. "She mourns thee, my priest," Sai-Kel told him. "She mourns thy loss now as much as she did the day you left us. Hers is a lonely, tragic voice in the Bloodsong that has touched us all." She dared to raise her eyes to meet his. "I grieve for thee, and for her. So do all of Her Children." "It was Her will," Reza whispered. "I thank you." Taking a deep breath and clearing the expression of sadness from his face, he said, "Tell your warriors that in this challenge I will use none of the powers given me by the Crystal of Souls. It will be sword against sword, claw against claw, warrior against warrior." Sai-Kel's mouth dropped open in wonder. For a priest or priestess to offer such a condition in combat was unheard of. Dying by the hand of a priest of the Desh-Ka was a wondrous honor. But to kill one in a ritual challenge would be something unheard of in the Books of Time. Granted, Reza could still probably kill every one of her warriors easily without the powers of the Desh-Ka, but it gave them a chance, albeit slight, of victory. "You would do this...for us?" "I do it to honor Her," Reza said. He reached out to put a hand gently on her shoulder. "Should I fall, I would ask thee to return my weapons and my collar to my love." Bowing her head, feeling as if the skin beneath the armor where he held his hand was burning, she said, "So it has been said, so shall it be done." "My thanks, warrior." He took his hand away and stepped back, hefting his sword in one hand. They waited as the other warriors circled around them, forming a makeshift arena. Then Reza said, "Let us begin." [Please remember to click on the little star icon to vote! ] Last updated 09/01/2016 08:48 EST

 

Chapter Six

"Leander is pulling alongside to help take off passengers," Ortiz told the others over the unit channel. "She's extending a flex-dock to the forward starboard side airlock. The XO says to direct all survivors there. Our cutter will stay near the aft airlock to take off any stragglers. Two destroyers are coming in to dock on the port side." The ships were taking a horrible risk conducting a rescue in the middle of a battle, but if they didn't, most of the passengers would be doomed. The cutters would never be able to ferry off the survivors before the starliner's hull gave out. "It's nice when we get good news," Davis said in a cheery voice that was in stark contrast to the dire situation. "That doesn't happen very often." "Hold up," Ortiz ordered, ignoring him. Turning around, she looked over the chain of terrified passengers they'd picked up as they'd made their way forward. Doing a quick count, she came up with nearly a hundred. The last time she'd looked, only two dozen had been trailing after them. She'd let them come along, unsure of where to send them until she'd received confirmation that Leander was coming alongside. "Walker, I want you to take your squad and escort these people to the airlock and get them aboard the ship. Gather up everyone else you can along the way, but don't stop and don't slow down. I don't think we're going to have a lot of time." As if to punctuate her concern, a deep boom rang through the ship and the deck under their feet shuddered. "Look!" Eustus, who was peering out one of the many viewports along the side, pointed. Somewhere aft a bulkhead had given way and a fountain of debris and passengers, their arms waving and legs kicking frantically, spewed into space. "Walker," Ortiz ordered, "move!" "Aye, lieutenant." Turning around, she bellowed over her PA system to the passengers. "We're heading to the forward starboard side airlock. Let's go!" Turning back to Ortiz, she said, "Good luck." Ortiz nodded. "You, too. Now get your ass out of here." The other squads stood aside as Walker and her Marines shepherded the passengers to the nearest stairway that led down to the deck where the airlocks were located. "The rest of you," Stalin ordered, annoyed at the distraction, "move out. We have enemies to kill." *** Reza sparred with Sai-Kel to grant her the honor of individual combat. She was a spirited fighter and a good sword mistress, and he could not bring himself to take her life. He recalled the brief and bloody battle he had fought against his sisters on the bridge on Rutan right after he had been banished from the Empire. It had been nothing more than slaughter, and brought the Empress no more glory than if they had stepped into the sea and drowned. What honor would the death of Sai-Kel bring, facing a priest in single combat? She might revel in such an ending, but it brought him only sadness. She deserved better. They all did. She attacked again, thrusting her sword at his midsection. He deflected it, then stepped back. "Kazh," he said, and she instantly stopped her attack. Sheathing her sword, she stood tall and bowed her head. "I have disappointed you, my priest," she said in a voice laden with misery. "Far from it, warrior. You honor the Empress and your sisters. But none of us — least of all myself — honor or bring glory to Her through meaningless sacrifice." Reza's eyes swept the ranks that now stood many deep around him and Sai-Kel. With his second sight he knew that nearly all the warriors on the ship were now gathered here, and those few who weren't were on their way. Without having to fight, the Marines would be able to get the passengers off unmolested, and Reza would buy them the time they needed. "If we are to cross swords," he went on, "then let us make it a worthy challenge." With his blade he pointed to the next nine senior-most warriors, as determined by the pendants they wore below their collars. "Ten shall face me. Those who fall will be taken from the field and replaced with the next most senior warriors. And should I fall..." He looked at Sai-Kel, who reluctantly met his eyes and nodded.

"Come forth, then," Reza ordered, and the other warriors joined Sai-Kel in a tight circle around him. To Sai-Kel, he said, "The honor is yours." The warriors saluted him, then drew their weapons. Around them, the onlooking warriors tensed, both in anticipation of the coming battle, and also to dodge or deflect any shrekkas that might come their way. Each of the ten warriors assumed her favored stance. Most carried swords, a few favored daggers, and one, Reza was surprised to see, uncoiled a grakh'ta nine-tailed whip behind her. Reza could feel the tension mount as the warriors sought that perfect moment in time to strike. His own body was loose, his sword held firmly in his hands. He closed his eyes, seeking his own perfect moment while forcing himself to keep his second sight firmly upon Ortiz and the others, both to watch over her and to not dishonor his opponents by using it here. The warrior with the grakh'ta attacked first. Lunging forward, she snapped the weapon toward him, the nine tails spreading out like the tentacles of a sea beast. Whirling about, Reza brought up his sword and sliced the tails from the rest of the whip, nimbly dodging aside as they flew past him. That broke the spell. As one, the other warriors closed in around him, and the plaza was filled with the sound of clashing steel. *** Eustus stayed close behind Ortiz as the Marines moved forward through the passageways. He was breathing hard, but not from the exertion of carrying around an extra thirty kilos of synthetic armor and weapons. It was because of the peculiar mix of emotions at having killed another being, even if not a human, for the first time. Exhilaration, fear, relief, pride, and guilt warred in his breast, and he was shaking from the adrenalin rush. He wanted nothing more than to find a private place to puke his guts out, but there wasn't time for that. More passengers and crewmen had flocked to them like moths drawn to a flame, and Ortiz had told them to follow her Marines, as it would be faster than trying to follow the route Walker had taken the others. Eustus had no idea how all these people were going to fit on the corvette, which was cramped with just her regular crew and the Marine detachment. But they had to do the best they could with what they had. Pausing for just a moment at another of the countless viewports along the ship's flanks, Eustus looked out to see Leander pulling alongside. The flex-dock, basically a big corrugated tube the ship could extend and retract to dock with other vessels, was already deploying to mate with the Venetian Star's airlock. Beyond, in the dark space around the stricken starliner, he saw the glittering, moving stars of the other ships of the human task force and the Kreelan warships that faced them. The ships were joined by brief bolts of emerald and jade, and the fiery trails of torpedoes raced between the two battling fleets. A quartet of energy bolts intersected with one of the human ships, which was close enough that he could make out some details of her hull. The ship was momentarily obscured by a huge fireball. As the glare subsided, he saw the bow and stern sections tumbling in opposite directions. He yelped when someone grabbed him by the combat harness and thrust him back into line. "Move, little man," Stalin hissed. "We have no time to sightsee." "Yes, staff sergeant," Eustus automatically replied. With a last frightened glance over his shoulder at the battle raging in space, he double timed back into his place in the formation, clutching his rifle tightly in his hands. A few moments later, the Marines emerged into the largest of the ship's casinos, which boasted three levels of machines and tables and catered to nearly every means by which gamblers could lose their money to the house.

"Oh, man." Everyone, even Eustus, chuckled at the sound of Castle's voice. He sounded like a man who'd reached the gates of heaven, only to find them locked and no guardian to plead with. "Lieutenant," Castle pleaded, "can't we—" "No, we can't," she cut him off. "Don't be an idiot." "But—" His protest was cut off by an explosion behind them as one of the viewports failed from the warping of the hull when the ship was damaged. The passengers following the Marines screamed as they were blown back down the passageway, carried away by the air within the ship as it suddenly found a way to escape into space. Some of them wore emergency pressure suits, but most did not. Eustus didn't have time to activate the mag locks on the bottom of his boots before he was knocked off his feet. He managed to grab a stanchion with one hand, then grabbed Ortiz, who was sailing past him. His rifle twirled in the screaming air, still attached to his suit by its tether. A split second later, the pressure sensors of the airtight door to the casino tripped. The segmented door slammed down from the ceiling to the floor bare centimeters from Ortiz's feet. Unfortunately, two passengers were in the way. One was dead, the door having come down on his chest. The flesh and bone, while crushed, kept the door from forming a perfect seal, and air from the casino whistled through the gap. As for the second unfortunate victim, all that was left on this side was her arm, the fingers still twitching. The Marines could hear the woman pounding with her other hand on the opposite side of the door, where she was trapped by her crushed flesh, still bound to her not quite severed arm. Mercifully, the pounding stopped after a few seconds as she suffocated. "Fuck," Ortiz whispered as she got to her feet, brushing off Eustus's attempt to help. She stared at the people trapped by the pressure door, her face pale behind her faceplate. "They're gone. All those poor people..." Every single one of the newly gathered passengers following them was dead. Stalin turned to her. "Forget the theater. We must go to the ship now." "No," Ortiz told him. "If they're still there, we're going to rescue those people. Then we can leave." Eustus stood beside her. Keeping his eyes on Stalin, he said, "We're not leaving Reza behind, either." Stalin ignored him. Stepping closer to Ortiz, he said, "We go to the ship." "We have to go right past the theater now, anyway," Davis said absently as he, like Castle, continued to gawk at the gaudy casino, which was empty except for the Marines. "That's the fastest way to reach the ship." He pointed. "Right down that staircase. Just grab all those little sheep and get outta here." "Then let's move," Ortiz said through clenched teeth. She brushed past Stalin. "Davis, take point. Move it! I want to get off this damn tub." *** Reza whirled and slashed, parried and thrust in a dance of death, in a ritual of blood, that reached back nearly half a million years in the history of his people, to a time of legend when the first blade was crafted from living metal. His sword was one with his body and mind, and fire flowed through his veins as he fought the greatest Challenge of his life. The Bloodsong was mute in his spiritual ears, but he thought he could yet sense the presence of the Ancient Ones watching, always watching. Perhaps it was only his imagination, but he preferred to believe that the feeling was real. He was pleased with his opponents, for they possessed both great skill and spirit, and he knew that the Empress, hearing the songs of their blood, would Herself be proud. He matched their movements with his own deadly grace. The ancient sword techniques of the Desh-Ka, as fluid as they were brutal, guided his blade, which pierced metal, bone, and flesh.

Dozens of warriors had already fallen by his hand. He grieved that they no longer lived to bring glory to the Empress in life, but knew they had honored Her in the way they had gone to the Afterlife. Living an arduous life in hopes of finding a meaningful death was at the core of Kreelan culture, and had been since the earliest words written in the Books of Time. Reza knew that if on this day he fell, should he die here and now, it would be a worthy end. But dying here was not his intention. What drove him now, and each and every day since he had left the Empire, was the hope that he might somehow, someday, be reunited with Esah-Zhurah. He would gladly have given what little he had and all that he was to touch her for just a brief moment before he passed into the Darkness. His love for her was the fuel that made the fire in his veins burn bright. A trio of warriors managed to pin his sword with theirs for the briefest of instants, giving two of their companions the opportunity to slash at Reza's arms. One blade found its mark, cutting deep into the flesh of his left arm just below the shoulder, while the other glanced off his armor. It was the sixth such wound he had received, and yet he felt no pain. Blood ran from that cut, two on his face, and three on his legs, and spattered to the smooth tile floor that was awash with the blood of his challengers. Leaving his left hand to hold his sword, he pivoted around and with the talons of his right hand slashed the throat of the warrior who had just cut him. Choking on her own blood, she collapsed to her knees. As she did, a pair of warriors rushed from the circle and pulled her away while another warrior took her place. Reza continued to pivot, drawing his sword from the cunning trap set by the three warriors, who lunged forward to take advantage of what they perceived as Reza's weakened position in the fight. That was a mistake, but not a fatal one. What killed them was coming at Reza using the identical form, as if they were training at a kazha. All three raised their swords for overhand slashes as they rushed him. When the blades of the trio were committed to their downward strikes, he lunged to one side. Sweeping his own sword out and down, he drove their blades to the floor before reversing the course of his blade, following their own swords and arms to their shoulders, then taking off their heads in a single slash. That gave the other seven warriors a moment to pause and consider as their sisters dashed forward to retrieve the bodies and heads of the fallen trio. They backed away, taking a moment to regroup as three more warriors joined the fray. Reza, who was breathing hard now, used the respite to focus through his second sight on Ortiz. She and the others had nearly reached the theater now, which was just aft of the plaza where he stood. He was torn, for he wanted to go with them, but he also could not dishonor himself by abandoning the Challenge. Silently wishing them luck, as Eustus would say, he gathered his strength once again as his opponents attacked. *** Ortiz stood before the theater, gaping in wonder. A plaque said it was inspired by the famous Palais Garnier, an opera house that had been built in Paris on Earth centuries before. She had never seen anything remotely like the grand staircases of marble with intricately chiseled details, sculptures adorning the landings and walls, with elaborate light fixtures glowing with realistic looking candle flames. The entire entryway was a work of art that had her entire detachment standing there staring at it, speechless. "I told you," Davis said in a wistful voice. Snapping herself out of the trance, Ortiz said, "Come on, let's see if anybody's home. First squad, take the left side. Second, take the right. Davis, Castle, Camden, and Stalin with me up the middle." The Marines split up to check the entry doors on all three levels accessed by the ornate stairway. The entry hall echoed with armored fists hammering on ornate, but sturdy, metal doors and shouts of "Confederation Marines!" When Ortiz reached the first door in the center, she banged on it with her fist. "Confederation Marines! Anyone in there?" A moment later something in the door, which was double wide, clicked and it opened. "Thank the Lord of All," a finely dressed man with short gray hair exclaimed. "I thought we were dead." "You will be if you and anyone else in here don't come with us right now," Ortiz told him. Among the people clustered near the door, she spotted one of the crew, a junior officer. "Hey, you," she called out, pointing at him. "Help us get these people moving. We're heading to the forward starboard airlock and we need to move fast." The man just blinked at her. "He doesn't understand Standard," an older woman whom Ortiz took to be the gentleman's companion said with undisguised disdain. "He's one of those snobs from La Seyne." "Oh, for the..." Ortiz cranked the volume on her PA system. "LISTEN UP!" Everyone standing before her cringed and put their hands over their ears. "We're taking you to the forward starboard side airlock. Move quickly but calmly, and take nothing with you. We don't have much time. Now let's go." Turning to Castle and Davis, she said, "Lead 'em out." The passengers, many of whom were crying or jittery with fear, followed the pair of Marines. Looking to either side where the other squads had been banging on doors, she saw more people emerging. "Reza said three hundred or so people were here," Ortiz said with an accusing look at Eustus. "Looks more like a thousand!" "They are the rich ones," Stalin said. He was examing the door. "This is the ship's emergency shelter. Look: solid durasteel as thick as my hand, lighter than aluminum and tougher than titanium." He snorted. "With money paid for each of these doors, one could buy a small town on my home planet." "Lieutenant." Ortiz turned her attention to Eustus. "What are we going to do about Reza?" he asked. "We can't just leave him behind." "I haven't forgotten him. But we've got to get these people off first." At that, Stalin laughed. Waving a hand at the hundreds of souls emerging from the theater, he said, "And where will we put them all? Strap them to the side of the ship?" "Two other ships are coming alongside," Ortiz reminded him. "When Leander can't take on any more, we'll get them to the other ships. Then they'll be the Navy's problem." "You will die a fool, little girl." He turned and stomped off down the stairs, elbowing passengers out of his way. "At least I'll have died for something worth dying for," Ortiz whispered to herself. [Remember to vote on this chapter by clicking the star! :-)] Updated 09/09/2016 11:23 EST

 

Chapter Seven

After what seemed like an agonizingly long time, Ortiz and her Marines managed to herd the hundreds of civilians to the airlock deck. The greatest challenge then was to keep them from stampeding to get aboard Leander. "What are we going to do with them all?" Walker asked as she met up with Ortiz beside the entrance to the airlock. Eustus, Davis, and Stalin were with her, while the other Marines kept the passengers from getting out of hand. Ortiz shook her head. "Does the captain have any idea how many he can take aboard?" "I haven't heard anything from the bridge, but they're still taking people on." Walker scowled. "I'm not sure where we're supposed to fit." "We're probably going to have to hitch a ride on one of the other ships," Ortiz said with a sigh. Castle, who stood nearby shepherding passengers into the airlock, turned and gave her a pained expression. "Aww, man." "Hope you locked up all your loot," Ortiz told him with a grin. "I wouldn't want to think about all these civvies pawing through your porn stash." "If someone so much as touches—" He was cut off by shouts and screams as a huge chunk of wreckage tumbled into sight through the viewports, arcing over the upper hull of the Venetian Star to crash into Leander just aft of the bridge, breaking the ship's back. More wreckage, ranging in size from golf balls to battle tanks, slammed into the corvette, piercing her hull and venting dozens of compartments to space. Frozen with horror, Ortiz watched as her ship, her home, bent and twisted like a toy being torn apart in the hands of an invisible giant. Plumes of air streamed from rents in the hull, carrying crewmen, civilians, and everything else that wasn't fastened down, into vacuum. Titanic electrical discharges arced from the engineering spaces, momentarily joining the fore and aft sections of the ship with cyan fire as Leander continued to break apart, incinerating anything that got in the way. An explosion erupted from the torpedo room as one or more of the torpedoes ruptured in their launch tubes, blasting the forward section of the ship away from the stricken liner and taking the flex-dock, which was packed with screaming passengers, along with it. The passengers still in line to get aboard recoiled to the inboard side of the passageway as those trapped on the stretching flex-dock whirled around and tried to retreat back to the Venetian Star. "Close the airlock," Ortiz heard herself say, unable to believe that the words were coming from her own lips. Her heart was a block of ice, hammering in her chest. "Lieutenant," someone cried, "we can't!" The dock continued to stretch and stretch as the forward section of the corvette moved away, and Ortiz could hear the groan of metal at the outer door of the airlock, which was full of panicking people trying to get back aboard the liner. She raised her voice, both on the radio and on the PA system above the cacophony of terrified screams. "Close the airlock!" As the other Marines stood, frozen by the horror of what they'd been ordered to do, Stalin went to Castle and took his rifle. Then the big NCO stepped forward to the inner door of the airlock, brutally shouldering aside the passengers in his way. Bringing up the assault rifle, he fired point blank into the mass of passengers trying to push their way back aboard. Men, women, and children died under the withering fire of his weapon as he emptied his entire magazine, a full hundred rounds, into them, and his expression registered no more emotion than if he had been shooting targets on the firing range. Then, kicking the bodies that were lying in the doorway clear, ignoring the pleas of the passengers who were still trapped in the flex-dock and the wreckage of the Leander, he strode through the blood pooling on the deck and hit the control to close the inner airlock door.

An instant later the flex-dock tore free and began to whip back and forth like a loose fire hose, spraying a torrent of bodies into space as the remains of Leander tumbled away. After handing the rifle back to Castle, Stalin turned to Ortiz. She still stood like a statue, staring at the nightmare tableaux beyond the hull. He took her arm in an almost gentle grip. "We go now." "You fucking bastard," someone whispered into the terrible silence that had fallen on the survivors, just before the Venetian Star itself reeled under the impact of a cloud of debris from the ongoing battle. *** Reza witnessed the catastrophe of Leander's demise through his second sight, and it sufficiently disturbed him that he would have suffered a serious injury from one of the attacking warriors had not the deck under their feet suddenly shook as if struck by an earthquake. He focused his full attention to the here and now, for he needed no special senses to know that the starliner was suffering damage that would soon leave it completely untenable. If Ortiz, Eustus, and the others had been able to make their way safely off the ship, he would have been content to continue the Challenge. But now... "Kazh!" he ordered as the latest group of warriors fighting him regained their balance. They immediately lowered their swords and stood tall, heads bowed. Striding to where Sai-Kel lay on the deck, badly wounded, he knelt beside her. "You will gather your warriors and leave this ship." "The Challenge..." she said with difficulty, a trickle of blood running from the corner of her mouth, "...it is not yet complete." Reza took her hand and held it. "All of you have brought Her great honor this day, but I would not have your lives wasted needlessly aboard this hulk." The ship shuddered again as it was struck by a large piece of debris, driving the warriors to their knees, and Reza heard the tell-tale high pitched squeal of air escaping. She held his hand tighter. "And what of you, priest of the Desh-Ka?" "Fear not for me," he said gently. Letting go of her hand, Reza stood up. Rendering Sai-Kel a salute, he said, "May thy Way be long and glorious." To the others, he ordered, "Take her and yourselves to safety. You will fight for Her honor and glory another day. Go." The survivors knelt and saluted him. Then a quartet of warriors carefully took Sai-Kel in their arms and led the other warriors in the direction of the bow. Rendering a final salute and silent prayer for the dead who remained behind, Reza visualized through his second sight a particular access way several decks below, then vanished into thin air. *** After hammering in frustration on yet another damage control door that had just slammed shut, Walker turned around "We're cut off! The other side is depressurizing." The Marines and the surviving passengers now found themselves trapped in a hundred foot long section of passageway. The pressure door behind them, which led back through several twists and turns to the starboard side airlock, had slammed shut a few moments earlier. They were trapped. "Dammit," Ortiz hissed. "Chasseur," she called over the radio to the destroyer, which was still alongside, "this is Ortiz. We..." She gulped as she stared at the nearest holographic display of the ship's deck plan. "We need some help to reach you. All the passageways we need to reach the port side are in vacuum, and we've got a hell of a lot of passengers without suits or beach balls. If a team could set up a temporary airlock and bring us a big pile of beach balls, we might be able to get these people out of here. " "Wait one." That was the voice of the ship's XO, with whom she'd been trying to coordinate their escape. A different voice came on after a brief pause. "Ortiz, this is Captain Somerville. I can appreciate your situation, but we've overstayed our welcome. The ship's already sustained damage from debris and, in case you haven't noticed, the task force is still engaged." He paused. "You've got five minutes, lieutenant. Then we're pulling out. I can't risk losing the hundreds of passengers we've already crammed aboard, not to mention my crew."

Ortiz felt like throwing up. "Five minutes? Sir, there's no way we can get to you in that time with all these civilians!" "You can't save everyone," Somerville said in an agonized voice. "But maybe you can save yourselves. Whatever you decide, you'd better get moving. Somerville, out." She turned to face Stalin. He and the others hadn't been privy to her conversation with Somerville, but he knew from her ashen expression what the captain must have told her. Stalking to the damage control door, he pushed Walker out of the way and reached for the override that would force it open. The passageway beyond was the shortest route to the Chasseur, and opening that door would kill every one of the civilians. "No!" Ortiz raised her pistol, pointing it at Stalin's back, her finger already tensing on the trigger. The civilians just behind her yelped and jumped back. That caught Stalin's attention, as well as her own. She looked up in time to see the tip of a gleaming blade slicing through the ceiling, carving out a near-perfect square as big across as a large man's shoulders. "Move back!" she shouted just before the section of ceiling, which was made of metal and carbon fiber lattice half a meter thick, crashed to the deck. A blood-streaked face peered down at her from the deck above. "Reza!" Eustus whooped. "Where the hell have you been?" Ortiz said, shaking her head. "Later," Reza told her. "We can reach the other ship, but we must move quickly." "There's no point," Ortiz told him. "The captain gave us five minutes before they abandon us. We'll never make it, and certainly won't be able to get everyone to climb up there in time." "Have faith, lieutenant," he told her. "Now do as I ask. Quickly. Post the Marines at intervals beside the civilians, with two here, and have them engage the mag locks on their boots. Then have the civilians hold hands." The Marines did so without being asked, and the passengers formed a chain. "Wait a moment," Reza said before ducking out of sight. Turning to Eustus, Ortiz said, "What's he doing?" "Beats me — oh, crap!" The artificial gravity suddenly cut out. "Lieutenant, Eustus, jump up here!" After switching off his mag locks, Eustus followed Ortiz through the hole. "Help the passengers up here. We must guide them up to the shopping mall, then across to the destroyer," Reza told them. "We still won't make it," Ortiz said, glancing at the life support panel that stood open. Reza had cut the circuits controlling the artificial gravity in this part of the ship. "We can't move fast enough." Reza smiled. "Have faith. But we must hurry." Ortiz barked the necessary orders, and the train of passengers was handed up through the hole. Eustus took the first one, an older man, by the hand and began to lead him after Reza, who stood at the far end of the passageway in a junction. Behind him stood another closed pressure door. As Eustus watched, Reza shoved his sword through the metal as if it were paper and air began to whistle as it escaped into the vacuum on the far side. Reza widened the hole just enough that an artificial wind began to gently carry the passengers toward him faster than Eustus could keep up. "Let them come!" Reza called. "And get a pair of Marines up here. We must..." He had to search a moment for the word. "...leapfrog to our destination."

"I get it," Ortiz said in admiration. She still didn't think they'd get to Chasseur in time, but they might at least have a chance. She quickly barked out her orders to get the Marines leapfrogging ahead. As the lead passengers, who were caught between gratitude at Reza's help and fear at his appearance, reached him, he again drew his sword and cut a hole leading to the deck above them and led the passengers along. Like an enormous worm, the ungainly line wriggled its way through the ship, quickly picking up the pace as the Marines came to understand what Reza was doing. He would punch a hole in a door or wall to direct the airflow, which in turn would carry the passengers along like balloons. Then, once the hole was no longer needed, a Marine would cover it with a suit patch. Ortiz reflected that it would have been fun had they not been running, figuratively speaking, for their lives. As they reached the shopping mall deck, Reza drifted back to her position, now at the head of the passenger "train." "Tell them they need not be afraid of what they see here," he told her. "They need not fear the dead." Before Ortiz could ask any questions, he led her into the open mall. "Holy shit," she breathed. Blood was spattered and pooled across a near perfect circle, roughly fifty meters across, at the center of the plaza. Along the edges were dead Kreelan warriors, laid out with mechanical precision like the spokes of a wheel, their heads (most were still attached to the bodies, some were not) pointing toward the center. "There are at least fifty of them here." "Sixty-two," Reza said in a sad voice. "Come, lieutenant. We cannot delay." Grabbing his arm, Ortiz asked, "You did all this?" He nodded. "Jesus." She favored him with a frightened look before turning away to face the passengers. Reza heard the words she spoke to the civilians, but his eyes remained on the warriors who had fallen. He could see with his second sight Sai-Kel and the other warriors, waiting for the human ships to depart before they themselves left this hulk behind. "Are you all right?" Eustus asked. "I am not badly injured," Reza told him. "Do not concern yourself." "That's not what I'm talking about and you know it." Reza nodded, but in his heart he was not so sure. He was not distraught over the deaths of the warriors, for that was part of their Way, and his. What bothered him more was the look of fear in Ortiz's eyes. She had just begun to trust him, but how could one truly trust someone that you would never understand? What would she think if she ever witnessed his true powers? "I will be fine," he told his friend, "in time." "Let's get this show on the road," Ortiz said, and Reza led them onward. *** "There it is!" Ortiz felt a huge weight lift from her shoulders as she dropped down the last deck through another hole Reza had cut with his sword. Before her was the port side airlock. She checked her chronometer: more than five minutes had passed, but the Chasseur was still there. "Thank you, Captain Somerville," she breathed. "I'll marry you and have your children." A pair of Chasseur's Marines stood beside the entrance to the airlock. "Hurry your asses up!" one of them shouted over his suit's PA system. Stalin and Walker took up positions on either side of the hole, with Ortiz to one side. As the passengers dropped through, still in zero gee, the two Marines propelled them toward the airlock, and the Chasseur's Marines guided them into the flex-dock. 

Ortiz was momentarily blinded by a flash that lit up the space beyond the viewports as Chasseur fired on something with one of her main batteries. A second later the Venetian Star, which was already a groaning, hissing pile of distressed metal and plastic, shuddered again as a tumbling mass of wreckage, clearly Kreelan this time, slammed into her. Marines and passengers were sent tumbling about as the destroyer's pilot desperately tried to match the tumbling motion of the stricken liner to keep the flex-dock from tearing away. "The ship's going to cut loose!" cried one of the Chasseur's Marines who, with his companion, was turning to head into the flex-dock. "No, wait!" Ortiz shouted. Cursing under her breath, she called the ship's captain. "Captain Somerville! If you close the inner door of your airlock and start depressurizing it, but leave the outer door open, you can just suck all the passengers across the flex-dock!" "That's the dumbest idea I've ever heard," came the captain's tense voice, "but we'll give it a try. Stand by." "Come on!" Ortiz shouted to her Marines. "Get those people through the goddamn airlock!" "This is like herding cats," she heard Davis mutter as he grabbed a man and woman who were crying like children and, using the leverage of his mag-locked boots, tossed them toward the entrance to the flex-dock. Another set of blinding flashes came from the muzzles of Chasseur's main guns, and Ortiz desperately tried to blink away the afterimages burned into her retinas. A whistling roar came through the flex-dock as the captain did as she'd suggested. It worked: the pressure differential between the Venetian Star and the destroyer's airlock worked like a vacuum cleaner, dragging the passengers down the clear, flexible tube. There was only one problem: not all the passengers could fit in the airlock at once. Not even close. "Pack everyone into the dock," Ortiz shouted, "then pack yourselves in after 'em!" Once everyone was in the dock, which had its own hatch on this end that could be closed to seal air in the tube, they could all cycle through the lock at the far end. It would leave Chasseur vulnerable until they had everyone inside the ship, but it would keep everyone breathing in the meantime. Stalin just laughed as he lobbed more passengers through the airlock. "You think we will live? Look." He nodded toward the airlock control panel. It was dark. The airlock had no power. Ortiz closed her eyes and shook her head. In all his butchery of the decks to get them here, which in a few cases had involved rather impressive displays of electrical arcing, Reza must have accidentally severed the power conduits for the port side airlock. The flex-dock, which had its own hatch at the docking end, couldn't mate with — or detach from — an airlock that had no power, because both ships were involved in the physical and electronic "handshake" for safety reasons. The dock would have to be released manually from inside the Venetian Star's airlock, which meant someone would have to stay behind. "I'll take care of it," she said to herself in a tired voice. The last of the passengers sailed by, and the Marines followed close behind. Stalin paused to give her a long look. She nodded. As he returned the gesture, she thought she saw a trace of sympathy in the Georgian's eyes. Then he was gone. Walker passed by, giving Ortiz a squeeze on her arm. She bent forward to put her helmet in touch with Ortiz's. "Godspeed, el-tee," she whispered. "You, too," Ortiz rasped. "Now get out of here." Something else crashed into the ship, and the destroyer's close-in defense lasers rapid fired at smaller chunks of debris that vanished in a fireworks show that might in other circumstances have been considered beautiful. "We're the last ones," Eustus panted as he came up to her, Reza beside him. "Let's go, lieutenant." Shaking her head, wishing she could be that green and ignorant again, she said, "Get your ass out of here, Camden." Taking him by the arm, she flung him into the maw of the flex-dock. Last was Reza. Captain Somerville was shouting something at her, but she ignored him. "I would've liked to get to know you better, Gard. Take good care of your—hey!" With one hand, he grabbed her combat harness, tore her free of the deck where her mag-locks had anchored her, and sent her sailing after Eustus. Ignoring her curses, he slashed open the panel covering the manual door mechanism and closed the outer airlock door. He waited until he heard the lock at the end of the flex-dock close. He heard Eustus pounding and screaming on the other side of the now-closed doors, and put his hand to the metal, wishing he could reassure his friend. "Do not fear on my account," Reza said softly. "I will join you soon." Then he triggered the manual release, letting the flex-dock separate from the dying starliner. Moving to one side, he watched as the destroyer pulled away, the tube trailing along its flank. The crew quickly cycled everyone into the ship before it jettisoned the lock and accelerated away. With a quick check through his second sight to make sure his sisters in the bow had also made their escape, he closed his eyes and reached out to the Chasseur, wondering what his human companions would make of the bit of magic they were about to witness. He vanished into the ether as the Venetian Star's port reactor went critical, vaporizing what was left of the ship. *** Sai-Kel and the surviving warriors sailed through space in tight formation, protected by their energy bubbles. They normally did not use such advanced technology when facing humans, but Reza's command to save themselves had left nothing to their discretion. Once they reached the bow, they activated the bubbles, then launched themselves through the hull of the ship, the bubbles searing through the metal as if it did not exist. Not long after they had departed the stricken vessel, it had vanished in a titanic explosion. Debris and radiation had washed over the warriors, but the bubbles were impervious to such trivial assaults. They watched in wonder as the battle raged on between their sisters and the humans, what their eyes perceived merging with the emotions they felt in the Bloodsong. The humans would emerge victorious from this battle, as they often did, for the Empress willed it so. Her Children could not bring Her glory if they defeated the enemy too soon. At last, it was over, and the surviving human ships departed. Not long after, a ship came to search for survivors, for leaving Her Children to die in the dark of space was not in keeping with the Way. As it pulled along side, its great flanks bearing the runes proclaiming its name — the Kai'lan-Da — Sai-Kel smiled. It would be a great honor for her last words to reach the ears of the one who commanded this ship. Her sisters pulled her inside, for Sai-Kel was very weak now, near death. The warriors made to take her to the healers, but Sai-Kel refused, instead ordering them to carry her to the bridge. They lay her at the feet of the one in command, a great warrior who had been the First of an even greater warrior. "Syr-Kesh," Sai-Kel whispered as the older warrior knelt beside her and took her hand, just as Reza had. "A healer must attend you," Syr-Kesh, who had been First to Tesh-Dar, high warrior priestess of the Desh-Ka,  told her in an urgent voice. "No," Sai-Kel said with a smile as her body began to fall away. "For Her glory...I would die...at his hand." Leaning closer, Syr-Kesh asked, "At whose hand?" Just before she fell into the warmth and light of the Afterlife, Sai-Kel whispered, "Reza." [ Remember, click on the star to vote! :-) ]
 Last updated 09/12/201613:02 EST

 

Chapter Eight

"Lord of All," Eustus gasped as a white light, bright as any sun, speared through the clear view panels in the flex-dock as the Venetian Star exploded. The faceplates of the Marines' helmets automatically darkened to keep them from being blinded, but the civilians weren't so lucky. The captain had already begun to rotate Chasseur about her long axis to put the mass of the ship between the paper-thin walls of the flex-dock and the expanding sphere of white hot debris. Eustus cringed as he saw a cloud of fragments whiz through the empty space where the flex-dock had been just a moment before, and hot tears welled in his eyes as he thought of Reza. He's gone. But Eustus had no time now to grieve. "Hurry!" Ortiz bellowed over the radio and her suit's PA. "Get them aboard!" While her idea of vacuuming the survivors into the destroyer was working, it wasn't working fast enough. The dock had now collapsed along the destroyer's flank as the ship maneuvered, and a huge strain was being placed on the seam where the docking ring attached to the ship's airlock. "Come on," Eustus said, grabbing a sobbing passenger, whose hands were covering her flash-blinded eyes. Eustus propelled her forward with one hand while he held onto one of the handhold loops with the other. The other Marines followed his lead, forming a fire brigade of sorts to fling the remaining passengers toward the airlock. Looking up at a loud popping sound, Eustus saw the telltale vapor stream from air that was venting from a tear in the dock where it met the airlock, courtesy of a fragment of debris that had ricocheted off one of the ship's gun turrets. The good news was that it made more of a pressure differential in the direction of the ship to help move the remaining passengers along. The bad news, on the other hand, was all too obvious. "Go on, Camden," Ortiz said after an agonizingly long time of moving the passengers forward, putting her hand on his shoulder as she tossed one last civilian forward. "We're the last ones in this conga line. Move your ass!" He didn't need any further prompting. Pulling himself forward with the handhold loop, he went sailing behind the last passenger, pausing at the next handhold long enough to turn and make sure Ortiz was following behind him. "You stop again and I'm going to shoot you!" she shouted. Yanking him free of the handhold as she sailed by, the two of them caromed toward the airlock, where Stalin and Davis were now waiting, their boots magnetically locked to the deck and their arms held out to assist. The inner door had been closed to protect the passengers and other Marines, who were now safely inside the ship. Stalin grabbed Ortiz and hauled her in, and Davis had a hold of Eustus's arm when the seam of the flex-dock finally gave way. Even though the pressure in the dock had been reduced dramatically, the resulting decompression into the near-perfect vacuum of space was still explosive. Eustus screamed as Davis lost his grip and Eustus was blown through the hole... ...or would have been, had not Reza appeared right between the two men. One of his hands latched onto the armor of Davis's upper arm, the gleaming talons of Reza's armored gauntlets sinking into the metal, while the other grabbed Eustus's wrist in an unyielding grip. Together, Davis, Stalin, and Ortiz managed to haul the two of them back into the lock before Stalin hit the button to close the outer door. He turned around and took a long look at Reza in the near-vacuum in the lock. Reza, acting as if the dangerously low pressure had no effect on him, got to his feet and calmly stared back. "Pressurize the lock!" Ortiz ordered, but Stalin made no move to do so. Shoving past him, she slammed her palm down on the appropriate control, releasing a hissing torrent of air that quickly brought the lock up to pressure. She grabbed Stalin's arm. "What the hell is wrong with you?" Without taking his eyes from Reza, he grabbed her combat harness and flung her into Eustus and Davis, who were both dumbstruck by Reza's appearance. 

Before Stalin could move another muscle, the tip of Reza's dagger was pressing against Stalin's chest armor, right over his heart. With a feral grin, Stalin grabbed Reza's wrist and pulled it toward him, pressing the dagger harder against his chest armor. The tip of the blade scored the tough metal, then began to sink in. "Go ahead," Stalin taunted. "Kill me with your shiny knife. But you know this is not how you want it. We are alike, you and I, more than the others can understand. When the time comes, we will see who is the better killer in the time honored way." "That's enough!" Ortiz shouted after Eustus and Davis helped her back to her feet. She took hold of the hand Stalin had clamped on Reza's wrist. "Let go! That's an order, staff sergeant!" Stalin ignored her. Turning to Reza, she dropped her hands away from Stalin's and said, "Back off. Now." Bowing his head, Reza stepped back, easily snapping his hand free of Stalin's grip before sheathing his dagger.  "He assaulted you," Reza said to Ortiz. "Do you wish me to accompany him to the brig?" "No," Ortiz said in a tired voice as she took off her helmet, glad to be free of its confinement. With a sharp look at Stalin, she said, "You and I will sort this out later." She turned back to Reza. "I don't need someone in Kreelan armor frogmarching my senior NCO through a bunch of scared civvies and the ship's crew. And right now I have a bigger concern: not that Eustus is complaining, I'm sure, since you saved his life, but just how the hell did you get here from the Venetian Star?" She took a step closer. "What the hell are you?" Reza briefly thought of telling her exactly what he was. I am a warrior priest of the Desh-Ka, he could have said. In the world where he had become a man, a warrior, had such words needed to be spoken, they would have told any among those who lived across the ten thousand suns of the Empire exactly what he was, and they would have understood all that it implied. But his human kin had no frame of reference. He was the most powerful warrior who had ever lived among humankind in all its history, with abilities they could only comprehend as magic. Yet, how could he say such a thing and have Ortiz and the others believe that it was anything more than boundless hubris? It probably didn't matter, in any event: he could think of no explanation that would make any more sense, that would be accepted any easier, than the truth. "The Kreelans must have had a teleportation device with them," Eustus blurted, just as Reza was opening his mouth to tell Ortiz that he was a Kreelan warrior priest. "I mean, we've known since the first contact encounter that they can do all kinds of things we can't explain, right? They just choose not to most of the time. The warriors aboard the ship must have had some sort of gadget that sent him back to us." "Wow," Davis breathed, his eyes wide with wonder. Stalin said nothing, but narrowed his eyes in consideration as he continued to stare at Reza. "I don't remember asking you, Camden," Ortiz snapped, thankful that this discussion was taking place in the relative privacy of the airlock, rather than among the entire detachment or in front of a bunch of civilians. As crazy as Camden's idea was, she couldn't think of any better explanation. Reza had appeared right before her eyes, and that had scared the shit out of her for any number of reasons. To Reza, she said, "Is this true? Does the enemy have such technology?" "Yes," he said. He didn't think it prudent to tell her that it wasn't any technology as humans understood it, but was innate to his body and mind. "But I know nothing of how this...device...functions." That much was true. "You spoke of this to those who debriefed you when you returned to the Confederation?" Stalin asked. Reza nodded. "Yes. That was the...mechanism...used to banish me from the Empire."

Stalin cocked his head to one side. "And why did they save you now, after you butchered so many?" "Because I wished it." Reza was uncomfortable with so much as bending the truth, as the warriors aboard the Venetian Star had nothing to do with his returning to the other Marines. In this case, however, he rationalized that it was an answer that was truthful enough. "If their warriors will just do whatever you ask," Stalin asked him in an acid tone, "why do you not tell them to surrender, or take their own lives?" "I could not ask them to do anything that goes against their Way," Reza said. "More than that, I cannot — and will not — say. If you have further concerns, I would direct you to Fleet Admiral L'Houillier." "Yeah, whatever," Ortiz said in a tired voice. "I can't get my brain around this and it's giving me a headache. Stalin, Davis, go round up the rest of our detachment and find out what's to become of us now that Leander's gone. Camden, find Gard here a uniform that'll fit and a bag he can toss his Kreelan stuff into. He and I will stay out of sight here until you get back." "Yes, ma'am," Eustus said as he made to open the inner door of the lock, with Davis and Stalin behind him. Ortiz pushed Reza to one side and stood in front of him, hoping to block him from view of anyone still in the passageway beyond. The door hissed open and the three men stepped out. Ortiz was surprised that the civilians were nowhere in sight and the passageway was empty. Loud voices, dozens of them, could be heard from somewhere down the passageway, however. She hit the button to close the door again after the others had stepped out, then she collapsed to her knees. "Lieutenant!" Reza knelt down before her, taking Ortiz by the arms and holding her steady. "All those people," she whispered as tears began to roll down her cheeks. She was trembling violently. "All those poor people I killed when Leander was hit." She looked up into his eyes. "How can I ever make up for that?" Looking away, she whispered, "You don't even know what I'm talking about. You weren't there." "I saw what happened," he told her. Ortiz looked up at him, disbelief plain in her eyes. "I can see beyond what my eyes show me," Reza explained softly. "You ordered the lock closed when the Leander was hit. Stalin shot the passengers blocking the airlock and closed the door, then the passengers in the flex-dock died when it ruptured." "You really saw all that?" "As if I were standing there beside you." She gulped and was quiet a moment. Then she asked, "Could you have used the teleportation device Camden was talking about to reach them?" Reza nodded. "Yes, but I could not have saved them all." "But you could have saved a few? Even just one?" "Yes, but there would have been a price to be paid." "What the hell does that mean?" Reza sighed. "If I had fled the...contest to save them, the warriors I was holding at bay would have been free to roam the ship, and could easily have blocked your escape with the remaining survivors." "But you could've just fought them again!" she cried, hammering one of her fists on his breast plate. Gently but firmly wrapping his hand around hers, he kept her fist pressed against his chest. "It is not so simple," he explained. "There are...rules that must be obeyed. I could not simply run from one ritual combat and begin another at my whim. It would have been a terrible dishonor. If I had to face the warriors again, it would have been on their terms. " He did not add that his own life in that case would have been forfeit. To flee a Challenge was a dreadful disgrace for a warrior, even a priest, that would have earned him a sentence of death. "I would have faced such dishonor to save your life, for I vowed to protect you, and to break that vow would be an even greater dishonor."

Ortiz shook her head, rolling her eyes in a combination of disbelief and disgust. "So, if I had been about to get hurt or killed, you would've popped out of thin air to save me, dishonor or not?" Reza nodded. "You stupid bastard," she rasped, pulling her hand away and getting unsteadily to her feet. "Next time save someone who's innocent, someone worth saving, not me. I release you from your stupid vow. I don't want your damn protection if it comes at that high a price." Burning with shame, Reza bowed his head. The inner door suddenly opened to reveal Eustus bearing a duffel stuffed with regulation gear for Reza to wear. "Good timing," Ortiz snapped as she stalked out, pausing just long enough to slap the control to close the door behind her. Eustus stood there, uncertain, as Reza remained on his knees, head bowed. "You okay?" After a moment, Reza nodded slowly. "I am fine," he said in a soft voice, but Eustus couldn't miss the track of a single tear running down Reza's cheek below the scar over his left eye. Eustus put a hand on his friend's armored shoulder for a moment. Reza offered him a weak smile of thanks as he got to his feet. Eustus pulled a new Marine uniform from the bag as Reza began to strip away his Kreelan armor. *** Several hours after their rescue from the doomed starliner, Chasseur transferred the rescued passengers to a support ship and Ortiz's detachment to the assault carrier Yavuz, where they were assigned to an empty platoon bay. The former occupants, along with half the battalion Yavuz normally carried, had been wiped out in an earlier battle and had yet to be replaced. "Here's the deal," Ortiz said in an exhausted voice as her Marines gathered around. She had just returned from a brief and frosty meeting with the acting battalion commander, a jumped-up captain who had looked at her as if she were a cockroach. "We're being chopped to the Yavuz's Marine detachment for now. As you can see," she waved around to the empty bay, festooned with the personal effects of the previous occupants, "they have some spare bunks for us. But this isn't a Red Legion outfit, so they'll be transferring us off at the soonest possible opportunity." That was met with a round of hoots and catcalls. While the Legion was looked upon by outsiders as the Corps' garbage dump, those who wore its patch on their shoulder and had managed to survive their first battle often looked upon their parent unit with perverse pride, and upon "regular Marines" with more than a little disdain. "We obviously lost all our personal effects, a couple weapons, and extra gear," she continued, "so the first order of business is going to be sending a detail to the battalion quartermaster to top off our weapons, ammo, and equipment." "What if they give us a cold shoulder?" Castle asked. Ortiz snorted. "Then do what you do best, Castle. Hustle it for us. But I want us combat ready by the turn of the dog watch." She waved around them. "Box up the personal effects of the Marines who were here and take them with you. Maybe that'll help grease the skids." She didn't add that anything they might find that would be of use or special interest, especially contraband, was subject to the finders-keepers rule. "That's all I have for now. Any questions?" There were none. "That's it, then." As Stalin took over to oversee the execution of her orders, Ortiz retreated to her tiny cabin near the entrance to the bay, catching sight of the name plate on the door that read 2LT WILL BENSON. After closing the door and shutting the world away, she sat down on Benson's bed, which had been made to boot camp standards before he had gone off to die. A holo of a smiling young woman with two babies in her arms looked out at her from the tiny fold-down desk. "Dear Mrs. Benson," Ortiz whispered, "I regret to inform you..." Her voice tapered off as she leaned back against the bulkhead, closing her eyes. But all she could see were the images of helpless civilians being cut down by Stalin's rifle, and so many more blown into space as the flex-dock to Leander gave way. 

She bit off her cry as she snapped awake, the images of all those she'd killed slowly, reluctantly fading away as her eyes darted around the cramped cabin. Her uniform was damp with sweat and her hands were shaking. "Lord of All," she whispered. Someone knocked on the door, and she realized that's what had awakened her from the nightmare. "Come," she said in a shaky voice, thankful for the interruption and wondering if she'd ever be able to sleep again. The door opened. It was Stalin. "Everything is done, lieutenant," he reported, his eyes narrowing slightly as he looked at her. "Did you want to talk about what happened in the airlock?" She laughed, or tried to, but it caught in her throat and died. "Would it make any difference?" She waved a hand before he could answer. "Never mind. That was a rhetorical question. Nothing makes any goddamn difference." The big man came to stand close beside her, one of his knees brushing her leg, and Ortiz suddenly wondered if this was it, if Stalin was finally going to rape or kill his little pet, his toy. Then she wondered if she really cared. Maybe you shouldn't have been so quick to throw away Reza's protection, she thought. Reaching into his pocket, Stalin withdrew a glass bottle about the size of his palm that contained a clear liquid and tossed it on the bed beside her. Vodka. "You need sleep, lieutenant," he said. Then he turned on his heel and left. Ortiz eyed the bottle for a long time before she reached out and picked it up. Unscrewing the cap, she put it to her lips and began to drink. *** Later, alone in the tiny cabin in the platoon bay that was reserved for the senior NCO, opposite Ortiz's cabin, Stalin lay in his bunk and brooded about something he and the others had seen aboard the Venetian Star: the sixty-odd Kreelan warriors that Gard claimed to have killed. While Stalin very much wanted to, he did not doubt Gard's claim was true. But how could Gard have struck down so many in the relatively short time Leander's Marines had been aboard the starliner? Stalin had more experience in hand to hand combat than most people in the entire Confederation, and he could not imagine being able to kill that many armed and skilled opponents in the amount of time Gard had. A handful, yes, but sixty or more? No. That would be impossible for any mortal man. That thought brought him to something that the others, including Ortiz, had not yet realized. Stalin understood the significance of the cyan rune on Reza's breastplate and on the oval blue stone affixed to his collar: such insignia had been worn only by a small number of very special Kreelan warriors encountered over the course of the war. The rare accounts of battles involving these warriors had generally been dismissed as having been fabricated, even in cases where video documentation supported the testimony of eyewitnesses, and few believed the recorded feats of these warriors could possibly be true. For to believe that was to believe in dark magic, in madness. Stalin, too, had always doubted those reports. Unlike most of his colleagues, however, he had a passion for studying his enemy that rivaled that for ridiculing God with the holy verses he posted every day, and he knew that the markings on Kreelan breast plates and collars were far more special than most believed. After getting the platoon settled in, Stalin had spent some time in the ship's library before returning to his quarters to contemplate his findings. Letting out a sigh, he picked up one of the printouts he had made from his research and studied it. It was a drawing that dated back to the first contact encounter with the Kreelans, made by the legendary then-Midshipman Ichiro Sato. He gave the long-dead admiral credit for being a passably good artist, for Sato's hand-drawn depiction of the warrior was true to form. In this case, he had also drawn the silhouette of a one point eight meter tall man beside the mysterious Kreelan to show just how big she was. But what intrigued Stalin was the rune on her breastplate: the design was the exact same as that adorning Gard's chest armor. "What are the odds?" he asked himself in Georgian. "And what does it mean?" He slid the drawing and the other pages of information under his pillow when a knock came at his door. A voice came through the door. "It's Walker." "Come." She came in and closed the door behind her. It was after lights out, but neither Ortiz nor Stalin ever enforced the rule. The men and women in their platoon were veteran Marines of the Red Legion, not preschoolers. "What do you want?" Stalin said, wondering if she'd come for words or something more physical. The two of them had shared both during their long time together. "Something has to be done," she said in a low voice. "That son of a bitch has Ortiz and most of the others hoodwinked with his parlor tricks." Stalin granted her a noncommittal grunt. Walker was so blinded by hate fueled by the loss of her family that she would never consider the possibility that what Gard had told them about his intentions upon returning to the Confederation was true. On the other hand, Stalin agreed that something had to be done, but for entirely different reasons. "Something will be," he told her. "When?" He shrugged. "Soon. Perhaps sooner if..." His voice trailed off and he smiled as she stripped out of her clothes and joined him in his bunk. >> Please remember to vote for this chapter if you enjoy it! Updated on 10/11/2016 at 12:10PM


 

Chapter Nine

"Welcome to Alpha Company, 1st Battalion of the Red Legion," boomed Captain Raiden Yamada. Little taller than Ortiz, Yamada had a barrel chest and biceps that strained at the sleeves of his uniform. His close-cropped hair was black, save for the furrow of gnarled scar tissue that flowed from his scalp to engulf the left side of his face like a river delta. That side of his mouth was turned up in a permanent grin. Ortiz and her platoon stood at stiff attention, ankle deep in mud on the waterlogged parade ground in front of the company headquarters building. The squat structure was neat in its appearance and well-maintained, but its rough-hewn wood siding, wood shake roof, and protruding ridgepoles made it look as if it were a living history museum. Three flagpoles stood before it, just behind Yamada, bearing the Confederation and Marine Corps flags, along with the banner of the 12th Guards Regiment, more commonly known as the Red Legion. The flags drooped without a breeze, soaked by the rain that continued to fall from the leaden clouds. "He looks almost as scary as you, Gard," someone whispered from one of the rear ranks. "At ease," Stalin hissed from where he stood at the rear of the small formation. "I have good news and bad news for you," Yamada continued. "The bad news, as I am sure you surmised the moment you debarked from the boat that brought you from the Yavuz, is that our outpost here on Carillon is not the five star resort hotel on a sun-drenched beach that you were no doubt expecting." The right side of his mouth turned up in a smile, and his comment was rewarded with a round of subdued laughter. "Believe it or not, the thriving metropolis you will find beyond the palisade gate," he gestured with a hand toward the open gate in the wall of wooden poles with sharpened tops that surrounded the compound, "is the largest habitation on this joyful planet, and the most modern." The Marines craned their necks, looking through the gate, their eyes following the cobblestones that led to a collection of numerous wooden structures on both sides of the street that comprised the heart of the town beyond. While no chimneys were visible over the rough hewn but sharp tops of the palisade, several plumes of woodsmoke curled into the gray sky. "Looks like a frontier town from a history book," someone whispered. "It's a shit hole," someone corrected under their breath. Yamada didn't hear, or perhaps just pretended not to. "By all rights, this garrison should be manned by the Territorial Army, but Carillon doesn't have enough of a population to raise even a single regiment. In such cases, primary responsibility for planetary defense on the ground falls to the Corps, with support from local TA recruits. The men and women who form the detachment here take their jobs seriously, and I have no doubt they will acquit themselves well if the time ever comes." He smiled again, but unlike the first time it was clearly forced. "Also, as you can see," he again gestured toward the open gate, "the Confederation has perfected time travel and sent us back about six hundred years. Since Carillon has never been threatened, let alone attacked, it's not exactly on the top of the priority list for Confederation engineers and modern materials. There's an endless supply of wood from the forests and stone from various quarries, so that's what we use here." He grinned, showing a set of perfect white teeth. "If you have carpentry and masonry skills, you'll be in good shape. If you don't have them now, you will before you rotate out, because we're the ones who build and maintain our fortifications, such as they are." That brought on a collective groan. "You said there was good and bad news, sir," Castle called out. "What's the good news?" "The good news," Yamada said with a nod of acknowledgement, "is that Carillon's main export is liquor. As such, it's plentiful and cheap, so you can drown your sorrows to your heart's content when you're off duty. The town, which is also the planetary capital, also has a legal brothel that caters to both sexes. For you nature lovers, when the weather permits," he gestured to the clouds overhead, "an overnight hike or horseback ride from here will bring you to some of the most amazing scenery you'll ever set eyes on."

"Uh, thank you, sir," Castle said in a subdued voice. "I'm gonna fucking die before I rotate outta here," someone moaned. "If you do not shut your mouth, you are going to die right now," Stalin growled. "Sir," Ortiz asked, "what about the rest of the company? There aren't enough buildings here to accommodate all the platoons." "The rest of the platoons are detached to cover the other major towns," Yamada told her. "I rotate them each month so that every unit is familiar with all of the locations they may be called upon to defend." And to do what I can to prevent mind-numbing boredom from setting in, he didn't have to add. "With your arrival I have enough strength to extend coverage to two more towns by splitting the platoon that I've been holding here. They've already departed, so for the next month you and your Marines will remain here to become acclimatized. Starting next month you'll begin scheduled rotations to the other settlements." "Yes, sir," Ortiz said in a wooden voice. Yamada was silent for a moment, then said, "I know you and your people have had a bit of a rough time, and that you lost all your personal belongings. So — and you can consider this another bit of good news — I'm giving you all forty-eight hours of liberty, two squads at a time so we have enough people on duty to man the garrison, to take advantage of the local delights and refill your kit bags. If there's anything you need to square up your combat gear, see the company supply officer and he'll get what you need." He paused. "Oh, and one last thing: every Marine, on duty or not, who goes beyond the palisade that surrounds the town will be armed with an assault rifle. The local forests are home to some large predators that look upon unarmed humans as fast food. Details are in your planetary info downloads, so make sure you read up on those threats before you venture past the walls." His gaze moved across the Marines, his expression one of sympathy as much as anything else. "Does anyone have any questions?" Silence. "Very well." To Ortiz, he said, "Carry on, lieutenant." Ortiz pivoted on her heel to face her Marines. "Platoon," she bellowed, "atten-SHUN!" The men and women behind her sloshed to attention. Pivoting back to face Yamada, who had also come to attention, she saluted. He returned her salute before whirling on his heel and disappearing into the headquarters building. Without waiting for the command to do so, Stalin circled around the formation from behind, coming to stand before Ortiz. "First and third squads get the first liberty rotation," she told him as they exchanged salutes. "Now get these people out of this fucking rain." "Yes, lieutenant," Stalin said. With that, Ortiz left the Marines in Stalin's hands and stalked off to find the company supply officer. "Lord of All," Eustus whispered, "this really stinks." Reza took in a deep breath, the aromas of rain and woodsmoke, of the forest and the beasts that lived beyond the palisade. It reminded him so much of home. "It is wonderful," he breathed in reply. *** Syr-Kesh stared through the view port into the vast depths of space, wishing not for the first time that she had the power of a priestess's second sight. This far-flung region of space was her responsibility, her charge to bring the humans to battle and allow the warriors under her to bring glory to the Empress, but an unexpected challenge now lay before her. Sai-Kel's revelation that she had fallen to Reza's sword echoed in Syr-Kesh's mind, and she had given a great deal of thought to what she should do. His presence here in her realm gave her a unique opportunity to honor the Empress, but she had to do so in a way that would be in keeping with Her will. Great battles raged across many planets in the human sphere, which was tiny compared to the Empire, but here near the edge of human space no planets were under large-scale siege. The human colonies tended to be small and would be easily defeated by even a modest force of warriors, which would go against the Empress's edict that the humans were to be preserved until such time as the Kreela themselves were nearly extinguished. Then, and only then, would the Empire unleash its final fury upon humanity. 

A wave of sadness crashed over her heart at the thought. The knowledge of the Empire's fate had long been limited to the Empress and the high priestesses of the ancient orders, but Syr-Kesh had seen and heard enough over the many cycles she had served as Tesh-Dar's First to puzzle out the truth for herself. She still clung to the hope that Reza would somehow yet fulfill the ancient prophecy and save her kind from Keel-Tath's Curse, but she could not imagine how after he had been banished. The sands in the cosmic hourglass that measured the cycles left to the Empire were rapidly draining away, and as the end of her own people drew near, so did that of the humans. Pushing aside thoughts of what she could not change, Syr-Kesh sought to focus on what she could. She drummed the talons of her right hand on the sill of the view port, a habit she had long ago picked up from Tesh-Dar, whose presence she sorely missed. Bleed them, My Children, the Empress had commanded. It was on the face of it a simple command that had great underlying complexity. The task of Syr-Kesh, and the many others like her throughout the galaxy who were charged with carrying out this war, was to provide her warriors the opportunity to fight the humans as long as possible, but without exhausting or exterminating them. It was a difficult balancing act that required constant reassessment of both her foes and her warriors, for while she had virtually unlimited resources, with countless millions of warriors vying in arenas across the Empire for the honor to fight the humans, the resources of the humans were minute by comparison. Getting to her feet, she approached the two dimensional star map that decorated one wall of her quarters. She had access to more sophisticated three dimensional representations, of course, but she found this simple map better suited to times of strategic contemplation. Her eyes wandered over the human planets in her area of responsibility and the shipping lanes that linked them together. To this point, the focus had been on small-scale space battles, with great care given to ensuring that the losses in shipping did not overly disrupt any of the enemy's colonies. In this way, these worlds continued to spawn young that would eventually become warriors. Such a strategy, however, would likely not lead her any time soon to finding Reza, which she was determined to do. Not to confront him in a Challenge, although she would not hesitate if the opportunity arose, but to provide such opportunity to her warriors. Sai-Kel and the other warriors under her who had died at his hand had earned a special place in the Books of Time, for it took great courage to face a warrior priest, let alone one who bore the mark of the Desh-Ka. If she could give more warriors the chance to face him, as well as any human warriors in his company, she would. She must. Finding him again in another random encounter in space would not suit her desires, nor was there more than a modest chance of it happening again unless she attacked every human convoy and task force in the sector. She might, however, entice the humans to put Reza in harm's way if the non-warrior humans and the younglings among the colonies were at risk. She could not afford to slaughter them, of course, but putting her blade to their throats to draw a trickle of blood might well suit her needs. Just as one of her own warriors would give her life without a thought to save one of the clawless ones or a child of the creche, so, too, were human warriors willing to sacrifice their lives for their helpless and their young. "Ela'i-Kuran," she called to her First, her decision made. "I have new commands for the fleet..." *** Reza was not at all surprised when the others of his detachment decided to head into town to find what comforts they could, notably among the half dozen pubs and the single brightly lit brothel, to begin their brief time of freedom before duty once again called. Eustus had tried to convince Reza to go with them, but Reza had declined. "I have other plans, my friend," he told Eustus. "You know I have no interest in such entertainments. Go with them and enjoy yourself."

"What are you going to do?" Eustus asked. "I must attend to some chores," Reza told him cryptically. Waiting until Eustus and the others, moving down the town's main street in a boisterous mob, had disappeared into the nearest pub, Reza followed, although not toward the same destination. Over his shoulder was a duffel that contained his Kreelan armor and weapons. The town was busy at this afternoon hour, and he got more than a few curious glances from passersby. He could wear the same uniform as the others, but he would never look like them, not with his long braids and Kreelan collar, nor would he ever be truly accepted beyond his tiny circle of true friends. The thought saddened him, but he knew all too well that Fate was not always kind. He ignored the curious and hostile looks of the strangers around him, focusing instead on his errand. He had to make two stops to gather certain basic chemicals he needed, the human names for which he'd long since looked up. Then he continued past the center of town, a block down one of the few side streets that were little more than gravel-covered alleyways, to reach his final destination. While he had located it before leaving the garrison through his second sight, it had not taken him long to find it with his nose, the smells of smoke and hot metal hearkening back to bittersweet times of his youth. "Can I help you?" A tall, swarthy man, powerfully built, looked up as Reza approached. His silver-streaked black hair was nearly as long as Reza's, formed into dreadlocks that streamed down his back. He stood behind a large anvil, hammer in one hand, tongs holding what looked like a short rod of glowing steel. Behind him two forges glowed, with the other tools of a blacksmith's trade evident in the shop's open front. "I would like the use of one of your forges and tools," Reza said, stepping closer. "I will pay, of course." The man laughed. "Listen, boy, if you want me to hammer some steel for you, I'll be happy to oblige. But I'm not going to let some jarhead come in here and get himself hurt." "I am well acquainted with the craft," Reza tried to reassure him, recalling the countless hours he had spent with Pan'ne-Sharakh, sweating from the heat of the forges used by the armorers of the kazha. "You are, huh." The man was obviously not convinced. "Come here and show me, then. Let me see you make this," he nodded at the glowing steel he held, "into a horseshoe. You do that, we'll talk." He lifted the hammer, offering it to Reza. Setting down the duffle, Reza took the hammer by the handle, carefully avoiding the head, which was hot from contact with the horseshoe-to-be, then the tongs. The blacksmith stood to one side and crossed his arms, a bemused look on his face. Hefting the hammer, Reza struck it once, twice, on the anvil, getting a feel for its weight. Then, adjusting the position of the hot metal bar on the horn of the anvil, Reza began to hammer it with powerful, confident strikes, transforming the straight bar into a curve that matched a newly forged shoe that lay beside the anvil. As the metal began to cool, he transferred it back to the forge to reheat it, relishing the radiant heat pouring from the hot coals before he again applied the hammer. His body fell into a rhythm, with every strike creating a tiny fireworks display of sparks. When he finished creating the curve, he set the shoe on the anvil's face and beat it to the proper thickness and width, following the contours of the shoe he was copying. He periodically took a large wire brush and cleaned the shoe, removing the flakes from the surface of the steel that sloughed off like dead skin. When he was finished shaping it, he took a punch from where it hung on a wall and used it to form the holes for the nails that would bind the shoe to the horse's hoof. At last, when he was satisfied, Reza dipped the shoe into the large pail of water beside the anvil, leaning away from the steam that billowed up. After pulling it out and eyeing it one last time, he lay it beside the original shoe he'd used as a guide and set the tongs down on the anvil. His creation was a perfect copy. 

"Son of a bitch," the blacksmith said, shaking his head in wonder. "That's some damn fine work." His lips cracked into a wide smile, and he extended a powerful, heavily callused hand. "Name's Calhoun. Brett Calhoun. All I can say is that your talents are wasted as a Marine." "My name is Reza Gard," Reza said, bowing his head as he took the other man's hand and shook it. Calhoun's grip, not surprisingly, was strong as iron. Reza applied equal strength, but no more. The man's eyes narrowed slightly in recognition. "Reza Gard. You the boy who was on the news some time back? The one who was raised in the Empire?" Reza nodded, wondering if his infamy would ever fade. Releasing Brett's hand, he said, "Yes. Is that a problem?" Brett shrugged. "Not for me. Not if you can shape metal like that." Taking another look at Reza's handiwork, he said, "Since you saved me the work of making that shoe, the shop's yours to do whatever you need." He pursed his lips. "Mind if I ask what exactly it is that you're working on?" In answer, Reza opened the duffel and removed his Kreelan armor, which had suffered badly in the Challenge with Sai-Kel and her warriors. Brett's eyebrows shot up. "Being the genius that I am, I'm figuring that this is yours?" Reza nodded. "I've never seen any of their gear up close and personal." Brett reached out and ran his fingers over the metal. "That's mighty fine work." "It was not made by my hand, but it is left to me to repair it." Brett pursed his lips as he looked over the breast and back plates, which had taken the brunt of the damage, although the other plates that covered Reza's arms and legs were also dented and scarred. "You're going to be at that a while. You have anything to eat recently?" At the mention of food, Reza's stomach growled, and Brett chuckled. "I guess that's a no," he said. "How about you join us for dinner before you get started? It's about that time." "Thank you," Reza said, "but I do not wish to intrude." "Nonsense." Brett checked on the forges, then waved Reza toward the door at the rear of the shop. "Come on, I live upstairs." Blinking in surprise at such hospitality, Reza followed the big man through the door, which opened onto a short hallway that had two doorways and a set of stairs that led up to the building's second story. Reza's nose caught the scent of something cooking as they ascended the steps, and his stomach growled again, accompanied by a rush of saliva into his mouth. "That smells wonderful." Brett laughed. "Talia," he called, "I hope you made enough for a guest." "Well, it would've been nice for you to tell me," a young female voice scolded with theatrical intensity. A girl in her middle teens with mocha colored skin and long raven hair poked her head around the corner and shot Brett a mock glare. Catching sight of Reza, her eyes widened and her mouth dropped open. "Put your lips back together before you catch a fly," Brett admonished her with a smile before he kissed her on the forehead. "Talia, this is Reza. Reza, this is Talia." "Hi," Talia squeaked. "Hello." Reza bowed his head. "I am honored." Ushering the gawking girl back through the entryway, Calhoun led Reza into his home. Reza stepped into a kitchen with adjoining dining area that was large enough to seem spacious, yet small enough to seem cozy at the same time. A table that could seat eight along two opposing benches stood before a pair of windows that looked out over the few single story buildings that separated Calhoun's house and shop from the palisade, beyond which lay endless lush forest. A beautiful stone fireplace was nestled between the windows, the chimney no doubt connected to that used by one of the forges below. A short hallway opposite the entryway led to a great room that boasted a comfortable looking sofa and pair of chairs facing a far more impressive fireplace that took up a third of the opposing wall, the smoke taken away by the chimney that served the second forge in the blacksmith shop. The interior of all the rooms was made up of light gray wood planks broken up by splashes of color that, even to Reza's inexperienced eye, were clearly evidence of a woman's touch. 

"Hi." A boy of eight years sat at the table. He smiled and waved at Reza as if they were best friends. "And that's Ben," Calhoun said. Again, Reza bowed his head. "It is nice to meet you, Ben." "Come on." Calhoun gestured to the nearest bench. "Take a seat and make yourself at home." Reza sat down opposite Ben, who grinned. "You're a Marine," he said with the definitive knowledge of boys his age. Smiling, Reza said, "Yes, I am." Calhoun took a seat beside Reza as Talia bustled about in the kitchen. With a gentle scowl, the big man looked at his son. "Aren't you supposed to be doing something?" "Aw, Dad." With a lingering sigh, Ben got up and shuffled into the kitchen to help his sister, who quietly scolded him for being a lazy brat. "It's the same thing, every meal," Calhoun said with a grin. "The kid's had to help in the kitchen since he could hold a spoon, but history starts over again every time we eat. You have any kids, or maybe a special someone?" "No," Reza told him, holding back a wave of emotion as he fleetingly thought of what might have been had he stayed in the Empire. That a human could become one of Her Children, that this same human could become a priest of the Desh-Ka, were both miracles against the most impossible odds. Was it too much to imagine that the love he had shared with Esah-Zhurah, given time, could have brought forth children into the world? But he would never know. He quickly clamped down on the dark despair that threatened to well up from the depths of his soul. The blacksmith didn't press the issue as Talia came around with a steaming pot filled with a savory meat stew that she carefully ladled into the four bowls set out on the table. Calhoun unsuccessfully tried to hide a smirk as she made sure to give Reza just a bit extra. Ben brought over a cloth-lined basket containing a loaf of bread fresh from the oven and a bowl of butter, making sure to put both in easy reach of where he'd been sitting. Then he ran back for drinks: a pink fruit juice for himself and Talia, and mugs of beer for his father and their guest. "Hey!" Ben cried out with bone-deep indignation as he saw that Talia, having returned to the table after returning the pot to the stove, had taken his spot on the bench opposite Reza. "That's my seat!" "Lord of All," Calhoun said under his breath. "Talia..." She shot him a pleading look as she gestured for Ben to come over to her. The boy stomped across the floor, his face pinched with annoyance at his sister, his mouth turned down in a fierce frown. She leaned over and whispered something in his ear and the frown instantly disappeared. "You promise?" he asked. Talia nodded. Without further complaint, Ben happily plopped down onto the bench beside her as Talia looked sweetly at her father. "And just what did you promise your brother?" Calhoun demanded with mock severity. "He gets half my dessert." "Good grief," Calhoun said. "Okay, hold hands." Calhoun took Ben's hand across the table, Ben took Talia's, and Talia and Calhoun both reached for Reza's hands. Wrinkling his brow in confusion, Reza held their hands. "Lord of All," Calhoun said, "thank you for your many blessings this day, and for bringing strangers to our door that they may become friends. Amen." "Amen," the children echoed, and everyone let go. "Don't you pray?" Ben asked Reza just before he stuffed a huge chunk of bread into his mouth and began to chew. "Yes," Reza told him, "I pray every day, but not quite in the same way as you."

"So, you believe in God, then?" Calhoun asked with no small trace of surprise. "The Kreelans believe in the Almighty?" Reza gave him a sad smile. "Let us say that I — and they — believe in power greater than ourselves, but I can tell you little more." He tried to keep his tone light, but not being able to speak openly of his past was a burden that weighed far more heavily on Reza than he ever could have guessed, and served to isolate him still further from the humans with whom he sought to reforge a meaningful bond. Thankfully, Ben changed the subject. "Where did you get all those scars on your face, especially that one over your eye? Did you get beaten up a lot when you were a kid?" "Ben, don't be rude," Calhoun admonished, then shot Talia an angry look as she jabbed her elbow into her brother's shoulder. "I do not mind," Reza said. Looking at Ben, he went on, "There was a time when, yes, I was beaten up, as you would say. But most of these scars are from later, when I met fellow warriors in ritual combat, and gave them many scars of their own. A warrior wears them with honor." He leaned slightly closer to the children, both of whom were staring at him, food still in their mouths, chewing forgotten. "But this one," he gestured to the scar over his left eye, "was given to me when I was perhaps your age, Ben, by the greatest warrior of the Empire, after I gave her a similar scar with my dead father's knife." "She let you live?" Talia whispered. "Just let you walk away?" Reza nodded slowly. "At the time, yes. But she came back for me when I was about your age." Talia shuddered and Ben looked to his father, eyes wide. "Is that true, Dad?" "I suspect so, son," Calhoun said as he studied Reza. "It fits with what I remember from the news reports." "Did you take that," Talia pointed at Reza's collar and the gleaming eyestone with the rune of the Desh-Ka, "from a dead Kreelan?" "No. It was made for me." "So someone gave it to you when you lived with them, like as a present?" she asked. Reza shook his head. He paused, choosing his words with care to avoid revealing anything sacred to the Way. They could never understand the true meaning of the Collar of Honor, but he could at least give them an inkling of its importance. "No," he said gently. "The collar must be earned. Only this," he tapped the eyestone, "is given, but not as a gift. It is more like a...responsibility, a burden, in a way, that must be carried." He smiled. "More than that, I cannot say." "Kids, stop grilling the man so he can eat," Calhoun interjected. Talia and her brother fell into a disappointed silence except for blowing and slurping sounds as they ate their stew. Both of them kept their eyes fixed on Reza, and he could tell they were bursting with questions. Calhoun was, too, but had the discipline to restrain himself. "I do not mean to pry," Reza said, deciding it was time to ask a question or two of his own, "but where is their mother? Is she not here?" Calhoun shook his head. "Amelia passed not long after Ben was born. A neo-tiger got through the palisade and took her and four others before we killed it." "I am very sorry," Reza said, saddened. "I should not have asked." "Don't be sorry — it's a fair question. Life here can be hard and dangerous. That's why these two," he nodded at the children, "know how to shoot a weapon straight and true, and know when to run and when to stand their ground, right?" Both children nodded. "You and your Marine buddies need to watch your tail feathers if you go beyond the wall. Animal wounds are the biggest cause of injury and fatalities among the Marines, so the doc says." He snorted. "It's certainly not from fighting Kreelans, which I'm more than thankful for."

"Our captain told us to beware of the animals," Reza said, fingering the eyestone at his throat. "I have had my own experiences with great predators. I plan to explore beyond the wall, and I'm sure the garrison patrols the forest. I will take what you say to heart." "Good man. Now let's finish up and get to work on that armor of yours." *** Reza was happy to accept Calhoun's offer to help, and was impressed with how helpful the children were, and how careful they were in the downstairs shop. As Calhoun held the hot armor steady on the anvil with heavy duty tongs, Reza rhythmically hammered it into shape, his experienced eye guiding each strike to gradually smooth out the creases and dents in the metal. Talia worked nonstop to keep the primary forge white hot, for Kreelan armor was a special alloy that demanded high temperatures to make it even moderately malleable. Reza ignored the gasps of the children when he stripped to the waist, revealing the multitude of scars, great and small, that criss-crossed his body. "You saw some rough times, son," Calhoun observed over the roar of the forge. Reza only offered him a smile before he took up the hammer and began to rain measured blows upon the metal on the anvil. They worked long into the night, for Reza was determined to shape his armor as if he were to present it for the inspection of Pan'ne-Sharakh, whose spirit he hoped was looking over his shoulder, her ancient and strong but gentle hand guiding his own. The children brought them water and food, or fetched tools as required or fresh water for the cooling tub. When Calhoun finally ordered them to bed, Talia protested that they did not have school the next day. Withering under the beseeching eyes of his children, he relented and let them stay up, making sure they kept well clear of the many things in the shop that were dangerous. After pounding out the damage, shaping, cooling, and fitting each piece, Reza took to the breast plate, which he had saved for last. As he worked the metal, Calhoun stared, transfixed, at the glowing cyan rune in the center of the plate. For all the damage, for all the times that Reza hit the metal with his hammer, the coloring of the rune never seemed to change. The glossy black finish of the armor was virtually destroyed under the pounding of the hammer, but never the rune. "How is that even possible?" Calhoun grunted, sweat pouring from his brow. "I've never seen the like. It's like the color runs all the way through the metal." "It does," Reza told him in between strikes. "How?" "I do not know how to explain it," Reza told him. The particular dye used to form the runes on the breastplates for the priestesses (and sole priest) was itself created from living metal, just as were the blades of edged weapons. It penetrated and transformed the metal it was applied to, and forever was part of it. The glossy finish, however, was more conventional: the stops Reza had made before arriving at the smithy were to gather the ingredients he needed for the black coating, and during the course of the evening he had described the process to Calhoun, for there was nothing secret or sacred about its formula or application. "Damn," Calhoun said after listening to Reza's explanation. "I'm going to have to try that on some of my own work." Reza smiled before he again brought down the hammer on glowing steel. *** "Where the hell is he?" Ortiz growled as she stalked down Main Street, Eustus and the other Marines of his squad doing their best to keep up with her. She had a splitting headache, as did the others who had partaken of the previous evening's binging. They all had been looking forward to recovering from their hangovers over the remainder of their allotted shore leave, but that had come to a jarring end when a runner from the company had discovered her asleep in an empty room in the bordello. She had no idea how she'd gotten there, but since she still had most of her clothes on she figured the story couldn't have been too juicy. The news the runner brought was not at all welcome: the platoon's shore leave had been curtailed, and everyone was to report for duty to the company headquarters. In addition to the two disconsolate squads left at the garrison that hadn't yet had their turn on shore leave, she had managed to round up everyone from the bordello and the nearby bars. Everyone except Reza. Even Eustus, whom she had found fully dressed and snoring away in the lobby of the so-called hotel across the street, had no idea where Reza might have gone. Eustus, just behind her, felt miserable, both physically from the previous evening's excesses and for letting Ortiz down. As they continued down the street toward the far end of the town from the fort, they crossed a back street. From a few buildings down Eustus heard a rhythmic banging and saw smoke coming from a pair of chimneys. Something made him stop and look more closely. "Camden?" Ortiz snapped. "What is it?" "This way, I think," he said, uncertain. He hated to move toward the banging sound, for someone was already slamming a hammer into his temples from the inside. Just how much did I drink last night? he wondered, not for the first time since Ortiz had rudely awakened him. Ortiz muttered something unkind under her breath. "Why would he be down here?" Eustus's addled brain finally made the connection. "His armor. He needed to fix it." As they reached the shop front, which stood open to the street, there he was. Reza, stripped to the waist, his body slick with so much sweat that even the pants of his uniform was soaked, drove a hammer against metal with the help of a big man that could only be the blacksmith. Toward the back, curled up on some bags, were a young boy and a teenage girl, sound asleep despite the hammering. With a final bang, Reza set down the hammer and helped the blacksmith move what could only be the breastplate to a tub of water, which exploded with steam as the water accepted the metal's waste heat. Then Reza turned around, as if he knew the others had been standing behind him, and nodded a greeting. "Sorry to interrupt your rollicking fun, Gard," Ortiz called, gesturing for Camden to step forward, "but duty calls." Eustus handed Reza a duffle bag. Reza opened it to find a fresh uniform, body armor, and the rest of his combat gear, which Eustus must have retrieved from the garrison before coming here. Another Marine came forward and handed Reza a rifle. "What has happened?" Reza asked. "The captain said the early warning network reported several shooting stars last night over the forest west of town and nominated us to go check them out." "Shooting stars?" Reza asked, cocking his head to one side in confusion. "Meteors?" "Maybe meteors," Ortiz said, stepping closer, "and maybe something else. Now get your gear on and let's get moving." Reza did as she asked, stripping out of his sweat-soaked uniform and donning the clean one, not at all self-conscious that he was for a brief moment virtually naked for all to see. Finally, he donned his Marine body armor and checked his weapon and ammunition bandoliers. After a moment's thought, he went to the bag in which he had brought his Kreelan armor to the shop and reached inside to withdraw his sword. "Lord of All," Calhoun said. "You didn't say you had Kreelan steel with you!" "I will show it to you later," Reza promised as he strapped it on his back. Ortiz nodded in approval. "Let's get this circus moving," she said as she turned and led the others toward the west gate. Calhoun stepped forward and lightly took Reza by the arm. "I'll look out for your things. Just remember what I told you about going out there," he said quietly. "I have not forgotten, my friend," Reza said. Behind Calhoun, he saw that Talia and Ben had awoken and were looking at him, expressions of concern on their faces. "I shall return soon." If you enjoyed this chapter, please hit the "like" button and be sure to share this story with your friends! :-)
 Updated 12/23/2016 at 1400 EST

 

Chapter Ten

What upset Ortiz more than being awakened from a blissful stupor was the mode of transportation she and the others were offered by Captain Yamada. "Fuel cells and spare parts are bulky and heavy," he had said, explaining the obvious, "and since every kilo of transport capacity that comes here is precious, we keep the few vehicles we have in the motor pool unless there's a military emergency. Which, as you've probably surmised, hasn't ever happened." He shrugged. "We've also used them on occasion for search and rescue to recover folks from the forest, but that's about it. So it's either this," he had gestured at the de facto transportation means of most humans on the planet, "or go on foot. But it's a heck of a long march to the west end of the ridge, which is as far as you'll be able to go on this patrol without air transport." "Which isn't available," Ortiz had said. "Which isn't available," Yamada had agreed with a slight smile. "You learn fast, lieutenant." Reluctantly, and against her better judgement, Ortiz had given in to his suggestion and taken in hand...the reins of a horse. A horse. She'd never even seen one except in a few holovids. After putting Stalin in charge of the remainder of the detachment, Ortiz led two squads from the company garrison to the town stables to requisition their transportation. An hour later, after receiving a crash course in basic horsemanship, she was struggling and cursing her mount, a lithe chestnut Arabian gelding with the unlikely name of Monty. "The horses know what to do," Ortiz said, mocking the leather-faced civilian man who tended the stable and who'd shown her and the others how to ride. "Just point them in the direction you want to go and you'll be fine. Monty's the best of the lot. He'll take good care of you. The lying bastard." For the hundredth time she yanked back on the reins as Monty bent down to snatch up some grass growing along the "road" that was little more than a rutted track through the forest leading west. With her other hand, she maintained a death grip on the saddle horn. "I've never had horse meat before," she told her mount, "but if you do that one more time, I'm serving the whole platoon Monty burgers when we get back. If we get back." "Just relax, lieutenant," Reza called to her over his shoulder. After demonstrating surprising prowess on a docile mare, the stable keeper had elected to give him a larger, much more spirited mount, a silver stallion named Caesar. At the head of the column, taking the point position, Reza rode the beast as if they were a single living thing. "Let him do as he wishes. He will not fall behind." "That's easy for you to say!" Ortiz griped. "I feel like I'm going to fall off every time this stupid beast leans down to stuff his fat face — oof!" Monty dove for another clump of grass, yanking down on the reins, which Ortiz was still clutching tightly, having shortened them up from when she had yanked Monty's head up earlier. That threw her off balance, and Monty completed Ortiz's acrobatic dismount by coming to an abrupt stop. With a venomous curse, Ortiz toppled forward out of the saddle to land flat on her back beside the horse. Monty turned to look at her as he contentedly munched away. "You...stinking...shit," Ortiz wheezed, the wind having been knocked out of her. Eustus, who was riding right behind her, dismounted and handed his reins to Davis, who came up beside him. Aside from Reza's seemingly inexplicable equine expertise, those two were the only ones who'd ever ridden a horse before. Actually, they were the only ones who'd actually seen a horse. "I'm fine, I'm fine," Ortiz wheezed as Eustus helped her to her feet. She pushed him away as she fought to suck air back into her lungs. "Why the hell did I ever agree to ride these damn things?" "And why is this whole stinking colony trapped in the dark ages?" Castle blurted. He'd been having nearly as tough a time staying on his mare as Ortiz. "No vehicles we can use? Wooden walls around the town and garrison? Buildings made of wood and stone? Horses? Hardly any real technology outside of the landing field? What the hell is it with this place?"

"The colony founders wanted the inhabitants to be able to sustain themselves without external supply," Davis explained in his tour guide voice, and everyone turned to glare at him. "What? Didn't any of you read the info pack?" He rolled his eyes before summarizing what he'd read. "Everything's wood because it's versatile and, in the short term, is in virtually inexhaustible supply. Wood is supplemented by stone from local quarries for construction purposes. Horses are the primary motive power behind transportation, both for personnel and cargo, along with field work in the agriculture industry, which is by far the greatest segment of the planet's economy and is the cornerstone of the liquor that is Carillon's primary export. Equines are flexible, hardy, and easily sustainable creatures—" "That can be eaten when they're too much of a pain in the ass," Ortiz interrupted with a poke at Monty's flank. "That's enough for now, Davis." "But I haven't gotten to the indigenous wildlife," Davis protested. "That's the really good stuff!" "Can it," Ortiz said more sharply than she'd intended, and Davis snapped his mouth shut, screwing his face into a pout. Ortiz ignored him. After three unsuccessful attempts to get back into her saddle, she sighed. To Eustus, she said, "Would you mind giving me a boost?" "Yes, ma'am." Eustus leaned down and interlaced his fingers, making a stirrup that he used to help her up. After a brief struggle, she regained the saddle, grabbed the saddle horn for dear life and, with an audible sigh, took the reins. "Okay, Monty," she said to her gelding as Eustus hopped back into the saddle of his own horse, "I give up. Do your thing, just please don't toss me off again, okay?" The horse turned his head to look at her, then snorted. "That didn't sound like a promise," Ortiz observed dryly. "Come on, Gard, let's move." She checked her geotracker, which was one of the few bits of technology that was both available for use and was actually helpful on this God forsaken, tree infested rock. "We need to make at least another twenty kilometers before dusk, when we'll make camp." With a grimace, she added, "I can hardly wait." "Yes, lieutenant," Reza said, whirling Caesar around with a flourish and heading down the trail at a trot. "Oh, no..." Ortiz cried. She grabbed for the saddle horn with both hands and fought to keep her ass in the seat as Monty happily took off after the silver stallion. Her only consolation was that her dismay was audibly shared by most of the others in the column behind her as the other horses hurried down the trail. *** Reza could not help but smile. Riding a horse was little different from riding a magthep, and he had taken to the equines instantly. He had been elated when the stable master had given him Caesar, a gorgeous animal, powerful, nimble, and sure-footed. Man and beast had immediately bonded to one another, and riding through the great forest triggered a flood of fond memories of a lifetime ago when Reza had sat astride Goliath, riding with Esah-Zhurah by his side among the natural wonders of the Homeworld. The trees around them soared to heights of fifty meters and more, indigenous conifers that were similar in appearance to those on Earth, or so Davis had told them after Ortiz had relented and let the man regale the patrol on the planet's wonders. Beneath the canopy was a carpet of ferns and lichens amid mounds of deadfall where ancient trees had fallen and were in the long process of giving their essence back to the soil. Here and there were meadows where full sun poked through to illuminate long golden grass and blooming flowers of every imaginable color. Tiny insects and fluttering bird-like creatures chirped and sang in a natural symphony. Even Ortiz had been captivated by the sights as they moved westward along the trail, for when Reza periodically threw a glance over his shoulder, he saw her gawking this way and that, wide eyes overcome with the natural wonder around them.

Nothing, however, could have prepared them for what lay before Reza after he topped a tree-covered hill. "In Her name," he breathed in the Old Tongue before the others came within earshot of his soft voice. "Holy...shit," Ortiz said as she pulled up beside him. Before them lay a titanic network of canyons that extended to the southwestern horizon and beyond. The steep canyon walls told the story of the planet's history in the dozens of unique strata that were revealed through the work of water and wind over the ages. It was a tapestry of mineral and stone that took their breath away. Far below their vantage point on the rim, Reza could see the glint of water in what had to be the main river channel. Dismounting, Reza left Caesar to nibble on some grass while he stepped to the edge to get a better look. The drop was straight down for what he guessed was at least two kilometers to the first of a series of steep rocky slopes and more sheer drops that eventually reached to the bottom. "Careful, Gard!" Ortiz exclaimed. "Jesus, that's a long way down." "Fifteen point three two kilometers, to be precise," Davis told her in an awe-filled voice. "It's over twice as deep as Valles Marineris on Mars back in Sol System, and it's warm down at river level. Even in winter the temperature is over forty degrees Celsius along the river bank." Eustus, emboldened by Reza's lead, dismounted and came to stand beside his friend. Leaning down, he picked up a rock and threw it in an arc, as far out as he could. They watched the tiny missile fall...and fall...and fall...until it disappeared from view. "Wow," Eustus breathed. "Look at that," Ortiz said, pointing due west. One of the side canyons opened onto what appeared to be a lake, the view framed by an enormous natural arch of stone that spanned the entrance to the waters beyond. Ortiz took out her tactical viewfinder and focused on the arch. "My God," she whispered, "that thing is at least thirty kilometers long!" "A place in town offers guided backcountry tours into the canyon, even out as far as that lake," Davis offered helpfully. Ortiz looked at him, astonished. "Are you nuts?" Davis shrugged. "Well, technically..." "Never mind," she said, reluctantly putting the viewfinder away. With a sigh, she turned back to Davis. "So how much are those tours? It's not like we'll have much else to spend our pay on while we're stuck on this rock." "Well— " Caesar suddenly snapped his head up from grazing and he turned to face the forest, back along the trail they'd taken. His ears strained forward and a trace of white shone around his eyes as he stared into the shadows. He sucked in a deep breath, nostrils flaring, then snorted. The mood of the other horses changed, too, as if someone had flipped a switch. All of them were now fully alert, looking in the same direction as Caesar. "What is it?" Ortiz asked, directing the question to Reza, who had already moved away from the cliff edge to take up Caesar's reins. Eustus did the same, coming to stand beside his own horse, one hand on the assault rifle that was in a scabbard attached to the side of the saddle. Reza held up his hand to forestall Ortiz from saying anything else. Focusing his concentration, he sent forth his second sight, but after a sweep through the trees out as far as half a kilometer he detected nothing larger than a group of deer-like herbivores browsing in a meadow. With nothing threatening to see, he closed his eyes and breathed in, trying to filter out all the scents that held no threat, hoping to isolate whatever was spooking the horses.

There, he thought after a long moment. He had caught a faint trace of alien animal musk mingled with the fetid breath common to many carnivores. Again, he sent his second sight away into the trees, following the bearing provided by the horses. And again, he found nothing. Returning his breathing to normal, he opened his eyes. "I think something is stalking us," he said, looking up at Ortiz, "but I cannot tell what it is, or exactly where it might be." "Neo-tiger," Davis whispered, his eyes wide in what might have been taken as a comically exaggerated look of fear, but Reza could tell it was all too real. Like Davis, Reza had studied the information on the planet before they had disembarked from the Yavuz, and learned that there was no shortage of fauna on Carillon that was potentially lethal to humans. The worst of them was a species of dinosaur-like saurians, very similar to the genoths of the Homeworld, that lived in the arid lands near the equator and were large enough to swallow a horse whole. But here in the forests, the two most-feared predators were the neo-tiger and a variety of snake that grew to a length of fifty meters. Other, smaller beasts that travelled in packs were also to be feared and respected, but the oddly named neo-tiger, which was more like a cross between the long-extinct sabertooth tiger on Earth and an orangutan, and the snake were by far the deadliest. "A neo-tiger, then," Reza agreed, as he doubted the snake would have a musky smell or the same foul breath as a meat-eating quasi-mammal. "That would explain why I can't see it." "What do you mean?" Ortiz asked. "They have near-perfect adaptive camouflage," Davis whispered, his eyes darting around them. "Like a chameleon, only a lot better. A lot better. Better than any Confederation tech. Even our thermal scanners won't see it." "What the hell is a chameleon?" Castle asked in a frightened voice. He had drawn his weapon and was pointing the muzzle toward the forest. "Never mind that," Ortiz snapped. To Reza, she said, "What should we do?" "For now," he replied, getting back on Caesar, whose attention remained riveted on their unseen pursuer, "I suggest we continue on as planned. I think the beast is still some distance behind us." "How do you know?" Ortiz asked. "Its scent is very faint, and there are other animals behind us that are undisturbed. As I said before, I think it is stalking us, learning about us, before it decides to attack. We must stay together and watch the horses carefully: they may give us some warning if it comes close. I also suggest that we find a defensible place somewhere along the ridge to camp to limit the directions from which it might approach." "All right." Ortiz took a deep breath. "We keep moving until an hour before dusk, then we'll start looking for a place to hole up for the night." To Reza, she added, "Lead on, Gard." *** The patrol continued to follow the trail along the ridge overlooking the canyon. Ortiz periodically rotated the Marines through the point position, and Reza had been relieved by Eustus, who now rode at the front of the column while Reza dropped back to the rear guard position. As Caesar dutifully followed the other horses, Reza tried to find the neo-tiger with his second sight. He caught glimpses several times of something behind them and off to the right, deep in the forest, but was unable to keep track of it. It was like watching a shadow slipping through other shadows, or a faint disturbance in a cloud of slowly swirling mist. Then he tried watching the other animals, which was far easier to do. Every living creature larger than his finger, save the bird-like creatures that soared above the ground, exploded away from some invisible threat, leaving a swath of terrified animals that moved parallel to the Marines' course and perhaps two hundred meters deep in the forest. 

As the sun sank toward the horizon, Ortiz signaled a halt as they reached a section of the rocky ridge that was clear of trees and large bushes to a distance of fifty or so meters. "This looks like it should do," she said. "We've got decent fields of fire here and there's nothing it can hide behind if it wants to come for us." Reza nodded in agreement. "We should gather as much dry wood as we can," he suggested. "I suspect the beast will not like fire." "Good idea. Davis, make it happen." "Yes, lieutenant," Davis said quietly as he dismounted. He and the others drew their rifles from the saddle scabbards, then Davis issued terse commands to the other Marines. Reza went to gather the reins of the other horses, but Ortiz said, "Let Camden do that. You get over there on that little outcropping," she pointed to a small rise near the center of their encampment, "and keep watch. I don't want to be surprised if that thing decides to make a run at us while we're setting up camp." Bowing his head, Reza handed Caesar's reins to Eustus and did as she ordered. The Marines spent the rest of the fading light in a frantic orgy of wood gathering while Reza, Eustus, and Ortiz kept watch. It was an act of will to keep their attention on the edge of the forest where their fellow Marines were gathering wood, for behind them was a mind-blowing sunset over the great canyon. "I've lost track of it," Reza told her as the sun sank below the horizon, leaving the sky blazing crimson and orange. "It was last in that direction," he pointed toward the forest at roughly two o'clock, "but has disappeared." "How do you know it hasn't just been staying still?" Ortiz said in a near whisper. "Because nocturnal animals, small ones, are climbing down from the trees where I think the beast had come to rest after we began to make camp." "Great," Ortiz muttered. She snapped down the thermal imager and looked into the forest with technology augmented vision. Her people, who were now returning from their wood gathering near the edge of the forest, stood out in bright contrast. Small animals, just as Reza had said, were making their way warily down the trunks of the trees, flashing bright eyes toward the Marines. She could see other animals moving along the ground among the nearest trees, but beyond that the deadfall, massive exposed roots, and undulations in the ground blocked her view. "If this thing breaks cover from the forest, wouldn't it have to show up on our thermal viewers?" "Yes, but only briefly," Reza observed. "As Davis noted, the beast is quite extraordinary in its adaptation. If I recall the planetary briefing correctly, xenobiologists believe that the thermal aspect of its camouflage evolved as a mechanism to protect it against the snake, which hunts primarily by detecting the heat signatures of its prey. " "And you don't see any of those damn things, I hope?" Ortiz asked. "No. But they are also well-camouflaged, and can move nearly as fast as the neo-tiger over short distances." "You're not making me feel any better," Eustus commented in a sour voice. Reza smiled. "I am sorry, my friend. But we should do well here. We have a clear line of sight to the tree line and a natural obstacle behind us." "That also means no retreat," Eustus pointed out. "None of us has parachutes." "If two squads of Marines have to retreat from one stupid animal," Ortiz told him, "then we deserve to be eaten." She sighed. "All right. Let's get the fires going." Under Ortiz's direction, the Marines had set up six small fires in a rough semicircle facing the forest that defined the perimeter of their makeshift bastion. Half the Marines were on watch twenty meters behind the fire line, with those off-watch free to eat or sleep as they chose. The horses were hobbled well back from the fire line, but at a safe distance from the cliff's edge.

Reza stood on the knoll, reaching outward with his second sight and his body's senses, but he found no trace of their quarry. "Anything?" Ortiz asked. She offered him a hot ration, which Reza politely declined. "No." She looked down at the ration, which was some sort of barbecued meat, and dipped into it with a spoon. "You seem worried," she observed between mouthfuls. "I know it must still be here somewhere," he told her, "but everything in the forest seems normal; there is no indication of a large predator anywhere nearby." "Maybe it didn't like our fires." Reza frowned. "It would not have stalked us for such a distance to simply give up, and unless it fed somewhere along the way, it must be extremely hungry by now." He shook his head. "No, it is still with us. Somewhere." "Well," she looked at her chronometer, "we've got another six hours until sunrise and plenty of wood for the fires. The goddamn tiger can just sit out there and starve." Ortiz turned and walked away toward the campfire around which the others who weren't on watch were gathered, eating and talking in low voices. Reza remained where he was, watching and listening, a knot of apprehension tightening in his belly. *** Lance Corporal Viktor Kutuzov finished his meal of synthetic chicken marinara and tossed the biodegradable packet into the flames of the campfire. Getting to his feet, he let fly a tremendous belch. "Christ, Kutuzov," one of the others exclaimed. "You could've spooked the damn horses." "Or set off an earthquake," someone else quipped. "Is good thing it came out front end and not back here," Kutuzov joked in his thick Russian accent, patting his ass. "Now I go make yellow rain on river." "Don't fall in, asshole," someone said. "The first step is a doozy..." Kutuzov chuckled and made an obscene gesture as he turned from the fire, carefully making his way past the horses, which were little more than shadows against the jaw-dropping field of stars that blanketed the titanic canyon below. His eyes barely had to adjust from the light of the fire to see the ground, so bright was the illumination provided from the countless points of light above. He did, however, place his feet with utmost care as he came near the cliff's edge. He looked down to see the tiny squiggle of the river glimmering at the bottom of the canyon, and he smiled. Kutuzov was an adrenaline junky and had already decided that he would get hold of a parachute: this was simply too good an opportunity to pass up for some galactic quality base jumping. The only trick, he thought, would be to arrange a pickup. Maybe one of those tour companies would agree to meet him somewhere along the path to the bottom... Such thoughts occupied his mind as he undid his pants and began to empty his bladder into the vast emptiness below. When he was finished, he zipped up, then carefully turned away from the magnificent vista to return to the campfire. He made only one step before a white-hot spear of pain shot through his left calf. Then the pain got worse. Much worse. *** Everyone turned as a shriek of agony split the darkness from the direction of the cliff. In that split second, Reza's second sight flashed ahead of his body, which was already dashing in that direction, to see Kutuzov, screaming and clawing at the ground, being dragged over the edge. "Behind us!" someone bellowed. Reza flew past the others, sword in hand. He reached Kutuzov just as the younger man lost his grip on the rocks he'd been clinging to. His face was contorted in agony and a terrified scream issued from his throat. Reza clasped one of Kutuzov's forearms with his free hand. "Hang on!" From behind, the other Marines surged forward, with Ortiz shouting for them to be careful not to go over the cliff. "Take my hand!" Eustus was beside Reza, grabbing for Kutuzov's other hand. Together, he and Reza fought to haul him back to safety. "I don't have a shot!" Davis cried as he desperately looked over the edge to one side. "The thing's under some kind of overhang!" More hands reached forward, trying to grab hold of Kutuzov. With a collective pull, they dragged him up, and he came up easily as more Marines leaned in, grabbing his combat harness, uniform, anything they could get a grip on. "It must've let go!" Ortiz shouted. Reza knew she must be wrong. As Kutuzov's savaged legs came into view, he saw with sickening certainty that he was right. He caught the briefest glimpse of a massive paw, prehensile as a primate's hand, wrapped around the man's foot and ankle, with two inch long claws sunk into the flesh, into the bone. The beast yanked on the young man's leg with unbelievable force. The other Marines, holding tight to Kutuzov, and in some cases with their hands entwined in his combat webbing, were thrown off balance and would have been flung into the abyss had it not been for Reza. With a glimmering flash of steel moving too fast for the human eye to see, Reza's sword severed Kutuzov's leg just below the knee. As the beast snatched away the severed limb, Reza launched himself backward with all his strength, arms spread wide, to prevent the startled Marines from pitching over the edge of the cliff. They collapsed in a heap, Kutuzov still screaming in terror and pain. Davis let go a burst from his rifle at their attacker, but the crimson bolts found only air and rock. "What the hell?" Ortiz cried as she got to her feet. She grabbed Reza by the front of his uniform. "You cut his goddamn leg off!" "We had him, you bastard," one of the other Marines snarled. His words echoed the angry starlit faces of the other Marines, who now stood in a semicircle around Reza, save for two who knelt beside Kutuzov and tried to staunch the bleeding from the cleanly severed leg. "He saved your lives, you idiots!" Eustus shouted, then turned to face down Ortiz, who was furious. "Think! We all would've gone right over the edge with Kutuzov if Reza hadn't done that." Another shriek tore through the night, punctuated by an ear-splitting roar. As one, the Marines whirled to watch in open-mouthed horror as Kutuzov, his hands battering in vain at the claws of a massive paw that had sunk deep into the vulnerable flesh of his lower belly, was snatched away from the two Marines trying to help him. The Marines got a glimpse of great yellow eyes, glowing in the flickering fire light, before the beast and the screaming Kutuzov disappeared over the edge. Leaning out as far as he possibly dared, Davis fired another, longer burst. "Did you hit it?" Ortiz gasped. "No," Davis whimpered. "It moves like greased lightning. The planetary guidebook said they were fast, but..." He took several steps back from the edge, well past where Kutuzov had lain, and the others followed suit. All save Reza, who stood still as a pillar of stone, sword in hand, staring at the trail of blood left by the young Marine, whose screams could still be heard somewhere below. Another long, spine-chilling moment passed before the screams ended with a wet crunch. After that: silence. Please remember to give this chapter a star if you enjoyed it! :-) Last updated 01/09/2017 1430 EST

 

Chapter Eleven

Author's note: I'm using a slightly different work flow (with my iPad vs. my MacBook Air) to publish this chapter, so hopefully it won't come out too funky looking here in Wattpad. If it does, just let me know and I'll repost it the old way. Thanks and enjoy! :-) Night gave way to day after an eternity of fearful darkness. With dawn came dreary clouds that blanketed the sky, heralds of a storm that was releasing a deluge of rain to the south. Exchanging few words, the Marines broke camp and remounted the horses. Exhausted and frightened, every pair of eyes looked outward for any signs of their nemesis from the night before.
"We're ready, lieutenant," Davis reported quietly.
Ortiz looked out over the column of horse-mounted Marines and grimaced. After the loss of Kutuzov, she had reported in over the comm link to Captain Yamada and requested permission to return to base, but he had refused. "I don't mean to make light of his loss," Yamada said in a sympathetic but unyielding voice, "but periodic casualties are a way of life here, just like casualties from the Kreelans are an unavoidable reality out in the Fleet. I expect civilians to run from danger; it's the job of Marines to stand and face it. Learn from the experience and carry out your mission, lieutenant. Yamada, out."
"All for some goddamn shooting stars," Ortiz whispered.
Davis glanced at her. "Lieutenant?"
"Nothing," she snapped. "Move out."
With a hand signal from Davis, Castle, who was in the lead, prodded his horse with his heels. With an anxious jolt the old mare began moving, and the other horses followed behind her. Like the Marines, they were skittish, turning their heads at real or imagined sounds or smells, their ears flicking forward with equine intensity. None of them dipped down to sample the lush grass that grew at their feet as they returned to the main trail that led through the forest. 
Riding in the rear half of the column, Reza's mouth was set in a grim line. The reins of Kutuzov's horse were secured to his saddle, the animal plodding along behind his own.
"It wasn't your fault," Eustus said quietly from behind him, and not for the first time since Kutuzov had been killed. 
"The hell it wasn't," someone muttered, echoing a sentiment that had been expressed either verbally or through accusatory looks by several of the others over the course of the night.
Reza would have told Eustus, at least, that he was not burdened by a sense of guilt so much as confusion and consternation. He had no doubt that he had made the right choice in amputating Kutuzov's leg in order to try and save him. No, what concerned him far more was a failing, or at least a weakness, of his second sight. As a priest of the Desh-Ka, even for as brief a time as he had worn the sigil at his throat, he had been in awe of the amazing powers he knew dwelled within him, and knew there very well could be others. Having been denied the chance for Tesh-Dar to teach him, or at least to have been granted the time to read through the Books of Time to guide his understanding, he might never stumble across them. But he did know and understand, or thought he did, the power of his second sight, and it was as natural to him now as breathing. He should be able to reach out with his mind and see and sense all there was around him, as far away as he might care to cast his spirit within the bounds of the time he might take to do so. He had taken that power for granted, thinking it — and he — was infallible. Now he knew that it was not. Nor was he. He should have been able to easily detect the neo-tiger, but the beast possessed some unknown quality that masked its body from detection, and it made him wonder if he truly understood his second sight, or whether he was only able to use it at some rudimentary level. Could he have simply taken this gift for granted? The possibility nagged at him, inflaming the sense of inadequacy that had taken root in his mind. 
Closing his eyes for a moment, he took in a deep breath before exhaling slowly, forcing the doubt and uncertainty from his mind. Once he had achieved a suitable level of inner calm, he cast his second sight out into the world around him, not to see what lay beyond the range of his eyes, but to better understand what lay within his spirit.
***
The patrol continued onward, wending its way through the forest under a leaden sky. Light rain fell intermittently, but the storm was content to otherwise let them be. After a time, the horses relaxed and fell back into their normal routine of browsing as they followed the trail, and the Marines, while still tired and morose from the previous night's horrors, began to shed some of their fears. All of them had fallen into a perpetual state of awe at the wonders of the forest around them: the trees, which seemed to grow ever taller as the patrol moved deeper into the forest; lichens that covered the many huge boulders that protruded from the ground, overlaying the gray granite with broad swaths of vivid red, orange, and green; fern-like plants with giant purple fronds in the shape of hearts; and ancient upended trees, slowly rotting into oblivion, with trunks as big around as a Navy corvette. Winged creatures that vaguely resembled large bats darted through the branches overhead, and other small beasts, which Davis noted were marsupials not unlike kangaroos on earth, but adapted to live in the trees, watched the procession from their perches aloft with large, gibbous eyes and hooted at the strangers. The forest abounded with life, and every creature seemed curious about the trespassers. The Marines were grateful for the audience, for the presence of the animals meant that the neo-tiger was nowhere nearby.
It was just past noon when the patrol topped a slight rise that again provided a breathtaking view of the great canyon. 
"This should be it," Davis said as he checked the coordinates on his map display. "The end of the road."
"Anybody see any shooting stars?" Ortiz asked in a sarcastic voice. 
Her query was answered with a combination of muttered curses and angry silence. 
Reza knew her question was entirely rhetorical. Ignoring the others, he focused his energy outward, trying as he had all day to improve the clarity of his spiritual sight.
But he didn't need the powers of the Desh-Ka to see the glint from the forest off to his right. His second sight, however, showed him far more detail than his eyes could, and what he saw in his mind sent a spear of ice down his spine. "Here," he said to Eustus, quickly handing his friend the reins to Kutuzov's horse before Reza went charging into the trees, Caesar's hooves pounding at a full gallop.
"Reza!" Eustus called, and the others turned at the commotion.
Ignoring him, Reza guided Caesar through the deadfall to a small clearing. Bringing the horse to a sudden stop, he slid to the ground and knelt beside a scorched metal container in the shape of bullet that was large enough to contain a fully equipped soldier.
Or a Kreelan warrior. 
"Holy shit," Davis, who was the first to arrive behind Reza, exclaimed. "That's an atmospheric penetrator, isn't it?"
"Yes," Reza confirmed as he moved around the container. Like all machines created by the builder caste, it was adorned with Kreelan runes proclaiming glory to the Empress. It was a relatively simple device, an almost exact duplicate of similar penetration modules used by the Marines to insert small teams into high risk areas where an assault boat or small lander was likely to be detected. It was dropped from orbit, and the occupant had to endure a grueling entry into the atmosphere to land, which was accomplished through the use of ablative shielding, parachutes, and a landing retro that, in the case of the Marines, had fractured the spine of more than one unlucky occupant. Looking toward the top of the penetrator, Reza saw that a black parachute had been folded up with typical Kreelan precision and tucked under the module to keep it from flapping in the breeze and potentially drawing unwanted attention. 
"There's another one," Eustus said, pointing to the edge of the clearing where an identical module lay, partly obscured by a patch of ferns. 
By now, the others had arrived and had spread out, searching for more penetrators. All had their weapons drawn and were fully alert. Unlike the neo-tiger, the Kreelans were an enemy the Marines understood, and their thoughts and actions were not dominated by helpless fear.
Leaving the others behind, Reza searched deeper into the forest around them. Eustus went with him, awkwardly holding his rifle while guiding his own horse and Kutuzov's behind Caesar. 
Reza thought to tell Eustus that he would not need his weapon, that the Kreelans were no longer in the vicinity, but decided against it. While Reza wanted to help his comrades in arms as best he could, he also did not want to make them dependent on his abilities. Even a priest of the Desh-Ka was far from immortal. 
When they returned to the clearing, they found Ortiz waiting anxiously. "How many did you find out there?" 
"Eleven," Reza reported. 
"So that's eighteen, counting the ones we found here."
"There are probably more," Davis said. He shook his head. "We couldn't have made a drop this tight, landing so close together. These came down within spitting distance of one another, but they probably had at least some that were blown off course, away from the primary landing zone. Even the Kreelans have bad luck sometimes."
Ortiz nodded. Keying her comm link, she contacted Captain Yamada. "Sir," she said in a tight voice as soon as Yamada came on, "we have a Kreelan incursion of at least eighteen warriors, possibly more."
Yamada was silent for a long moment. "Lieutenant, are you sure?"
Kicking one of the modules, Ortiz said, "One hundred percent certain, sir. Those shooting stars were atmospheric penetrators. We've got eyes- and hand-on confirmation. Enemy warriors are on the ground."
In the background on the far end, she heard Yamada shout an order at someone to put the colony on full alert. Then, to Ortiz, he said, "I have new orders for you, Lieutenant."
"Go ahead, sir."
"Search and destroy," Yamada told her in a grim voice.
***
Tia-Ulan led her warriors through the forest toward where she believed the nearest human village was located. They were supposed to have landed much closer, but they had been given no choice for their insertion window and had been blown off course by ferocious winds aloft. She and her companions had howled with the heady mix of fear and exhilaration as their capsules were thrown about in the airstream, but even stalwart Kreelan warriors dreaded the crushing force of the retro rockets that fired just before the capsules hit the ground. Normally they would have shed the capsules higher up and simply floated down on flying wings, but the intense wind made that impossible. 
No matter, she thought as she stopped for just a moment and arched her back in a languid stretch, trying to relieve some of the discomfort left behind by the jarring landing. They had found a trail that led in the right direction, and the extra distance meant that she could spend more time appreciating the amazing natural beauty around her. She only wished the humans had been located in the opposite direction, so that Tia-Ulan and her warriors could have spent even a single moment more gazing upon the shattering beauty of the great canyon to the west. But that, she knew, was not to be. Such a sight would be a treasured memory until she passed into the Afterlife, for she did not expect to live long enough to see the canyon again. Her party was one of many sent among the worlds of this sector by Syr-Kesh in hopes of finding Reza, the banished consort of Esah-Zhurah, blood daughter of the Empress. Tia-Ulan knew the story of what had happened; every warrior and clawless one across the Empire's ten thousand suns knew. And each also bore a burden of Esah-Zhurah's soul-crushing despair and sadness, a song of pain and anguish that echoed through the Bloodsong and had since the moment the Empress had cast Reza from Her sight and love. Tia-Ulan did not know if finding Reza would bring Esah-Zhurah relief or more sorrow. All she could do was her duty as ordered by Syr-Kesh: to find the human who had become a priest of the Desh-Ka and bring him to battle for the glory of the Empress.
To that end, the hundreds — perhaps thousands — of search parties were not made up of the most experienced warriors. Only those who led, such as Tia-Ulan herself, had seen many battles. Those with her were junior warriors. While some had not yet fought against the humans, every one of them had competed in a series of ferocious challenges to the death for the honor of finding Reza and challenging him. None, even Tia-Ulan, expected to best him in combat, but that was of no consequence. To have the courage to cross swords with one such as he, to die by his hand, would be the greatest honor, and in so dying they would glorify the Empress far, far more than had they died in battle against the humans. 
The leaders of warriors such as Tia-Ulan had been chosen by their record of deeds as recorded in the Books of Time and as shown in the pendants that hung from their collars. She was proud to have been chosen, and was elated at the nature of their quest. Rather than being embroiled in some great battle where thousands or tens of thousands of warriors might fight and die in a huge swarm, she and those who followed her could seek much more personal combat with any humans they encountered. The humans would no doubt win in the end, for Tia-Ulan suspected they could call on reinforcements, whereas she could not. But in the meantime the swords of the junior warriors would be blooded, Tia-Ulan would again take the lives of humans, and if the Empress truly smiled upon them, they might find Reza on this garden planet.
The thought buoyed her spirits, and she turned her face up, opening her mouth to taste the sweet rain that had begun to fall from the dark clouds above. 
Her acting First, a tall and willowy warrior who seemed too thin and fragile to wield a sword (much to the surprise of her opponents in the arena), offered Tia-Ulan a shy smile as she, too, turned her face skyward and opened her mouth.
But instead of happily taking drops of water onto her tongue, she screamed in terror.
***
"Goddamn, but I hate rain," someone in the patrol grumbled over the comm link.
"Stow it!" Ortiz snapped as she and the others were pelted by a scattering of fat drops that were the promise of a coming deluge as the storm decided to pay them a visit after all. "Stay sharp, dammit. Gard, do you see anything?"
"Nothing yet," Reza answered in an uncomfortable half-truth. He knew, of course, exactly where the warriors were now, but he was torn between his desire to help protect his fellow Marines and to see that honor was paid to the warriors in not giving his human companions undue advantage in battle. "But they are —" 
His reply was interrupted by a piercing scream from somewhere not far ahead, followed by frenzied shouts and cries in what were distinctly recognizable as Kreelan voices.
"Dismount!" Ortiz ordered. "In line, advance!" 
The words had barely escaped her lips when the rain began to fall in a torrent so heavy that it nearly drove Ortiz to her knees.
"We can't maneuver in this bush!" Davis shouted over the roar of the deluge. "There's no way we can form a line and move forward. We've got to stay on the trail!"
Ortiz shook her head, sending swirls of water flying from her helmet. "That's suicide! They'll cut us to pieces."
"Not in this," Davis said. "You can't see your hand in front of your face. We can sneak right up on 'em!"
"Shit," Ortiz spat. "Movement to contact," she shouted, "single file!"
Stumbling through the epic downpour, the Marines left the horses to fend for themselves and plodded forward through the waterlogged humus, each desperately trying to stay in sight of the man or woman in front of them. 
Over the enveloping sound of the rain they could hear yet more screams.
"It's the neo-tiger," Castle shouted, his voice barely audible through the comm link. "It's tearing the bitches up!"
"No," Reza told him in a grim voice. "A group of warriors would make short work of it at close quarters. This is something else. Something worse."
"If it's killing them so we don't have to," Ortiz said, "I'm not going to complain. Let whatever it is kill them all."
***
"Flee!" That single word, spoken by her own tongue, tore through Tia-Ulan's heart, for it went against everything she had ever known as a warrior. Like the others with her, she was terrified, but a warrior's honor demanded that she boldly embrace fear and danger. But at her core, as with all of her kind, warrior or clawless one, was obedience and discipline. She wanted with all her heart to face the horror that had fallen upon them, but the will of the Empress, expressed in the commands of Syr-Kesh, would not be denied. Find Reza and bring him to battle. That was Syr-Kesh's commandment, and it had become the sole reason for Tia-Ulan's existence. She could not allow her life, or the lives of the others, to be spent in any other pursuit, glorious though it might be.
She caught sight of the undulating horror through the sheets of rain, the enormous serpent that had snatched up Tia-Ulan's First and consumed her whole. The thing had been hiding in plain sight, masquerading as an enormous branch amidst the burgeoning leaves of the trees above, its true nature not revealed until it attacked. The beast paused for a moment, no doubt forcing its first victim down its gullet, before it struck again, smashing another warrior to the ground. Fangs as long as Tia-Ulan's forearm pierced the unfortunate warrior's armor and sank deep into her torso. The warrior screamed, but more blood came from her mouth than air from her punctured lungs. "May you find a place among the Ancient Ones," Tia-Ulan prayed as she hurled a shrekka at the doomed warrior, killing her instantly. She would never let a fellow warrior suffer needlessly.
Turning to the others, Tia-Ulan bellowed, "Follow the trail! Quickly! Go!"
Quickly recovering their composure, the young warriors pushed by as fast as the rain and treacherous earth allowed. Tia-Ulan counted them as they passed her. Satisfied that all the survivors were accounted for, she turned and followed them, bringing up the rear. 
***
Reza knew from his second sight what awaited them, but that foreknowledge could not prepare him for the enormity or ferocity of this new foe as it came into view through the pounding rain. The head was as big as Caesar, the body as big around as two large men bound together. How long it was, he had no way to judge, for its monstrous body disappeared into the rain-shimmered trees above them. The thing turned to look at him, the shoulders and head of a Kreelan warrior still protruding from between its jaws. Reza noted with some small satisfaction the shrekka that protruded from the warrior's skull. She had not suffered long. He stared into the thing's unblinking eyes. He was filled with respect, but not fear. No warrior who had faced down a genoth of the Homeworld and lived would ever again truly fear another beast of nature.
Unfortunately, Reza was the only one among his war party who could claim such a feat.
Eustus snapped to a halt beside him. "Lord of All," he gasped.
Castle's observation was more colorful. "Jesus bleeding Christ!"
"Open fire!" Ortiz screamed when she saw it a heartbeat later, pulling the trigger of her own weapon.
Crimson and emerald energy beams sizzled through the rain, which greatly diminished their power before they struck the snake's tough hide. It took a moment before the hits even registered on the beast as it swallowed its latest kill. 
But if the Marines thought this dumb animal would simply retreat before their technological might, they were badly mistaken. It was the top predator of its domain and knew no fear of any other creature.
The heavy weapons gunner, Lance Corporal Pervez Jamali, advanced on the thing, his weapon blazing away. Jamali had been placed in rehabilitation for compulsive gambling and had never learned to read, but that had never mattered when it came to his aim: every shot hit the snake squarely in the head. Had the energy bolts not been weakened by the heavy rain, he might have been able to kill it all by himself.
Instead, he simply enraged the snake. With speed and agility unbelievable for so huge an animal, it drew back, opened its maw, fangs extending, and struck at Jamali.
The snake's jaws found only empty air. Eustus had flung himself at the gunner, knocking him to the ground just before the snake's head passed through the space Jamali had just occupied. 
The other Marines poured fire into the thing at point blank range, drawing its attention and giving Reza the opportunity he needed. Dancing forward with inhuman speed, his movements masked from the others by the rain, he drew his sword and slashed through the beast's thick hide, severing the spine.
Thick branches above exploded with a series of deafening cracks as the snake's body convulsed and fifty meters of writhing serpent crashed to the ground. The head, jaws still agape, smashed into the ground, the fangs sinking deep into the sodden soil as the thing's body coiled and twisted around it.
"Get back!" Ortiz screamed. "The damn thing'll crush you!"
The others backed away. Jamali grabbed Eustus and hauled him out of the way as a coil of the snake's body twisted and fell, nearly crushing both of them.
Nimbly dodging the twisting, turning body, Reza moved up behind the head, which was now snapping at empty air, and drove his sword into the massive skull. The tip of the glittering living metal blade found the serpent's brain. With a final convulsion, the massive body lost its tension and the loops and coils settled to the ground.
"I hate this planet," Castle whimpered as he kept his rifle trained on the thing's head and the dead eyes that stared out at him.
Ortiz snorted. "Amen to that." Then, to the others, she said, "Is everybody okay?" 
"No," Jamali said, kneeling beside Eustus. "There's something wrong with him."
"Eustus!" Reza was beside him in a heartbeat. "What is it?"
"Don't...know," Eustus managed, his voice barely loud enough to be heard above the rain. "Can't...breathe...can't...move..."
"Look for a wound," Ortiz snapped as she dropped to her knees beside him. She and Reza examined him as carefully as they could in the rain and muck. "Oh, shit." She looked up at Reza. "One of the snake's fangs must've grazed him when he tackled Jamali."
"The snake's venom contains a neurotoxin," Davis told them. "It's actually not exceptionally potent in the adults of the species, but it doesn't have to be. It can inject over a liter of venom in a single strike, and if that doesn't kill you —"
"Jesus," Ortiz said, cutting him off, "we get the picture! Reza, go get your horse and...Reza?" 
Reza had already gone.
A few moments later they heard something crashing along the sodden trail from the way they'd come. The Marines raised their weapons, ready to fire until they saw Reza, riding Caesar, galloping toward them. He drew the horse to a sliding halt. 
"Hand Camden up," Ortiz ordered. Castle, Jamali, and Davis helped her lift Eustus, who was now completely paralyzed. Getting his limp body onto the horse would have made for a great comedy routine had not the situation been so grim. 
But at last Reza had a firm hold on his friend in the saddle. Looking down at Ortiz, he said, "Beware the warriors. They're ahead of you, and almost certainly will seek to do battle."
"If they want a fight, we'll give them one," she said grimly. "You're the one who should have to worry. But you don't, do you?" She stepped back. "Watch your ass, Gard, and good luck."
Reza flashed her a cryptic smile, then whirled Caesar around and charged ahead along the trail, disappearing into the thundering rain. Revision posted 3/30/2017 21:46 Author's note: If you enjoyed this chapter, please give it a star if you like it, and of course feel free to comment, throw tomatoes, etc. ALSO, if you haven't already signed up for my mailing list, you might want to do that: if you do, you'll get a free copy of a fun little short story entitled THE MONHEGAN EVENT, which is only available to my newsletter subscribers. If you're already a subscriber, I'll be sending it around soon to the entire list. The subscription page is on my site at http://www.authormichaelhicks.com/newsletter/ - Enjoy! MRH

 

Chapter Twelve

Brett Calhoun looked up from his work as an unfamiliar wail rose in pitch over the roar of the rain pouring down into the street outside the open front of his shop. He stood there for a moment, holding the gate hinge he'd been working on, as the eerie sound wormed its way into his brain. He knew what the sound was, but he hadn't heard it since the system had been upgraded years before and was tested a few times. Since then, it had never been activated. 
The invasion alert.
"Lord of All," he whispered as he dropped the glowing hinge he'd been working on into the water bucket where it let off a torrent of steam, then tossed his tools onto a nearby bench. Dashing upstairs, taking the steps two at a time, he went to his room and flung open the closet. Reaching past the only set of formal clothes he owned, he grabbed a long canvas bag from the back corner. Unzipping it, he extracted a military assault rifle. It wasn't a modern pulse rifle like the Marines used, but fired rounds that used caseless propellant and were tipped with combination armor piercing/high explosive bullets. It wasn't fancy, but it was tough, reliable, and easy to care for. Every adult colonist had one, courtesy of the Confederation as part of the Territorial Army program, along with two hundred rounds of ammunition. More weapons and ammunition were stored at the local armory, which was a squat stone structure near the center of town that was manned by two full-time TA civilians to keep it clean and fix the constant leaks in the roof. Unlike many of his peers, who'd thought of the Kreelans as either a government hoax or someone else's problem, Calhoun had taken good care of the weapon, hoping he would never have to use it, and had cleaned and oiled it every month and fired it every year. "Please let this be a false alarm," he said, turning his eyes heavenward. But something twisted in his gut, knowing that Reza and his fellow Marines had been sent out to investigate some "shooting stars." What was it, Reza's lieutenant had said? Maybe meteors, maybe something else. It looked like they had been something else.
"Dammit." He slammed a magazine into the weapon and chambered a round before throwing on his heavy oiled leather rain slicker and strapping the TA-issued ammo vest over the top of it. He paused for a moment, considering whether he should dig the military uniform and body armor out of the duffle, but decided against it. He had one priority right now, and it wasn't to join in some ridiculous gaggle of mostly untrained idiots at the Marine compound.
He had to make sure his children, who'd gone to school that morning before the downpour had begun, were safe.
Pulling the hood of the rain slicker over his head, Calhoun dashed out into the rain. Crossing the street, he sought temporary sanctuary from the downpour under the awning that hung over the walkways that lined the shops and residences. The school was near the center of town, not far from the armory, and already a flood of people had emerged from their homes and businesses, heading in that direction. 
"Brett, where's your uniform?" demanded a tall stick figure of a man in his mid sixties. It was Kyle Armitage, the town's mayor. He wore his TA uniform and brandished his weapon like a magic talisman.
"It's in my closet where it belongs," Calhoun snapped. He was about to push past Armitage, then sighed. He stopped long enough to snatch the helmet from the mayor's head. "You've got this on backwards." Flipping it around, he slapped it back onto the man's bald pate, then said, "Go home, old man. You don't have any business being in a fight."
Bristling with anger, Armitage grabbed Calhoun by one of the straps of his ammo vest. "It's our duty!"
"My duty is to my children." Calhoun batted the man's hand away, then turned and continued on his way. 
As he neared the street that led to the armory and, three buildings past it, the school, Calhoun found himself trapped in a mob of confused people. Most were clamoring to get into the armory to draw their weapons, having chosen not to keep them at home or wanting more for their children, or perhaps more ammunition. Others, like Calhoun, were trying to force their way through to the school and their children against the tide of people coming from the opposite direction, heading toward the armory. 
It was a rain-drenched ballet of utter chaos.
"Dammit," Calhoun cursed. Normally a very gentle man, he was shamelessly using his size and strength to force his way through his fellow townsfolk, ignoring their complaints and curses.
Lightning struck the steeple of the town hall across the street, accompanied by an ear-splitting boom of thunder. People screamed in fright, some shouting that they were under attack. Calhoun ignored them, a part of his mind amazed that no one had been electrocuted. More lightning struck around the town and in the forest beyond in a typical phenomenon for major storms. It was always a dazzling, awe inspiring display of nature's fury, and Calhoun always enjoyed such storms. At least he did when he viewed them from the relative safety of the indoors.
A massive bolt struck the far end of town near the power station and all the lights went out. Worse, another alarm began to sound, a piercing hoot-hoot-hoot that brought back the living nightmare of the day his wife died and the gut-wrenching fear that went with it: the sonic fence that kept the town safe from the predators of the forest had just gone down.
For just a moment, utter silence swept over the crowd. They had never faced the Kreelans before, and so the invasion alert was still something intangible, unknown, more a source of trepidation than outright fear. The sonic fence going off-line was something else. The potential consequences of that were known all too well. Calhoun's wife had died in a storm such as this, albeit without the added complication of a possible Kreelan attack. 
As more lightning struck, the momentary spell was broken and the townsfolk panicked. Calhoun was almost knocked from his feet as the mob surged toward the armory, and he could hear screams of both fear and pain. People lost their footing and were pushed to the water-covered cobblestones, then were trampled by their friends and neighbors. 
Over the bedlam he heard Armitage, the mayor, shouting, "Get the dogs! Man the palisade!"
Calhoun gave the man credit for trying, but his flock was beyond the reach of reason. 
Tall enough to see over the heads of most of his neighbors, he saw that the street toward the school was now blocked by a solid mass of panicked people. There was no way through. 
Cursing, he fought back the way he'd come, then dashed down a side street that was now mostly empty. He looked down each cross street that he passed, looking for a place where the crowd of townsfolk near the armory began to thin out. Then he cut over, shoving his way through the less densely packed mob and moving away from the armory down the street toward the school.
What he saw put a lump in his throat. The teachers, as per longstanding protocol, were herding the children into the underground shelter, which was another amenity provided by the Confederation. "No," he rasped as he sprinted toward them. If the town had only been facing the possibility of a predator incursion because the sonic fence had gone down, putting the children in the shelter would have been reassuring. But after meeting Reza, Calhoun had reviewed the story of the boy who had been taken by the Kreelans and raised in the Empire. Calhoun remembered with vivid clarity the description Reza had given in his own words, read by a narrator, of what had happened to the children in a similar bunker on Hallmark, the planet where Reza had been taken captive. Calhoun had always wondered about the wisdom of cramming everyone, particularly the children, into one supposedly safe (relatively speaking) bunker, where they would wait for rescue. After viewing Reza's story, he had done a little research about the practice, and had found that more often than not, the bunkers just made the occupants a fat, juicy prize for the Kreelans in the end. Calhoun had decided right then and there that he would take his chances with his children in the wilderness, rather than be stuck in a metal box, waiting for the blue-skinned reavers to come.
The teachers were herding the children inside, except for those sixteen or older, who'd been sent to the armory to draw weapons. 
"Brett! What are you doing here?" The principal, Laura Varga, stood beside the massive vault door, hands on hips. Thin as a whip and with a thick head of silver hair, she looked the same now as when Calhoun had been in her class. She glared at him as if he had just thrown a spitwad at a classmate, and he had to keep himself from laughing as he felt a twinge of guilt for doing just that in her fifth grade class. Then the seriousness of the here and now reasserted itself. 
"I've come for my kids," he told her.
"They're perfectly safe here," she reassured him. "They—"
Stepping closer, Calhoun said in a voice that the nearby children wouldn't be able to hear over the pounding of the rain, "Not if the Kreelans are coming, they're not. These things are death traps when they come." He looked into her eyes. "Laura, get my children. Now."
She stood there, defiant for a long moment, then slowly nodded. "I don't agree with you, Brett, but I have no right to stand between you and your children. Wait here."
Disappearing into the vault, she emerged a couple of minutes later with Talia, who was holding Ben by the hand.
"Daddy," Talia said in a frightened voice, "what's happening?" She only called him Daddy, rather than Dad, when she was truly frightened, and that wasn't often.
"We're getting out of here," he told her as he scooped Ben up into his arms after slinging his rifle over his shoulder.
Talia trotted beside him as Calhoun hurried away. "But where are we going to go? That's the safest place in town, isn't it?"
"Not this time, baby. We're going home, first to pack a few things. After that..." He pursed his lips. "After that, we'll figure something out. All I know is that I don't want you two in there. Not this time."
***
"Do not leave me, Eustus," Reza said as he held onto his friend. Caesar was charging along the trail through the blinding rain, and Reza was shocked that the horse hadn't managed to stumble and fall on some unseen root or rock. Reza was well aware that even at a flat out run Caesar would never be able to carry them back to town fast enough to save Eustus, who was now gasping for breath, his body totally limp, paralyzed by the snake's venom.
Well clear of the other Marines now, Reza also knew through his second sight that the Kreelan warriors were no longer a direct threat, having moved off the trail and into the deep woods. They were heading on a parallel track toward the town, and wouldn't be in a position to ambush Ortiz and the others if they kept to the trail.
Out of sight of any who might see, Reza decided that it was time. "Forgive me, Caesar," he said, knowing that what was to come would likely terrify the horse. Reaching forward with the hand that clasped the reins, Reza grasped a handful of Caesar's mane. Closing his eyes, he focused his mind on where he wished to be...and made it so.
***
Having gathered up some supplies and proper foul weather clothing for the children, Calhoun was just stepping into the street from the elevated walkway in front of his shop when a horse, whinnying in fear like he'd never heard before, burst from the curtain of rain, stumbling and splashing straight toward him.
Talia let out a shriek of surprise as the lunatic rider managed to rein the animal around and keep it from crashing into the shop. 
"Dammit, man," Calhoun shouted, "you almost ran us down..." His words dried up as he recognized the rider. "Reza?" That was when Calhoun made out that Reza wasn't alone in the saddle. He cradled a limp form, also garbed in Marine camouflage.
"My friend has been bitten by the great snake," Reza called. "He needs a healer."
Calhoun blinked in surprise. "He's still alive?"
Reza nodded. "Yes, but not for much longer. He can barely breathe."
Calhoun stood there for a long moment, wanting to help but conflicted with worry for his children.
"Daddy," Talia said, taking his arm, "you need to take him to Chunlan."
"No," Calhoun snapped. "We're not going anywhere near that old woman."
"Calhoun," Reza pleaded, "Eustus has little time."
"Why didn't you just take him to the clinic?"
"Because that would raise questions from my chain of command that I cannot easily answer."
Frowning, Calhoun said, "What's that supposed to mean?"
Talia pulled on Calhoun's arm again, more insistently this time. "Dad! We've got to take him!"
Looking into his daughter's pleading eyes, Calhoun finally let out a sigh. To Reza, it was a sound of quiet despair. "All right." Calhoun took the bridle of Reza's horse in hand. "Come on. It's not far."
After leading them to a house three streets down, Calhoun helped Reza wrestle Eustus's dead weight from the horse. Together, they carried the dying Marine onto the porch. Calhoun hammered on the door with a fist. "Chunlan! Chunlan, it's Brett. Open the damn door!"
There was no response.
Pushing past Calhoun, who wore an angry expression and was just raising his fist to bang on the door again, Talia said, "Chunlan, it's Talia! Please...please help us!"
After a long, agonizing moment, the door opened just enough to reveal the wrinkled face and thick gray hair of an elderly woman of Chinese descent. Her dark almond shaped eyes glanced at Talia, then, narrowing in suspicion, settled on the men. 
"Please," Reza said. "My friend has been poisoned by the venom from a great forest snake."
She stared at Eustus. "He would already be dead, if that were so. No one survives the bite of that beast." She began to close the door.
"He was not bitten. The fang only grazed his leg. Please help us."
She began to close the door. "Take him to the clinic, or back to your Marines, where he can die in comfort. There is no antivenin. No cure."
"Bullshit!" Calhoun hissed.
"He will not make it that far," Reza told her after glancing at Calhoun. "Even now he can barely breathe." Blinking back tears that were invisible amidst the rain that covered his face, Reza said, "He is a good man, a good and true friend. Many of us do not deserve a future, but he is one who does."
She stared at Eustus, then at Reza. At last, something changed in her eyes. The cold hard obsidian softened, revealing a trace of compassion. 
Opening the door, she pointed to a small, uncomfortable looking couch. "Put him there."
The two men dragged Eustus into the house and lay him down. Talia and Ben came in last, and Talia closed the door. "The wound is here," Reza said, pointing to the seemingly inconsequential scratch on Eustus's leg through a tear in his uniform. 
Chunlan knelt down and probed around the wound with her fingers, careful not to touch the puckered flesh. Then she put a hand on Eustus's chest, then on his forehead. His eyes were open, unfocused, his brain no longer able to control the function of the eyelids. She leaned forward, putting her ear close to Eustus's mouth. "How big was the snake?"
"At least a hundred and fifty meters," Reza told her. 
Talia gasped, and Ben said something that would in other circumstances have earned a good scolding from his father, but Calhoun remained silent, his eyes fixed on the old woman.
"That was good for your friend," Chunlan said. "Death comes in seconds from the small ones." Then she looked up at Reza, pinning him with her gaze. "How long since he was struck?"
Reza had no way of explaining away the unexplainable. With a glance at Calhoun, he said, "Perhaps ten minutes. No more."
Chunlan cackled as she struggled to her feet and moved toward a cabinet that took up most of one wall. 
"What's so funny?" Calhoun demanded.
"You know the ways of the forest better than most, blacksmith," Chunlan snapped at him. "You know that the great serpents only dwell deep among the tallest trees."
"Yes, so?" Calhoun's expression was caught somewhere between anger and confusion, as if his subconscious knew the answer to the riddle but selfishly refused to tell his conscious mind.
Chunlan made a derisive clucking sound. "You think you could ride here on a horse from even the nearest edge of the deep forest in under ten minutes?"
Calhoun blinked as if she had slapped him, before turning to stare at Reza. Calhoun's eyes, as if drawn by a magnet, settled on the collar around Reza's throat and the gleaming blue stone. Then, meeting Reza's eyes, he said, "That's more than a full day's ride."
Reza nodded. 
"How did you do it?"
"I..." Reza swallowed, unsure how to answer.
"How does not matter," Chunlan said, pushing between them with a small stoppered vial and injector. With a groan and an audible creak from her ancient knees, she knelt again beside Eustus. Wrinkled hands that betrayed not the slightest tremble drew a tiny bit of dark amber fluid from the vial into the injector, then she inserted the slim needle into Eustus's carotid artery. "You both have much to do." With a fond look at Talia and Ben, she said, "I will keep the children safe and care for your friend. Now go."
"Daddy, don't leave us!" Ben clutched at his father, tears in his eyes. "I don't want a neo-tiger to get me."
Kneeling down, Calhoun held his son close and told him, "If there's anywhere you'll be safe from any neo-tigers that get through the palisade, it's here." He pulled away enough to look into his son's eyes. "She knows more about those beasts than anyone, and I believe her when she says she'll keep you safe. I would never, ever think of leaving you here otherwise. Okay?"
Wiping his tears with the sleeve of his sopping wet shirt, Ben nodded in a jerky motion. "But what about you?"
"I will protect your father," Reza vowed. 
"Promise?" Talia said in a tight voice.
Reza nodded. "In the name of the one I hold most dear in my heart, I promise."
Giving Ben one last hug, then hugging Talia, Calhoun told them, "Do as Chunlan says. We'll be back as soon as we can."
As Calhoun stepped toward the door, Chunlan called out in a sharp voice, "Blacksmith!"
Calhoun turned to face her.
"Our debts are now settled," she said.
Answering with nothing more than a grimace, Calhoun flung open the door and stomped out into the rain.
To Reza, who stood there for a moment looking after Calhoun, an expression of confusion on his face, Chunlan said, "Go. And keep your word."
Reza bowed his head before stepping outside, pulling the door shut behind him. Published on 04/15/2017 at 2130EST
If you enjoyed this chapter, please give it a star and feel free to comment! Also, if you haven't already, join my mailing list at http://authormichaelhicks.com/newsletter/ to get a free copy of my short story "The Monhegan Event." If you're already on the list, I'll be sending an email around soon with a link to the story for you. Enjoy! - MRH

 

Chapter Thirteen

Stalin's rain-drenched face twisted into a smile as the light duty transport vehicle carrying Captain Yamada and half of the remaining Marines of Ortiz's detachment rolled through the main gate of the garrison on six oversized tires. Not long after Ortiz's contact report, the manager of one of the nearby distilleries had reported it was under attack. After the vidcom was abruptly terminated in mid-scream as the manager was cut down from off-camera, Yamada had decided that the situation was sufficiently dire that one of the precious and pampered vehicles could be taken from the safety of the garage. No riding on horseback or slugging through the mud for him, Stalin thought. He spat after the vehicle, a wordless curse upon the captain and all who were like him. 
"I can't believe he took a whole squad with him," Walker said for the third time, shaking her head in disbelief. "Who knows how long it'll take Ortiz to get back here, assuming she and the others don't get chopped down by the Kreelans in the forest?"
Stalin shrugged. "Good riddance to Yamada and Ortiz, too, if it comes to it."
"So what do we do?" Walker pointed through the gate that opened onto the town's main thoroughfare, toward the frightened, screaming crowd of civilians. "How are we supposed to protect all those fools?"
"I am not worried about protecting sheep. Our job is to kill the enemy," Stalin growled. He cast a sidelong look at Walker. "Do you have a problem with that?"
Walker shook her head. "None at all." 
"Good. See that rooftop?" He pointed toward the hotel, which also served as a saloon and brothel. Standing three stories tall, it was one of the tallest structures in town. "Take Chang and Leffler and keep watch on the southern half of town. Shiloh and Kohl, with me. We'll cover this end of town from the belfry of the church."
"How long until they come, do you think?" Walker asked Stalin quietly, her words lost in the rain before it could reach the ears of the others.
"The Kreelans? Whatever force is at the distillery could be here on foot in an hour or two at most. The ones that Ortiz found, probably not until morning."
Walker frowned. "Then shouldn't we at least try to get this gaggle of civilians sorted out so they don't totally embarrass themselves when the enemy attacks? We've got plenty of time."
"You still haven't read the files on this planet, have you?" 
She shook her head. "You know reading isn't exactly my thing."
"Well, let us say that the Kreelans are near the bottom of what the townsfolk need to worry about, at least as long the sonic fence is down." Stalin gave her a death's head grin. 
"You didn't..." She was about to say sabotage the fence, but bit back the words before they could escape her lips. But no, she thought. Of course he couldn't have sabotaged the fence. It had been taken off-line by lightning. Hadn't it?
Ignoring her, Stalin looked back toward the center of town and picked up his pace. "Things should become very interesting, very soon." 
***
Calhoun came to a sloshing stop near the edge of the crowd, Reza right behind him. If anything, the townspeople had fallen further into chaos. In addition to people screaming and shoving, fights had broken out among those closest to the door to the armory, and over the bedlam and the rain he could hear Kyle Armitage's voice screeching for order. "Idiots," Calhoun hissed. "Fools."
"You must speak to them," Reza said.
Snorting, Calhoun shook his head. "I'm just the blacksmith. He's the mayor." He nodded toward Armitage.
"He may be the mayor, an administrator, but he cannot lead them. That is plain for anyone to see. But you can."
"Doesn't matter. Even if they cared to listen, no one could hear anything I said if I shouted at the top of my lungs, anyway. So don't—"
The rest of what he was going to say was drowned out by a long burst from Reza's assault rifle firing into the air. After a few shrieks of surprise, the crowd fell silent, every set of eyes staring at Reza, who slowly lowered his rifle.
"They will hear you now," Reza said.
"Thanks, good buddy," Calhoun muttered. Then, in a voice he hoped everyone would be able to hear, he shouted, "How many of you have weapons and at least half a bandolier of ammunition?" About two dozen hands lifted uncertainly into the air. "Every one of you get over to the shelter. I want half of you on the palisade keeping watch outside, the rest of you close the street barriers leading to the shelter and keep an eye on anything coming at you from inside the town."
"Now just a minute, Brett!" Armitage challenged, taking advantage of the silence. Pushing his way through the crowd toward Calhoun, he went on, "I'm in charge here, and I say we all get our weapons and man the full perimeter like we're supposed to! I'm not going to start off our part of this war by surrendering most of the town without a fight!"
That brought a muttering of support from the still silent crowd.
"We don't have time!" Calhoun's words cut through the rain like a knife. "Every minute that you've been mucking around here is time you've given the forest to prepare to kill us."
"The fence should be back up any minute now," Armitage countered. "Believe it or not, I already sent a repair team over to the control center. I'm worried about the real threat, the Kreelans!" That elicited a much more enthusiastic roar of support. "They're attacking the Pineville distillery."
Calhoun's mouth dropped open with shock. "Pineville? But I thought..." He looked at Reza, whose expression had turned grim.
"That is a different group of warriors than the one we encountered," Reza said. 
"You're a good man, Brett," Armitage went on in a more conciliatory tone, "and I know you mean well, but you should stick with things you know." Turning back to the crowd, Armitage said, "Now that I've finally got your attention, those of you who are already armed, head over to the east gate! The enemy from Pineville will be coming from that direction, so let's be ready to give them a big welcome. The rest of you, as you get your weapons, head over there and join them!"
The crowd again became animated, if not so chaotic now, and Armitage was at its center, enjoying a round of cheers.
"Well, that's that," Calhoun growled.
The two stood there uncertainly while the armed townspeople headed off to the east gate and the others continued to mill about in front of the armory.
"How long is that sonic fence usually off-line?" Reza asked.
"Usually? No more than ten minutes for maintenance, if that. It's the only high-tech thing in this town outside of the Marine garrison that anyone really worries about."
Reza frowned. "Has it even gone out during a storm like this?"
"Never," Calhoun told him, a worried look on his face. "It's fully grounded, shielded, and has its own backup power supply. Lightning's taken out the lights before, blown a transformer or some such, and started fires, but has never taken out the fence. It's too important." His mouth tightened. "Especially when it rains."
"Why when it rains?"
"Because that's the favorite hunting time of the neo-tigers and some of the other nasties out there." He paused. "I suppose it must sound like we're constantly under siege here, but that's not really true. It's just that the forest demands respect and is terribly unforgiving. It's hard for people to get used to the idea that they're not at the top of the food chain here."
After a long moment, Reza said, "Perhaps we should check on the fence repair crew."
Calhoun nodded. "Not a bad idea."
Together, the two quickly made their way to the building that housed the sonic field generator. It was a compact structure made of poured concrete, the only one of its kind in the entire town, not far from the Marine garrison. A series of extremely heavy duty shielded cable ran from small towers on the roof toward different sections of the palisade. Each cable ran along the roofs of the various buildings or was supported on sturdy poles where it had to cross a street. 
"The actual sonic signals are made by devices along the palisade," Calhoun explained as they came closer, "but they need a lot of power to function, and they're on all the time. The generator provides both electrical power and signal synchronization, or so they tell...me." He slowed to a stop, his hand tightening on his rifle.
The thick metal door stood ajar. 
Calhoun made to enter, but Reza held him back. "Allow me, please."
Nodding, Calhoun stepped to the side as Reza entered the building. He already knew, of course, what he would find, but he wanted to make sure, just in case something unexpected had already found its way in.
"Lord of All," Calhoun breathed as he stepped inside behind Reza.
The repair crew, two men and a woman, lay dead on the floor, ripped to shreds by a small but powerful bomb that had completely destroyed the control panel and the adjacent electronics cabinet.
"Who would have done this?" Calhoun asked in shocked amazement. "They'd have to be insane and have a death wish, to boot!"
Reza frowned. He had in mind a likely candidate. "Can it be repaired?"
Whirling back to face him, Calhoun said, "Are you crazy? I'm not an electrical engineer or anything, but look at this mess!"
Trying to calm Calhoun, Reza stepped closer and put a hand on his shoulder. "Think. The town must have spares for nearly everything for a system this important. Where are they, and who besides these people," he gestured to the bodies, "would know how to fix this?"
"Armitage," Calhoun breathed. "The man's a pompous ass, but he's also a first rate engineer. If anyone can fix it, it's him."
"Then I suggest we go back and get him."
As they stepped back out into the rain, they heard what sounded like screams coming from near the center of the village, followed by a volley of gunfire.
"That may not be so easy," Calhoun said as he broke into a run, followed closely by Reza.
***
Talia sucked in her breath as she heard the screaming and guns firing. Ben, who'd wrapped his arms around her waist, clutched her even more tightly. "What's happening?" Talia whispered.
"People are dying," Chunlan said in a low voice without looking up from pouring an intensely foul-smelling amber liquid from a storage jar into a small pump sprayer. "They did not heed your father."
Talia shook her head, unable to understand. "Why wouldn't they?"
"Because they are foolish," Chunlan lamented. In little more than a whisper, she added, "Just as I once was."
They all turned to look at Eustus as he let out a deep groan. Shoving the sprayer into Talia's hands, Chunlan said, "Hold this, and do not drop it." When Chunlan reached Eustus, she bent down, her back creaking, and put her hands to either side of his head. Seeing that his eyes were fully open, she moved his head back and forth, noting with satisfaction that his eyes stayed fixed on her. "Blink once if you can hear me."
Eustus blinked once.
"Are you in pain? Once for yes, twice for no."
One blink.
She reached for his hands. "Squeeze."
After a moment she was rewarded with the faintest pressure. With a nod, she let him go. "The paralysis will fade quickly now, but I will warn you that your skin will feel like someone is jabbing needles all over your body, like you were getting a huge tattoo. It will hurt, but you will live." Turning to Talia, Chunlan gingerly retrieved the sprayer.
"What is that?" Ben managed to ask.
The old woman grinned at him. "What does a neo-tiger fear more than the snake?"
"A bear," Ben answered without missing a beat. Every child on the planet was schooled in essential survival skills, and a huge part of that included knowing about the major predators. The bears native to this planet were much more akin to Terran bears than neo-tigers were to tigers, except they were nearly three times the size, more intelligent, and far more ferocious. Neo-tigers were prey to the ursine monsters, and all but the largest snakes steered well clear of them. Fortunately, they were rare, but hand-deep gouges in the wooden pilings of the palisade were proof that they had come in the past to investigate the settlement.
Talia wrinkled her nose in disgust. "That's bear pee?"
Chunlan rewarded her with a chuckle before she turned to the door. "Stay here. I will be right back."
"You can't leave us!" Ben nearly screamed.
She held out the sprayer to him. "Then come with me. Whoever holds this sprayer is the best protected person on the planet."
Ben looked up at Talia, who nodded. "Go ahead. Remember: Dad said he wouldn't have left us here if Chunlan couldn't keep us safe."
Ben released his death grip on his sister and reached for the sprayer. 
"Remember," Chunlan told him sternly, "you must not drop it. And only spray exactly where I tell you and how much I tell you."
"Yes, Chunlan," Ben said, holding the sprayer as if it were a crucifix before a vampire.
With a nod to Talia, the old woman threw the door open and stepped out, followed by Ben. Then she closed the door.
"What...is...going on?"
She turned to Eustus and went to sit down with him while Chunlan and Ben anointed the outside of her house. "Things aren't so good, Mr. Eustus."
He snorted. "Just...Eustus."
"Sure. Eustus." In a few brief sentences she told him what was happening, and by the time she was through it was all she could do not to burst into tears. "I'm so worried about Dad," she said, then stifled a sob.
"Don't be." Eustus reached out with an unsteady arm and took hold of her hand in a gentle grip. "Reza will take care of him."
"He said he would, but..." She shook her head, unable to finish the thought.
"He will," Eustus told her. "If he makes a promise, he keeps it. I'm more worried about us. Did that Chunlan woman say she put bear piss in that sprayer?"
Talia nodded. 
A slow smile crept over Eustus's face. "I wonder how she got it?" he said, trying to lighten the mood.
Talia managed a grin before the door swung open and Chunlan and Ben charged back inside, both of them soaking wet. In the air outside, the screams were rising and falling like waves hitting a beach, and the gunfire was echoing nonstop, punctuated by horrendous peals of thunder from the lightning that continued to shoot down from the sky. The look on Chunlan's face was grim. Ben went straight back to Talia. Falling to his knees, he wrapped his arms around her. 
"I hope you recover enough to hold a rifle soon," Chunlan said as she put the sprayer away and pulled a perfectly maintained assault rifle from under a cabinet in the kitchen, then reached under again and hauled out a full ammunition bandolier. "I am too old to fire this, and the children too young."
"I thought you said the neo-tigers wouldn't get us," Talia said quietly, her eyes wide with fright.
Chunlan huffed. "You have nothing to fear from those simple beasts, not while you stay in here." She looked squarely at Eustus. "But the smell of bear piss will not stop the Kreelans when they come for us. And they will come soon, I think." She nodded in the direction of the sounds of gunfire. "They are shooting at something, or someone, outside the palisade."
***
Ren-Li'ahr led her warriors at a loping run through the rain toward the walls of the human village. Her heart was pounding not with fear, but with exhilaration. She and her companions had been fated to land practically on top of an enemy facility whose function was to produce an exotic liquor that she and her sisters had paused to taste (and enjoy) after they had massacred the helpless humans laboring there. None had put up more than the most pathetic resistance, leaving the warriors pining for a true challenge.
With no other objective in view, Ren-Li'ahr led her warriors up the road that led away from the facility, and on the way encountered a vehicle with human warriors heading toward them. Half of the humans never made it out of the confines of their metal sarcophagus as shrekkas sliced through the clearsteel windshield. The other half fell after a brief but spirited battle that left two of her own dead. After giving them the last rites and collecting their collars, she continued along the road, the others behind her, hoping against hope that it would lead them to more humans and, by the greatest of chances, to Reza.
Topping a small rise in the forest, she let out a cry of joy as she saw the village. Splitting her warriors into two groups, she sent one toward the main gate under command of her First, while she led the other around the far side. 
The warriors attacking the nearest gate made it to within hurling distance of their shrekkas before the humans along the top of the primitive wooden wall caught sight of them. With shouts and screams, they opened fire with their projectile weapons, but most were terrible shots. Bobbing and weaving in the heavy rain, all but three of the warriors reached the gate. With barely a pause, those who reached it first sliced through the thick timbers with their swords, while those warriors following behind crashed into the cutouts, knocking them down. Rolling gracefully to their feet, they lunged into the unruly mass of humans and began to hack them to pieces as their sisters quickly joined in.
Giving in to her impatience to join the fray, Ren-Li'ahr brought her warriors to a halt. Sheathing her sword, she leaped as high as she could and drove the talons of one hand into the hard, rain-slicked wood. Hauling herself up with that hand, she slammed the talons of her other hand even higher, and quickly scaled the wall. The others, thirty-odd in all, did the same. 
Carefully drawing herself up over the sharpened tips of the timbers at the top of the palisade, she somersaulted over to the other side. Rolling in the water and muck, she drew her sword.
Before her, mouth agape in shock, was a large, dark-skinned human holding a rifle.
And beside him, staring at her with his fabled green eyes, was Reza, high priest of the Desh-Ka and consort to the heartbroken Esah-Zhurah. Published on 15 May at 2137 EST
Please remember to hit the "star" to give the chapter a like if you enjoyed it, and please tell your friends about it! :-) 

 

Chapter Fourteen

The swarm had begun. Long had the sleepers been dormant, buried deep in the loamy soil of the forest. Over a century had passed since the last great swarm, when the tilt of the planet's axis and the gravitational pull of the moon were in a certain alignment, and when the temperature conditions were just right. Those conditions had occurred since the last great swarm, but the sleepers would not wake without one last key ingredient that had been lacking in those otherwise opportune windows of time since the last great swarm: torrential rain. 
And rain this day fell in great abundance. As the storms raged above, the water soaked ever deeper into the earth. A little would do no more than satisfy the tiny needs of the sleepers for water that allowed them to survive their long night. More might wake a few, which made their way to the surface, only to be eaten by the predators above. A deep soaking, such as they were receiving now, when the other factors were properly aligned, was the ages-old signal to awaken, to leave their earthy lair and seek the ancient spawning grounds in the river.
Yes, the small swarms were little more than short-lived delicacies for the things that lived and died on the surface. 
When the great swarm emerged, the hunters suddenly became the hunted, for the swarm was hungry, starving after more than a century asleep. By the thousands, then tens and hundreds of thousands, then in the millions did the creatures emerge. They scampered in an loping hop that carried them as fast as a human could run, their direction guided by ancient instinct, and the forest quickly filled with the deafening sound of their high-pitched chirping. All that lay between them and their destination would be laid waste, consumed by countless tiny starving mouths rimmed with needle sharp teeth.
***
Calhoun snapped up his rifle toward the enemy warrior, but Reza deflected the barrel with his hand as the Kreelan rendered Reza a salute, bringing her left fist to her right breast and kneeling in the mud before him.
Staring first at the warrior, then at Reza, who returned the strange salute, Calhoun muttered, "What in the name of..."
He broke off as the air was riven by bestial cries and shrieks that erupted from the forest and overwhelmed the sounds of nearby battle between more warriors and the human defenders. 
Reza and the warrior instinctively looked in the direction of the forest, even though their view was blocked by the palisade, as more warriors dropped to the ground beside their leader. 
The volume of the roars, shrieks, and cries continued to build, and it was clear even without being able to see them that an impossibly large number of animals was stampeding through the forest and coming closer.
Then Calhoun heard the other sound that began to eclipse even the cacophony of the animals: a high pitched scree-scree-scree that made his flesh crawl. 
"Lord of All," he whispered, terror etched on his face as he stared in the direction of the ever-rising sound. Even the Kreelans turned to look at him, confusion and a trace of fear clearly written on their humanoid faces. "It can't be."
"What is it?" When Calhoun didn't answer, Reza grabbed him by the elbow. "What is it, Calhoun?"
"It's a Great Swarm," Calhoun told him, having to shout over the bedlam. "It was just a theory that some of the biologists had, that these little amphibian-like animals that come up out of the ground this time of year sometimes had massive swarms." He shook his head. "That hasn't happened since the colony was founded, and no one ever believed it."
The warriors at the top of the palisade shouted a warning just before something massive slammed into the wooden wall. All but two of the blue-skinned aliens were sent tumbling to the ground. Some managed to roll gracefully, breaking their falls, while others screamed when the hit, shattering bone and tearing muscle tissue.
A worse fate awaited the pair that had hung on. Two neo-tigers vaulted over the sharpened tips of the palisade wall, snatching the hapless warriors as if they were helpless meat animals. Four more warriors died as the beasts, crashed through them, still clutching the first pair of warriors in their massive jaws.
Grabbing Reza by the shoulder, Calhoun shouted, "Come on!"
The two men turned and fled toward the center of town. The wall trembled under nature's assault as smaller creatures slammed into the palisade in their blind panic as they fled from the swarm. Hesitating only a moment, the warriors ran after the two men, not pursuing them so much as fleeing whatever awaited them beyond the walls.
As he ran, Calhoun could only think of one thing: getting to his children. 
***
"Help me up, kid," Eustus gasped, reaching for Talia. "Lord of all," he said as she pulled him to his feet, "I feel like I'm covered with ants that are biting the heck out of me."
"Here." Chunlan stepped toward him, thrusting the assault rifle into his tingling hands. "You will need this."
As he stood there, cradling the rifle, she went back to the small kitchen and returned with a long and wicked looking carving knife. 
"It won't come to that," Eustus said, eyeing the weapon, which he suspected carried a razor sharp edge.
The old woman replied only with an indignant huff as she went to stand near the front window, staring out into the gray maelstrom beyond.
Eustus frowned as he heard the unmistakable sound of weapons fire coming from the eastern side of town. 
"They have come," Chunlan said quietly. She looked down at Ben, who had slipped his hand in hers and was holding on tight. "Do not fear, child," she told him. 
"I'm worried about Dad," Ben rasped, his eyes momentarily holding Talia's.
"He'll be okay," Eustus said.
"How can you know that?" Ben snapped angrily.
Eustus came over and knelt in front of him so his eyes were level with Ben's. "Because Reza's with him. Reza's not just a regular Marine, a grunt like me and the others. He's...he's something more. I'm not sure even how to describe it, because I'm not sure myself if I know everything Reza can do."
Ben glared at him for a moment, then said, "Is he magic?"
Eustus blinked, the thought never really having occurred to him. "I know it might sound silly for me to say this, but now that you mention it, I think he is."
"For real?" Talia was staring at him, wide eyed.
Nodding, Eustus said, "For real."
"He would have to be," Chunlan said in a low voice, "for him to have brought you here so soon after you were bitten." She favored him with a speculative stare. "You should have long been dead."
Just then the tempo of the firing spiked, rising into a crescendo that just as quickly faded into sporadic shots. 
Getting to his feet, Eustus went toward the window. "That's not good," he muttered.
The constant hammering of the rain slowly gave way to the sound of hundreds of human voices screaming in terror and pain. Then, as if it was part of a symphony that was gradually building to a horrible climax, the screams were overlaid with animal cries and howls, and then something else.
"Oh, no," Chunlan whispered, her eyes widening. 
"What is it?" Eustus demanded. When she didn't answer, he grabbed her by the elbow, and her frightened eyes turned to lock with his as the high-pitched keening noise grew ever louder drowning out everything but the rain. "What's going on?"
"It is a Great Swarm," she said in a terrified voice. "A plague of small creatures from the forest that will kill us all!"
"Amphibians," Talia said. "Some biologists think there are millions of them that hibernate, then come swarming out of the ground when conditions are just right."
"How big are they?" Eustus demanded. "Can't we just shoot them?"
Chunlan laughed. "They are smaller than your palm, and there are millions. Millions!"
Ben yelped as something big slammed into the outside of the house, and they saw a hulking shadow in the rain pause, as if looking in at them, before darting away with frightening speed. 
"That was a neo-tiger," Ben whispered.
"The animals flee the swarm," Chunlan said. "And the town is right in their path."
Eustus didn't have to think much about the next move. "Is there a way to get on the roof?"
Chunlan shook her head. "No, not without a ladder, and I do not have one."
"Where, then?" Eustus demanded as more things, smaller this time, thumped into the house. Shadows began to flash past the house, and were soon joined by screaming people. Eustus stared, aghast, as a woman went down with a gurgling scream just beyond the door. "We've got to get higher!"
"The hotel!" Talia said. "It doesn't have a ladder outside, but one of the back rooms has one to the roof."
Chunlan eyed her. "And how would you know this?" With a glance at Eustus, she said, "Only the...ladies...live in those rooms upstairs."
"That's not important," Eustus growled. He silently cursed as a flood of things and people streamed down the street, each ignoring the others as they fled in terror from whatever was coming. The scree-scree-scree sound was so loud now that his ears were ringing.  Darting into the kitchen, he grabbed a carving knife and gave it to Talia. "Use this on anything that comes at you," he said. "Don't try to kill whatever it might be, just poke it to try and warn it off, okay?" Talia nodded as she took it, holding it tight.
"What about me?" Ben asked, his voice trembling with fear.
"I've got something special in mind for you. Come here." Eustus knelt down and had Ben climb up on his shoulders, putting his feet in the webbing of his combat harness and wrapping his forearms under the shoulder straps. "Just hold on, okay?"
Ben nodded. Eustus could feel the boy's body shaking.
"I'll go first," Eustus told the others, "then you, Talia, then Chunlan."
The house shook as something massive slammed into it, and they all cried out in surprise and fear as something outside roared. Eustus whipped the muzzle of his rifle toward the far wall where whatever it was had struck and fired a short burst that blasted through the thin siding of the house. Another roar, this time one of pain and rage, echoed through the house, then the thing was gone.
"A bear," Talia whispered. "A bear got inside the wall!"
"Probably more than one," Chunlan said quietly. "We should probably just stay here."
"To heck with that," Eustus said. "We're going to the hotel and getting out of this mess. Talia, you hang onto my combat harness and don't let go, no matter what, okay?" She nodded. "And just tell me where to go. I have no idea how to find the hotel, certainly not in this muck."
"Okay," Talia breathed.
"Let's go." Eustus moved to the door. Putting one hand on the lever while holding his rifle with the other, he said, "Ready?" 
The others nodded. 
"May the gods help us," Chunlan whispered.
"Okay," Eustus said, saying his own silent prayer to the Lord of All, "here we go." Whipping open the door, he and the others plunged into the earsplitting mayhem that lay outside.
***
"Holy shit," Walker whispered as she stared through the rifle's scope into the artificially enhanced madness of the streets on the eastern side of the town. She couldn't make out much in the way of details, for the rain was falling too heavily even for the scope to pull out much definition, but it was far better than with the unaided eye. The buildings across the street were lost in the rain, which was falling even harder now, if that was even possible, than it had been when Stalin had sent her and the other Marines here to the top of the hotel.
"I hope Stalin doesn't expect us to shoot in this shit," Chang shouted from his position a few meters away over the din of the rain, animals, and screaming people. Leffler, on her other side, said something unintelligible, but the sentiment came through loud and clear.
"If he wants us to shoot something," she said, "he'll tell us. In the meantime..."
"What the hell is that?" Chang shouted, cutting her off.
Two enormous shadows, each of which was bigger than the troop carrier Yamada had driven off in, were racing down one of the streets, heading west through the town. Smaller shadows, moving even faster, flowed around them like the water of a river around a pair of islands.
"Those are goddamn bears!" Leffler cried, aiming his weapon at them.
Walker cursed under her breath, then shouted, "Hold your fire, you idiot!" Keying her comm link, she said, "Stalin, are you seeing the shit going on down on the street?"
"Yes," he replied. "Things will get even more interesting soon."
"What about the people?" Walker demanded. She knew she didn't have much in the way of empathy or scruples, but she couldn't imagine the nightmare of the townsfolk who had thought they were going to have to defend themselves from a small contingent of Kreelan warriors, only to be faced with whatever this was. But Stalin knew what was going on, or had at least suspected. For the first time in a long while, she was angry with him for being such a bastard. "What the hell is happening?"
"We are safe up here," he reassured her. "Just enjoy this...display of nature." Then he clicked off.
"Goddamnit," Walker hissed. Looking through her scope again, she watched in helpless fury as the village defenders were trampled and torn apart in the streets below.
***
Ren-Li'ahr and the others with her fled after Reza and the human, but after a brief time she realized that Reza's destiny lay in a different direction than her own. He must be driven by a different imperative, perhaps something to do with the human in his company, or he would have turned to stand his ground against the tide of creatures now flooding into the town. The larger animals, clearly the most dangerous, had vaulted over the palisade wall, while others had streamed through the holes her sisters had cut in the sturdy wood. Then, with an ear-splitting crash, even amidst the other deafening bedlam, the gates on that side of the wall crashed inward.
The other warriors who had fought the humans near the gate had by now joined her. Not all had survived, and not all had been killed by the weapons of the humans.
"We stand and fight here," she shouted, gesturing for the warriors to form a line to block the street. 
As the warriors quickly took up their positions, swords and shrekkas at the ready, Ren-Li'ahr looked to where Reza and his companion were rapidly disappearing in the rain, and saw him glance over his shoulder at her. Bowing her head, she rendered him a brief but heartfelt salute. Her task had been to find him, and so she had. She had not been able to bring him to battle as she would have liked, but glory would yet be hers. She felt in the harmony of the Bloodsong the agreement of her sisters: if they could not face Reza in battle, then they would buy time with their lives that he could do whatever he intended. To die on behalf of a Desh-Ka priest, the only one to have lived among their people for thousands of generations, would bring great glory to the Empress.
With howls of fury, Ren-Li'ahr and her companions turned to fight the rampaging beasts of the forest.
***
Reza's heart was heavy with a sense of loss that was countered by a feeling of intense pride as Ren-Li'ahr and the other warriors gave up their pursuit and instead offered him what protection they could at the price of their lives. "May thy Way be long and glorious," he said quietly in the New Tongue as he turned back and caught up to Calhoun.
"What the devil are they doing?" The blacksmith cried, having dared to take a quick glance behind them. 
"They are buying us what time they can," Reza told him.
"Why would they do that and not just kill us?"
"Because that is their Way," Reza told him, knowing that Calhoun could not understand.
"You're insane," Calhoun told him, then cursed as something about the size of a large dog darted out in front of him from a side street, followed by dozens more. The creatures, a kind of herbivore, ignored the humans as they charged toward the west side of town. A mass of smaller animals, about the size of Terran house cats, joined them. Calhoun tripped on one and would have gone down had Reza not grabbed his arm and steadied him.
From somewhere off to the left they heard basso growls followed by a piercing roar.
"Lord of All," Calhoun shouted. "Bears! Run!"
Run, as if they were not already fleeing as fast as their legs could carry them. Reza would have whisked Calhoun to another place had he not been so focused on merely keeping his feet. To move through space with his mind still required a great deal of concentration, and he feared that they might wind up somewhere other than where Reza intended. Tesh-Dar had told him and Esah-Zhurah that such things had happened to some new to their powers, and he simply couldn't risk it. 
Darting to the left down another sides street, they found it empty...for the moment. The two men pounded through the deepening water flooding the street, then hopped up onto the elevated walkway that ran the length of the buildings to the next street. There, they encountered more animals, but none that were threatening. With a turn onto yet another street, they again found themselves fighting through a torrent of animals. Something bigger than a horse loped out of the rain toward them. Calhoun blasted it with his rifle, but it just kept coming, roaring in rage. Reza added the firepower from his own weapon, and the thing finally collapsed into a skidding heap, smaller animals darting around it, as the two men raced past.
"There!" Calhoun shouted, pointing at a house that Reza recognized as Chunlan's. 
With a final sprint, they ran, kicked, and butt-stroked their way through the teeming mass of animals to reach the house, only to find the door hanging open.
"Oh, God, no," Calhoun cried as he went inside.
"They're not here," Reza said, having taken a brief moment to seek ahead of them with his second sight. 
Calhoun turned to him, a stricken look on his face. "Where could they have gone?"
"Ask yourself," Reza told him, keeping a wary eye on the door, "where would Chunlan go?"
With a bitter laugh, Calhoun said, "The devil if I know. That woman should've died a long time ago. If it was up to her, she'd still be here."
"Then where would Talia have gone? Eustus does not know the town well enough, and would listen to her unless Chunlan led them." He put a hand on Calhoun's shoulder to steady him. "She is your blood and you have taught her well. Think: where would she go."
Taking a deep breath, Calhoun nodded. "High ground. She'd know to get to high ground in a situation like this. Most of the animals can't climb, or wouldn't if they were in a panic like this. And the swarm...they'll mostly stay near the ground." He gritted his teeth. "I hope."
"And where is the nearest high ground?" Reza asked.
"The hotel!" Calhoun nearly shouted. "It's one of the highest buildings and it's not far."
"Then let us go." Reza led Calhoun back out into the madness. 
They'd barely rounded the corner of the house when something huge appeared out of the rain. 
Reza's memory flashed in time with the lightning that illuminated a saurian creature that reminded him with painful clarity of the genoth he and Esah-Zhurah had once slain. The thing's maw was briefly frozen in time by the lightning as it lunged toward Calhoun with a roar. Reza barely had time to shove his friend clear of the snapping jaws and wickedly long and sharp teeth. Then, in a smooth motion, he drew his sword and ran it up through the creature's palate, driving the weapon's tip into its brain.
Only then did he hear Calhoun's scream. Whipping his head around, Reza saw him vanishing into the downpour, held firmly in the clutches of a neo-tiger.

 

Chapter Fifteen

"Left!" Talia shouted, tugging on Eustus's combat harness. "Go left!"
He did as she said, turning the corner of the building they'd been hugging for the last few dozen meters. He was as frightened as he'd ever been in his life, but he swallowed down the bile that bubbled up in the back of his throat as he forced his way forward, fighting against overwhelming terror every bit as much as the surreal swarm of animals. Ben still clung tightly to his back, and Eustus assumed Chunlan was behind Talia: he dared not turn around to make sure.
Reaching the end of the building's wall, Eustus stopped. The rain was so heavy he could barely see the middle of the street. "Which way?"
"It's right there," Talia pointed straight ahead, "across this street!"
Squinting, Eustus was able to make out the faint outline of a large angular shadow through the torrential downpour across the surging river of terrified animals.  "Great," he muttered. Gripping his rifle tighter, he forced some courage into his voice. "Okay, it'll be a walk in the park! Ready?" He looked over his shoulder into Talia's face, which mirrored his own terror, then Chunlan's. The old woman looked calm, almost peaceful. Both nodded. On Eustus's back, Ben whimpered and clung tighter. Eustus took a deep breath. "Here we go..."
Step by shuffling step, he forced his way into the flow of terrified fauna. He fired short bursts from his rifle a few times to create momentary eddies in the current, which allowed him and the others to dart forward a few paces. 
After what seemed like a lifetime of horror, they made it to the far side. Slamming up against the wall of the hotel, their hearts pounding like hammers, they took a moment to savor the fact that they were still alive. 
Talia screamed, and Eustus whipped around in time to see a neo-Tiger racing down the street. It was gone before he had a chance to fire. Only then did he see that the thing held a man in its maw, and that his mouth was open in a scream that was lost in the pandemonium.
"No," Eustus whispered as he recognized who it was: Calhoun. And if Calhoun had been taken, then Reza must now be gone, too. Lord of All, he prayed, save us. "Come on!" He grabbed Talia, praying that she hadn't seen her father from her lower vantage point. There was nothing he could do to help Calhoun, and he couldn't go back to find Reza, not while he had the children and Chunlan. His only choice was to get them to safety, if he could. Then he would have to time act on his friend's behalf. Or to grieve.
Eustus could see the entrance and began staggering toward it, firing short bursts as he went. They were fighting against the oncoming tide, but didn't have far to go. He stumbled and nearly fell as he reached the raised walkway that lined the front of the hotel, which was submerged beneath a moving mat of small rodent-like animals. Gritting his teeth as he felt some of their tiny bodies being crushed beneath his boots, he mounted the walkway, then pulled Talia and Chunlan up behind him. With one final, desperate surge, they reached the hotel's entry doors. 
They were locked.
"Open up, damn you!" Eustus cried as he banged on the sturdy wood double doors. He couldn't hear the muffled response from inside, but didn't have to make out the words to understand that they weren't willingly going to open up. Overtaken by an unfamiliar sense of anger, he pointed the muzzle of his rifle at the lock and fired three rounds, ignoring the frightened cries from within before he kicked in the right side door. Whirling around to make sure Ben was protected from the dangers outside, he ushered Talia and Chunlan inside, before backing in. Once inside, he slammed the door shut and leaned against it as Ben finally climbed down. Eustus knew the boy wasn't heavy, but his own thighs were trembling with exhaustion from the ordeal.
Eustus found himself facing a dozen terrified people, almost all of whom were women in gaudy outfits, and none of whom were armed. "Find something to barricade the door," he told them. They continued to stare at him. "Now!"
Startled into action, they scattered like startled cats. Four of them headed for a well-kept upright piano, which stood against a nearby wall. Grunting and cursing, they pushed it toward the door. At the last minute, Eustus stepped aside and helped them ram it against the door.
"Good," Eustus gasped. "That's good. Let's..."
Before he could finish his thought, a four legged animal not unlike a deer and about the same size exploded through one of the windows of the saloon, even though the windows had been shuttered. The beast, whose sole injury seemed to be a small cut on its nose, stood there, blinking in surprise, amid a sea of shattered glass and splintered wood from the shutters. It tossed its head back and made a sound like a braying donkey.
A heartbeat later another one jumped through the window, followed by five more and a torrent of the small rodent creatures. Another one of the quasi-deer animals came through, nearly twice as large as the others and endowed with a fierce rack of antlers with needle-sharp tips. It glared at the humans and brayed a challenge.
"Upstairs!" Eustus ordered as the saloon began to fill with animals. "Go!"
Chunlan grabbed Talia and Ben by the hand and darted up the elaborately carved stairs faster than Eustus would have credited. The others paused only a moment before following with a chorus of shouts and screams.
The movement enraged the bull, who charged straight at Eustus, head down and antlers aimed right at his chest.
Eustus pulled the trigger on his rifle, and was rewarded with a single shot as the magazine went dry. The pulse round grazed the bull's flank and had no effect on its hurtling charge.
Purely on instinct, Eustus switched his grip on the rifle, holding it by the barrel like a bat. As the bull came into range, he swung with all his might. The butt of the rifle slammed into the beast's antlers, knocking the deadly weapons aside for a single precious moment. Letting go of the rifle, which went flying into the sea of animals now covering the floor, Eustus drew his knife. Lunging toward the bull as the animal swung back toward him, Eustus grabbed it around the neck before plunging his knife into the tender flesh where the neck met the jaw. The animal bleated in pain and thrashed in rage as Eustus desperately clung on. Eustus stabbed it again, and this time was rewarded with a gush of bright red arterial blood. The animal bellowed and tried to wrench away. Eustus let it go, hurling himself to the side. He hissed as a pair of the antler tips raked across his back, then he was rolling on the floor as the bull staggered in the opposite direction, its life blood pouring from its body. Gritting his teeth at the sensation of tiny feet darting over his hands and forearms and tiny mouths nibbling at his skin, he groped along the floor for his weapon. He finally felt it and snatched it up. As he ran for the stairs, ignoring the tiny things underfoot, he hit the release for the magazine and slammed in a new one. Turning around, he fired a brief burst toward the base of the stairs to discourage the larger animals from following.
He found some of the women ogling the scene from the second floor landing. "What are you waiting for?" He shouted. "Get to the roof!"
With obvious reluctance, their eyes drawn by the surreal scene on the first floor, they turned and fled upstairs to the third and final level. He followed them to a back room. Making a final check that he hadn't left anyone behind, he slammed and locked the door. Behind him, a ladder was affixed to the wall and led up to an open hatch in the roof. Rain poured through as the women made their way up.
Slinging his rifle, Eustus followed them, breathing a huge sigh of relief when he found Chunlan and the children, huddled together behind the facade that lined the front of the building, which provided a small bit of protection from the wind, if not the rain. 
"Camden!"
He turned and was surprised to find Walker striding up to him. "What the hell are you doing here? Where're the el-tee and the others?"
"I think..." Eustus was at a loss for words. He really had no idea how he'd gotten back to down, other than it was some sort of magic Reza had worked. He decided he'd try to skip over that part and answer what he could. "Lieutenant Ortiz is still deep in the forest, making their way back here. We made contact with a group of Kreelans out there, and another group hit the far side of town." He paused. "I think Captain Yamada and the Marines with him must've bought it."
Walker stepped closer, her dripping nose a finger's breadth from his. "That doesn't explain how you're here. Are you a deserter, Camden?"
"The strange one, the alien in human skin knows powerful magic," Chunlan said. Looking at Eustus, she went on, "He saved this one's life by bringing him to me after being bitten by a great serpent, then went with their father," she glanced at the children, who crouched in misery behind the facade, "to try to repair the sonic fence and save the town."
With a grunt, Walker stepped back...slightly. "Well, I guess that didn't go so well."
Ignoring the barb, Eustus asked, "Where are Stalin and the others?"
Walker pointed into the gray murk. "In the church belfry."
"Why hasn't he done anything?"
Walker laughed. "What would you have us do? If it was just the Kreelans, we'd be in there blasting away. But against this mess?" She leaned over the side of the building at the animals still pouring past. "Give me a break."
Eustus's gaze followed hers, then swept through the rain back to where he thought Reza might be. "I've got to go back down. I've got to find him." 
"Negative on that, Marine," Walker told him. "You're staying right here where..."
Her words were lost as the world exploded in a blaze of cyan.
***
In that agonizing moment as he watched Calhoun, his newfound friend, screaming in terror, being borne away by the neo-tiger, Reza stood there, rooted to the ground as the denizens of the forest ran around him in a fear-filled frenzy. He knew he had to help Calhoun, that honor demanded it, but the rational voice in his mind said that Reza could not help him, that he could never catch up to the beast without using his powers, which under these conditions would be nothing less than suicidal, that Calhoun was probably dead already. It told Reza that he could not save everyone. And that perhaps, in the end, he could save no one, not even himself. 
In that moment, he felt completely helpless, and the full weight of failure crashed down upon his shoulders in a deathly burden of guilt. He had failed Calhoun and his children. He had failed Eustus and his fellow Marines. He had failed his love, Esah-Zhurah, and the great priestess Tesh-Dar, his mother in spirit, if not in blood. He had failed the Empress. Nicole. Jodi. Wiley Hickock. His parents. It was as if all the things that had ever caused him pain, every sense of loss, were now crushing him at once. 
He threw back his head and howled like one of the creatures of the forest, giving vent to his pain and sorrow, weary of the burden that had been thrust upon him by Fate. 
It was then that he remembered the last words spoken to him by the Empress before she banished him. She appeared to him in a vision so clear that She could have been standing before him now, Her hands upon his shoulders, just as upon that fateful day. "I beg that you remember this," She had whispered. "You are of My blood, the blood of an Empress. And although you have chosen a Way that will take you to be among our enemies, you do so with honor. And thus shall you forever be remembered in the Books of Time. From this day onward you shall never again feel My love, but know that I do love you, and I pray that glory shall forever follow in your footsteps."
The memory acted as a dam against the flood of painful memories, and a fire ignited deep inside him that began to burn away the sense of failure and replace it with a fierce rage that quickly consumed him. He understood now that, in the process of rejoining the human race and trying to fit in with his genetic kin, it had become too easy to think like a human, albeit one who had unique powers. 
But that was not what he was. You are of My blood, the blood of an Empress...and a priest of the Desh-Ka. He had chosen the path of honor to again live among humans, but his blood and soul were forever Kreelan.
Embracing the rage, opening himself to it, he felt the flames roar through his blood. He yearned for the fullness of the Bloodsong, to hear the melodies of Esah-Zhurah, Tesh-Dar, the Empress, and the billions of his sisters, but consoled himself with the knowledge that the great symphony of Her Children played on, even if he was now deaf to it. Time began to slow, the drops of rain and the frantic animals coming to a standstill as the fire within him grew ever hotter, ever brighter. In a moment of crystal clarity, as if he were looking through the second sight of the Empress Herself, he could see everything, knew everything, understood everything. He could have spent an eternity in that infinitesimal fraction of time, but that was not where honor was leading him. Falling away from the stars, he focused on the tableaux around him. He saw Calhoun, noting that he was still alive. The man's heartbeat was strong, his body not badly injured. Eustus and Calhoun's children, along with Walker and two other Marines, on the roof of the hotel. Stalin and the remaining Marines in the church steeple. The surviving civilians. Every animal within leagues of the town. The millions of ravenous amphibians threatening to doom them all.
Gripping his sword tighter, Reza focused the energy within him, feeling like a star about to go nova. Concentrating with all his might, he fought to bend that energy to his will. It was, of course, something that Tesh-Dar had never had time to teach him, and he ignored the voice of reason, the voice of his human side, that told him he was probably about to die. 
"In Her name," he whispered to himself, "let it be so."
The power inside of him straining for release, he raised both arms and spread them wide. Lightning danced over his body like a cyan corona before it finally exploded from his hands, momentarily turning the bleak gray into blinding day.
***
Calhoun was beyond terror as the neo-tiger carried him along, held with almost tender gentleness in its massive jaws. He hammered at the thing's head with his left hand, for his right was useless, that shoulder clamped between the thing's teeth. He had tried to grab his knife, but it was beyond his reach on the other side of the ammo vest. Paradoxically, he wasn't in any real pain except for his back: the thing held him in such a way that he was facing nearly straight up, and every bound and turn made him feel like his spine was being twisted. He knew that his reprieve was only temporary: neo-tigers liked their kills fresh, and frequently would haul their prey away, still quite alive, to a protected spot to feast.
As the beast swept around a corner, Calhoun caught sight of Eustus, Chunlan, and the children. "Hey!" Calhoun screamed. "Help me!"
He saw Eustus turn his way and knew that he must have seen him being carried off, but Calhoun also realized there really was nothing the young Marine could do to help him. "Save my children," Calhoun prayed. That was the best he could hope for as the bounding neo-tiger raced past and his children faded into the rain.
The beast had almost reached the west gate when the world suddenly exploded around them. The air was lit by a cascade of lightning, as if from a hundred terrible thunderstorms at once, and much of the rain flashed to steam as the animals surrounding him were instantly incinerated. The only thing that wasn't was the neo-tiger, which was unharmed.
And yet, a moment later he found himself flying through the air, along with chunks of the neo-tiger's head, which had been cut apart with surgical precision. As if in some sort of surreal nightmare, he could see the cross-section of the flesh and bone of the neo-tiger's lower jaw as it flew alongside him, as perfectly defined as if it were part of an anatomy study. The decapitated head - minus the lower jaw, of course - flew in tight formation, as well, and he got a clear look at the cross-section of the neck and its fountaining arteries as the body made a couple more stumbling steps before collapsing into the mud beside the countless steaming corpses of other animals. 
Calhoun was still gawking in confused amazement when he hit the ground. Or, more accurately, plowed into the knee-deep water where the ground had begun to slope toward the west gate, which had been torn from its hinges by the preceding animals.
He hit with a splash and went under. The runoff here had become a shallow river, and he fought to gain his footing as the current dragged him along. 
A hand gripped him by the upper arm with irresistible strength and hauled him to his feet. Spitting out the water that had forced its way into his mouth, Calhoun found himself facing Reza, who held his sword in his other hand. 
"It's about damn time," Calhoun sputtered with a smile. He felt like he was going to burst into tears, he was so relieved. Then he noticed the parade of charred animal corpses streaming by. "I'd really, really like to get the hell out of here." Calhoun felt Reza's grip on his arm tighten. 
"So shall it be done," Reza said softly.
He and Reza vanished into the storm.

 

Chapter Sixteen

"Dad!" Talia shrieked as her father and Reza miraculously appeared in the blink of an eye. 
"Daddy!" Ben screamed, his higher pitched voice a harmony of relief to hers. They threw themselves into Calhoun's open arms as he collapsed to his knees on the rooftop, Reza standing beside him.
"Reza!" Eustus wanted to pull Reza into a bear hug, but decided not to give Walker another excuse to give either of them any hell. "I sure am glad to see you!"
"And I, you, my friend," Reza told him, putting a hand on Eustus's shoulder. But he did not let his expression show the pain that had flared inside him, deep in his gut. Ignoring the pain, he turned to Walker and said, "We must leave here. Now, while there is still time."
Walker just stood there, staring at him, her mouth hanging open in disbelief. She had turned away from the cyan glare that had almost blinded her and was blinking the spots from her vision when Reza and Calhoun had suddenly appeared. They had materialized right there, no more than an arm's length away. "That's impossible," she managed.
"It will be if we do not leave now," Reza said, stepping closer. "The forest animals that would threaten us are no more, and the amphibians have been stunned. But that will not last for long." The deafening screeing sound of the amphibians had been quelled, and that, along with the deaths of the animals had left the world eerily quiet beyond the roar of the rain.
"I meant that you...him," she gestured at Calhoun, "that whatever just happened...was impossible!"
"We can talk about that later, assuming we survive," Reza told her. "Right now, we need to move."
Chunlan came up to him and stared into his face. "Even gods may bleed," she said quietly as she reached up and touched his upper lip. Her fingertips came away red. 
"I am no god," Reza told her, gently moving her hand away. He already knew about the blood streaming from his nose. He could smell and taste it, even against the overwhelming stench of charred animal flesh and skin that even the rain had trouble washing from the air. He could also sense that his body was gravely weakened, but there was nothing for it. If there was a price to be paid for using his powers to the fullest, then so be it. "Enough. We must leave."
"And go where?" Calhoun said as he got to his feet. He still held Ben in his arms, and Talia clung to his free hand. 
"Toward the great canyon," Reza told him. "It is our only choice." Turning to Walker, he said, "Get any other vehicles that may be at the barracks and take them to the shelter. Chunlan, take the children and go with them. Load the children and anyone who cannot move quickly into the vehicles first." He stepped closer. "And send an emergency distress broadcast if the subspace transmitter is still working."
"Yeah," she said, taking a small step back, "I sort of figured out that part on my own."
Nodding, Reza turned to Brett and Eustus. "First get to the shelter, Everyone must leave if they're to have a chance at survival. Then get as many as you can to the stables and mounted on horses."
"A lot of people will still have to go on foot," Calhoun said.
"I know," Reza said darkly. 
"And what about you?" Eustus asked. "Where are you going?"
"There is something I must attend to. Remember: we have little time. Move quickly." With that, he turned and strode to the edge of the roof and stepped off into space.
"Reza!" Eustus and Walker both ran to the roof's edge, but Reza was nowhere to be seen. The only things in the water-drenched street below were charred animals.
"Lord of All," Walker breathed. "What the hell is he?"
"We can worry about that later," Calhoun said, setting Ben down. "We've got to get going."
***
As Reza emerged into Calhoun's shop from the not-space through which priests and priestesses could move at will, he sank to his knees and vomited blood. His vision faded to gray and for a long, desperate moment he was afraid he would pass out. "No," he breathed, clenching his fists tight, willing his body to bend to his will. He held up the gleaming blade of his sword and stared into it as if it were a mirror. For a moment he thought he saw Esah-Zhurah's beautiful eyes staring back at him and heard her voice whisper, "Be strong, love of my life." He missed her so very much.
But now was not the time for reflecting upon the pain of his broken heart. He had come here for a very specific reason. It took him only a few moments to find the duffle that contained his armor and other weapons. He would not leave the legacy of his former life behind, but he could not afford to be encumbered by carrying it in the terrible battle that he knew must yet come. Quickly, he stripped out of his Marine uniform and donned his newly repaired second skin. Despite the desperate circumstances, he smiled as he slipped on the black leatherite, then the metal plate. He secured the shrekkas in their accustomed place on his left shoulder, and the dagger and short sword to his waist, with the scabbard of his long sword across his back. When he was done, he felt complete again; when he only wore the Marine uniform, even with the armor, he felt naked.
He imagined the town stables in his mind and willed himself to go there...but his spirit was too weak. The world around him shimmered and a frigid wind swept across his soul, but that was all. 
Grimacing, he accepted that - for now - he was again a mere mortal man. But no, he thought with a wan smile. You are not a mere man, but an exhausted priest of the Desh-Ka. 
Ignoring the gnawing pain in his gut and the blood still streaming form his nose, he leaped from the raised sidewalk into the inundated street. Slogging his way toward the west gate, he wondered how much time they had before the amphibians would begin to awaken.
***
"We'll be safe in the vault," Laura Varga argued after Calhoun had told her what was happening. Only with the greatest reluctance had she opened the vault door enough to let Calhoun inside. 
"You'll be safe now," Calhoun told her, "but you'll starve when you run out of the supplies in here because there won't be anything outside these metal walls for dozens, possibly hundreds of kilometers. Nothing, Laura. The crops, the silos, everything will be gone, eaten by these things. And remember that the next stage of their life cycle won't get any better." The small amphibians now threatening them represented the larval stage of the creature's life cycle; those that survived would become much larger predators, as big as a large dog and far more deadly. Normally they weren't a problem for the townsfolk because few ever survived the off-cycle emergences, being picked off by the other creatures of the forest. "If even a tiny fraction of this great spawn survives to adulthood, this entire area is going to be uninhabitable without bringing in a lot of outside firepower that we just don't have." He leaned closer, putting a hand on the older woman's shoulder. "We've got to go."
Laura looked back at all the frightened faces crowded around behind her. Armitage, the mayor, and most of the men and many of the younger women were missing, having been masssacred by first the Kreelans and then the stampeding animals at the east gate. Sucking in a breath, Laura turned back to him and said, "All right, then. I've always trusted you, Brett, and I've never regretted it. So I guess I'll have to trust you again. It'll take a few minutes for everyone to gather up their things..."
"No," Brett said, cutting her off. "We have to leave right now. If we don't, we'll be caught in the open by the amphibians." Raising his voice, he went on for the benefit of the others. "The Marines are bringing transporters to the west gate, and I need as many folks as will volunteer to head to the stables and get the horses. But we've got to get going now. Right now." To Laura, he said, "Lead on, ma'am."
Taking a deep breath, she made a decisive nod. "Follow me!" She shouted before stepping out into the rain and water swirling in the street.
Not everyone was willing to follow her, however. Nearly a third of those in the shelter decided to remain there, and no amount of arguing could coax them out. 
As the last of those departing stepped through the door, Calhoun watched as the vault door slowly swung closed. Then he led Eustus and a group of volunteers toward side street.
"Wait!" Eustus said. "The stables are the other way!"
"I know," Calhoun replied. "But I've got another idea that Reza didn't think of."
Not knowing what else to do, Eustus followed him. Over the rain he thought he could hear the dreaded scree-scree-scree of the amphibians in the distance, coming back to life, and he threw a worried look toward the forest that loomed beyond the dark gray deluge, wondering at the terror that lurked there.
***
"How could you have done it?" Walker hissed at Stalin as they and the other surviving Marines splashed through the street leading to the Marine barracks. "You put all these people - and us - at risk. And for what?" She shook her head. "I knew you were a crazy bastard, but..."
Walker found herself flying through the air, dazed, after Stalin's left fist smashed into the side of her face. She had barely hit the ground when he was on her, one hand around her throat and the other holding a knife a hair's breadth from her right eye.
"I do whatever I do because it pleases me," he growled. "And if you call me crazy again I'll cut out your tongue. Do you understand?"
"Yeah," Walker gasped. "I get the message."
Stalin pulled the knife away, then hauled her to her feet by the throat. "Move," he ordered, shoving her roughly in the direction of the barracks. 
When they arrived, Stalin said, "Each of you get a transporter. I will try to contact the fleet."
"Uh-uh," Walker said, leveling her rifle at his chest. "I'm not trusting you with that. You're as likely to smash the equipment as anything else."
Stalin laughed. "Do you think I want to die here, eaten by whatever creature comes along? If so, you are badly mistaken." He spat into the rain. "As you wish. You do it." He came toward her until the muzzle of her rifle was pressing hard against his chest armor, and her finger tensed on the trigger. "Next time, you should shoot."
With a laugh, he turned away and followed the others toward the vehicle shed. 
Shivering with relief, Walker made her way to the admin building and the comms room. She'd never operated a FLEETCOM terminal before, but it didn't take her long to figure out how it worked. "Mayday, Mayday" she began, "this is Carillon, calling any station..." She paused to think a moment, trying to decide what she should say. While the Kreelans had attacked, it wasn't exactly in serious force, and what would anyone on the far end think about a plea for help against rampaging amphibians? But an invasion was an invasion, be it by alien warriors or creatures that could kill every human in the settlement. "We are declaring an invasion alert and require immediate fleet assistance. Mayday, Mayday..."
***
"You're what?" Ortiz signaled for the other Marines with her to halt. With sighs and groans of relief, they collapsed to their knees or fell prone onto the sodden ground. The horses had panicked and fled into the forest during the fight with the huge snake, and the Marines had been forced to travel the old fashioned way, on foot. Ortiz had set a grueling and relentless pace back toward the town that probably would have exhausted the horses. She had also decided to forget about following the trail and had led the Marines on a much more direct line toward town, hoping that she might be able to flank the Kreelans in the process, and hoping even more that they could avoid any more unpleasant creatures like the snake or neo-tigers on the way. While they had made good time thus far, Walker's call had provided an excuse for a momentary and desperately needed respite. "Say again?"
"We're evacuating everyone from here," Walker told her, "and heading your way."
"Negative," Ortiz told her. "There's a Kreelan force of unknown size between us and the town. You could run right into them!"
"We don't have a choice, lieutenant. I don't have time to explain right now, but I'll tell you that I'd rather take my chances with the Kreelans than what's coming after us here." She paused. "And you're in charge now, ma'am. Captain Yamada and the Marines from the other detachments are dead. Do you copy?"
"Yeah," Ortiz sighed. As much as Ortiz wanted to, she wasn't going to press Walker for details now, although she couldn't help wondering what had her so spooked. Walker had never been afraid of much of anything. Shit. "I copy. All right, get your asses moving and give me a full sitrep just as soon as you can, understood? I don't like being in the dark. We'll arrange a rendezvous point then."
"Yes, lieutenant."
"In the meantime," Ortiz grated, "we'll see if we can't sort out the Kreelans before you get here."
"Understood. Walker, out." The comm unit went dead. Ortiz tilted her face up to the rain. "Lord of All," she muttered, "I hate this fucking job."
"But you're so good at it!" Davis, standing beside her, said with comical enthusiasm. Among the Marines with her, he was the only one who seemed completely unfazed. 
Of course he acts like he's fine, she thought to herself. He's completely insane. "Okay, Davis, get everyone moving. Up and at 'em, Marines!"
***
Tia-Ulan watched as the Marines resumed their fast march through the forest, and felt no reluctance in granting them respect for both their determination and stamina. Her own warriors were tired, and they moved with far less equipment than the humans typically burdened themselves with. She had led her warriors along the main trail for a time, then veered on a more direct course for the settlement, hoping again to encounter Reza. In the process, rendered deaf and blind by the rain, she had nearly blundered into the humans. While she would not turn away from an encounter, it was not her first priority, and she believed that they would lead her right to Reza. Pulling off to one side of the route the humans were taking, she and her warriors lay hidden in the brush, letting the humans take the lead before following in their wake. It was a challenge to stay close enough to remain in contact, yet far enough away to remain undetected, for the humans who brought up the rear were unceasingly vigilant in trying to keep their trail clear. Occasionally one would even dart into the brush and wait for a time, hoping to detect Tia-Ulan's force in case it was following. Her warriors had to be very careful, and it heartened her to know that Reza found himself in such company. Soulless animals the humans might be, but none could doubt the wisdom of the Empress declaring them worthy opponents for Her Children.
Giving a signal by hand to her warriors, she rose from their resting place and followed after the humans.
***
"We're not going to make it," Walker said loud enough for Stalin and Eustus to hear, the rain masking her voice for the civilians huddled farther away. Each of the Marines had brought a Light Transport Vehicle from the barracks. The LTVs could hold roughly a dozen people each, but that was only a small tithe of all the townsfolk. Under Stalin's scowling glare, Walker had directed that the infirm and youngest children board the vehicles, and as soon as they were full she sent them off to the west, following the same trail Ortiz and the others had taken on horseback.
"We will not if we do not get everyone moving," Reza said from beside her.
Startled, Walker raised her weapon at the apparition clad in black alien armor as he strode toward her. "You could've gotten yourself killed!" She shouted. "Where's your uniform?"
"Later," Reza said, and she could see now that he was struggling to stay on his feet. "Where are the horses? Where are Eustus and Calhoun?"
"I don't know," Walker said through gritted teeth. 
Reza looked toward the far side of town, where the sound of the amphibians was growing with every passing minute. 
"We go now," Stalin said. "Walker, lead the civilians..."
Walker held up her hand. "Wait! Listen!"
Through the dull roar of the rain they could hear the sound, faint at first, but quickly becoming louder, of heavy engines. From the gray murk dark, angular shadows emerged, finally resolving into the shapes of enormous transporters barely big enough to maneuver through the town's streets. Each one had a tractor with oversize wheels pulling a large flatbed trailer.
The first of them stopped next to where Reza, Walker, and Stalin stood, mouths agape in surprise. Above them, Calhoun leaned out the driver's window. "These were in the repair shop on the south end of town for maintenance. We use them to move what the distillery needs to make the liquor, and I figured they can haul people just as easily."
"Fine," Stalin said, as if disappointed. "Get everyone aboard and then let us get out of here."
Reza managed a nod of approval at Calhoun, then felt Eustus's arm around his waist. "Come on," Eustus said as he guided Reza to the steps that led up to the cab. "Let's get the hell out of here while we still can."

 

Chapter Seventeen

As the ragtag convoy churned through the mud along the same trail that Ortiz and the others of her detachment had taken toward the canyon, the civilians desperately clung to one another and to the few handholds available on the flatbed trailers. Reza and Eustus were doing the same on the trailer being driven by Calhoun, while Stalin had distributed the handful of remaining Marines among the other vehicles. Eustus had his arm draped around Reza's shoulders as they sat on the hard, pitted metal, quietly fretting about his friend. He had never seen Reza so weak. Reza had become in his own mind a kind of superhero, unafraid, unconquerable. Immortal. Eustus couldn't comprehend what Reza had done in the town, what magic he had wrought that had bought them all some time. But it had clearly come at a cost.
He held his friend tighter, willing him to be all right.
"I will be fine, my friend," Reza said just loud enough to be heard above the rain, which was falling even harder now, if that was possible, and the roar of the vehicle's engine. "I just need to...rest a while."
"Yeah, right." Eustus didn't say anything else. Even with the rain pouring over them, he could still make out the streaks of fresh blood flowing from Reza's nose, and he suspected he was bleeding internally, as well. "You're a lousy liar, you know that?"
Reza managed a grin. "I will try to work on that." The grin turned into a grimace as Calhoun took them over a deep rut in the trail that had turned into a small but furiously flowing stream of mud and debris. Many of the civilians on the flatbed cried out in surprise as they were momentarily inundated with a deluge of muddy water, which was followed by screams of anguish and terror as two people were washed overboard and quickly swept away.
"Stop!" Eustus shouted to Calhoun. "Stop! We've lost someone..."
Calhoun let up off the accelerator and the big vehicle slowed.
Reza clutched Eustus's shoulder. "We cannot stop, even for a moment. Every second counts. Tell him to keep going. He must...not...stop."
Eustus saw the stricken faces of several civilians, no doubt the families of the victims, staring at him, begging for the vehicle to stop. Hating himself, hating this world, hating the entire universe, he ordered, "Belay that! Keep going."
Calhoun poked his face through the window that looked back on the cargo area. "Eustus..."
"Keep going, dammit!"
The blacksmith nodded. A heartbeat later the big vehicle began to accelerate again. A man jumped off the trailer into the swirling water, calling a woman's name.
Eustus closed his eyes.
***
Eustus was not the only one musing about Reza's condition. Stalin stood near the head of the trailer of the tail-end transporter, holding onto a stanchion for support. While his eyes ceaselessly, and uselessly, scanned the deluge around them for threats, his mind was focused on Reza. I know what I saw, he kept repeating to himself, even now still trying to force himself to believe it. He had seen Reza in the street through the scope of his rifle. The image had been indistinct, the electronically enhanced display in his sight distorted both by the rain and the animal stampede, but there had been no mistaking the vaguely human shape standing still among them. With the crosshairs centered on Reza's chest, Stalin's trigger finger had been slowly applying pressure. He was taking his time because if he killed Reza now, he would never know if he, Stalin, were truly the better man, the better killer. It was a battle he had been fighting in his mind since the day that Reza had bested him and broken the bones of Stalin's hand. Killing him and beating him were not the same thing. To kill the Kreelan in human skin, even one wearing the special collar, would not, Stalin believed, have been terribly difficult. Even toward Stalin, Reza was too trusting. But that would not satisfy Stalin's curiosity. He had to face Reza on as equal terms as possible and best him in a fight. Then, and only then, could he be satisfied with killing him.
Stalin had just taken the pressure off the trigger when the entire town was lit up by a titanic cyan flash that overloaded the electronic sight and temporarily blinded Stalin's other eye. It was as if he had been looking directly at the birth of a new star. He and the other Marines with him and shouted in surprise and fear, too late trying to shield their eyes from the blast, and their eardrums nearly ruptured from the sound of the explosion. The explosion. That's what the other Marines thought it was, the spontaneous detonation of chemicals used by the distillery, or perhaps explosives from the Marine barracks. 
But Stalin knew better. Even as he tried in vain to blink away the after-images, he knew the truth: the chain lightning, as he thought of it, had originated with Reza. The last glimpse Stalin had of him through the scope before it had been overwhelmed was of Reza surrounded by a halo of thermal energy. How Reza had done what he did, Stalin had no idea. But he had no doubt that Reza was the source of the energy that had killed the animals and stunned the amphibians all the way back into the forest. He wanted to marvel at the technology the Kreelans possessed that would allow any of them to do such a thing. Part of him, however, was not convinced that it was technology, at least not as he or any other human might understand it. Being a deeply spiritual man, Stalin could not help but wonder if the power he had witnessed had actually come from within Reza, without any technological assistance. And if so, what did that make him?
It makes him a much more dangerous opponent. At that thought, Stalin's lips slowly turned up in a grim smile.
***
Ortiz and the others waited in the brush along the trail, not so much to keep out of sight — not that it was necessary in the deluge — but to stay out of the rushing creek the trail had become. She had run out of words to describe her loathing for rain and this world in general. 
She set her silent cursing aside as she heard Walker over the radio. "We're only a few minutes from the rendezvous point, lieutenant."
"Roger that," Ortiz replied. Of course, she could only hope that where she thought she was and where Walker was going were actually the same place. It was impossible to be sure with the rain interfering with their systems, and any kind of dead reckoning impossible in this terrain. "Watch out - the damn trail is swamped here."
"And everywhere else. I've never seen so much goddamn rain! I hope the fleet heard our mayday and can get us off this stupid mud ball."
"Damn straight." Ortiz cocked her head. "I think I hear you guys...yeah." Multiple lights, looking like the glowing eyes of another of the forest's nasty denizens, appeared and quickly grew brighter, accompanied by the low growl of vehicular engines. Ortiz stood up and waved her flashlight. "Do you see me?"
"No...yeah, there you are!"
Despite the perils of their situation, Ortiz couldn't help but be relieved that her detachment was back together again. She moved aside as Walker pulled up in one of the LTVs, then stepped up to the driver's hatch.
"Going our way?" Ortiz asked with a smile as the other Marines moved out of cover and gaggled behind Ortiz. Walker laughed. "Okay, you sad sacks," Ortiz shouted to the rest of the detachment, "find a spot somewhere and make your buddy smile. Let's get the hell out of—"
She happened to be looking right at Lance Corporal Kamikawa when a Kreelan throwing weapon sliced through his neck, cleanly decapitating him. Behind her, Walker yelped as a weapon sailed through the window, right in front of her face. The spinning blades left a minor cut along the bridge of her nose before embedding themselves in the head of the hapless civilian sitting in the passenger seat beside her.
"Ambush!" Ortiz bellowed, her training overcoming her shock as Kamikawa's head toppled from his shoulders and his body crumpled to the ground. Pointing her weapon into the gray rain, she fired off a few quick bursts in hopes of giving the Kreelans something to think about for a precious second or two while the Marines turned to meet the threat.
But instead of forcing the enemy to get their heads down, they launched a volley of the hissing throwing stars. Ortiz dove to the ground, which was more like diving into shin deep fast-flowing mud, grimacing as she felt one of the weapons land a glancing blow on her helmet. Three more Marines went down even as the others opened fire, the bolts from their pulse rifles dissipating in the rain mere meters from the muzzles. Much to her relief, the ineffective fire from the pulse rifles was quickly supplemented by the projectile rifles used by the colonists as the remaining citizen soldiers began firing from the vehicles.
Scrabbling to her knees, still firing blindly, Ortiz shouted to Walker, "Get your ass moving! Keep the convoy together and get those civvies out of here!" For the briefest moment, she considered ordering the Marines on the transports to dismount, but there wasn't much point. Besides, if Ortiz couldn't deal with the Kreelans here, the Marines with them might make all the difference. 
Walker paused just long enough to give Ortiz a nod of acknowledgement and farewell before she stomped on the accelerator, sending the LTV shooting up the far side of the rapidly eroding trail. The other vehicles followed, even as the firefight expanded to both sides of the trail, the dark shadows of Kreelan warriors emerging from the brush, the blades of their swords glowing.
Ortiz dove into the mud again to avoid another barrage of the throwing stars. As she was pushing herself back up with her left hand, her right still clutching her rifle, her fingers closed over something slimy that wriggled in her grip. "What the..." Bringing her hand up out of the muddy water, she found herself holding something that looked like a distant cousin to photographs of Terran frogs that she vaguely remembered seeing in her childhood.
Her surprise turned to pain as the thing bit her between the thumb and index finger with an oversized mouth that was clearly lined with teeth suited to a vicious, if small, carnivore. 
"Fucker!" She tried to shake the thing off, but it clung tenaciously, rapidly sawing its jaws back and forth, carving through her flesh while gripping her hand with webbed feet that had suddenly sprouted spikes that lanced into her skin, helping it hold onto its prey. 
Having survived more than her share of battles with Kreelans and enduring the likes of Marines assigned to the Red Legion, Ortiz wasn't about to be bested by a frog. Bringing the thing up to her lips, she decided to give it some of its own medicine: she opened her mouth wide and shoved it in as far as she could before biting down on it. She was rewarded with a high pitched keening as her teeth sank through skin and flesh to crush the tiny bones and internal organs. Whipping her head to one side, she ripped the thing from her hand and spat out the still-wriggling body. It landed in the water, which erupted in a feeding frenzy of similar creatures that ripped apart her attacker. 
"Jesus Christ!" She shot to her feet and backed away, nearly backpedaling into the path of one of the lumbering tractor trailer rigs carrying dozens of terrified civilians. She heard some of her Marines screaming, and could tell it wasn't from anything the Kreelans were doing to them. Around her, the water was suddenly filled with the things, and every inch of ground that wasn't covered by water was shifting as if it was alive. They're burrowing up from below. The pounding of the rain was quickly overshadowed by a scree-scree-scree sound that made her skin crawl. 
Now she knew what the civilians had been running from. 
She looked up as piercing screams arose from the ranks of the alien warriors. For a moment, Ortiz hoped they would break off their attack, but that hope quickly faded: her Marines were still pouring fire into the attackers.
For a moment, she was paralyzed with indecision. She wanted to break contact and get her people away from the damn things coming out of the ground, but knew she couldn't until the last of the vehicles was safely away. She fired a brief burst into a group of the swimming, hopping nightmares, blasting a few to bits and sending the others into another feeding frenzy, which momentarily cleared what she hoped was a safe path that she ran through, moving toward the bulk of her people. "Marines!" She called over the radio as she killed a Kreelan warrior that was about to cut down one of her people. "Cover the convoy and close with the enemy!"
If she was going to die, she'd much rather do it at the hands of a sword-wielding Kreelan than a swarm of toothy amphibians.
***
All during the bone-jarring escape from the town, Reza had focused his energies inward, trying to heal himself. He was not, of course, a healer, but he knew from the many stories he had heard from Esah-Zhurah and the healers of the kazha where he grown to become a warrior that priestesses — and priests — had some capacity to heal themselves and others. With all the distractions in the world around him, it had taken an inordinately long time to reach a deep meditative state. But once there, he was able to focus his consciousness on his body in much the same way he could send his second sight far beyond it. He was not surprised to find that some of the tissue on the outer parts of some of his organs, including his heart, had been seared, charred by the energy he had forced from his body. 
Bringing his metabolism as near to a complete halt as he dared, he focused first on repairing the damage to his heart, lungs, and the primary arteries. The damage done to his other organs would likely heal of its own accord in time, but to function, to fight, his brain and muscles needed the oxygen carried by his blood. He began to force closed the ruptures in his arteries where the arterial walls had become brittle from being burned, at last sealing up the leaks in his cardiovascular system. A great deal of blood had pooled in his chest cavity, making it difficult to breathe and putting pressure on his heart. Slowly, hoping Eustus would not notice, he drove one of his talons between his breast and back plates, puncturing the leatherite and undergarment beneath, then the skin and muscle. He kept forcing it deeper until the razor sharp tip reached the bloated reservoir in his chest, then removed his finger from the wound. Even in his deep meditative state, he literally breathed a sigh of relief as the blood drained from his body, then was washed away by the rain. 
Focusing now on his heart and lungs, he did what he could to repair them. What he was doing was nothing like what a healer could do, but he hoped it would keep him alive long enough to fight well in the coming battle.
After the poor civilians had fallen from the flat bed and he had told Eustus to keep moving, Reza remained in meditation until he heard the unmistakable sound of gunfire mixed with screams. Even before he opened his eyes, he cast out his second sight and saw that the group of warriors that had been attacked by the snake had stalked Ortiz and the others, and had finally attacked. He admired their determination, and would give them the right of combat that they so obviously desired.
At least half a dozen civilians on the flat bed were firing into the murk, and Eustus had joined them. Getting to his feet, ignoring the frightened looks of those around him who stared at his alien armor, Reza took a deep breath and drew his sword. Moving close to Eustus, he said, "Live well, my friend." Then he leaped from the flat bed, disappearing into the rain.
"Reza, no!" Eustus stared after his friend for a moment before turning to look at the cab of the truck. He saw Talia's face, her eyes wide with horror, staring at him. "Tell your dad to keep going," he shouted. "Don't stop until you're all safe! Understand?" Slowly, she nodded. 
Good luck, kid was his last thought before Eustus jumped into the chaos of gunfire, screams, and piercing cries of the amphibians that were rising from their subterranean slumber.

 

Chapter 18

The battle in the forest was one of sheer madness as humans battled Kreelans, with both desperately fighting against the upwelling of carnivorous amphibians that threatened to devour them all. 
Stalin's craggy face wore a broad smile as the chaos and the carnage rang like music in his ears. He would have liked to have been able to see more clearly, but the darkness and pouring rain put paid to that. He heard Ortiz order the column forward as she and the others with her made to fight the Kreelans. He felt a momentary pang of loss that she would die here, but that was as God willed. They would all die someday, and today was as good a day as any. 
Then he saw Walker's LTV get hit with a grenade that sailed from the darkness like a glowing jewel. The vehicle spun out and rolled over just before the weapon detonated, sending tendrils of artificial lightning over the metal body, into the surrounding trees, and lancing into the ground. Too bad, he thought. Of all those around him, Walker had understood him best, but he would shed no tears for her death. Here time, then, had come, as well. 
But it was not to be his day to die. He would stay with the convoy, not to care for the civilians for whom he had not the least sympathy. No, he would stay because his true nemesis was here.
His breath caught as he saw a shadow detach itself from the flat bed ahead of the one he was riding, an alien figure momentarily caught in his own vehicle's headlights, sailing into the dark Hell around them.
"No!" Stalin hissed, tightening his grip on his rifle. Without hesitation, he leaped from the flatbed, hurling himself after Reza.
 ***
Walker was suspended in a nightmare of darkness and rain, of screaming and thunder. It reminded her of home, of when she was young. Her mother screaming at her father. Her father hitting her mother. The earsplitting crack of the gun held in Walker's hands as she shot her father in the back. The horror of seeing the red stain over her mother's heart as her father collapsed to the floor, the bullet having speared through him to kill her as well. The look in her mother's eyes as the life went out of her and her body collapsed. The sirens and shouts as the militia came. The cries of anguish from her own lips, the cries that filled her soul every day since. And the pain. Always, the pain, like fire, burning her flesh. Burning her soul.
With a gasp, Walker snapped awake. She hung suspended, upside down, in the LTV, which had rolled onto its back. It was pointed up at an angle, the rear having sunk deep into the mud. The cabin was filled with smoke and steam, and she had no doubt she would have suffocated had not the plastisteel windows blown out. Or, as she saw in a flash of natural lightning, had been melted. It took her a moment to realize that the only reason she hadn't cooked was because the LTV had flooded with water when it flipped over after the grenade had detonated and the water had carried the worst of the electrical charge and heat away. 
That wasn't to say she had escaped completely unscathed. Her legs, arms, chest and face felt raw, and in some spots far worse. Running her hands carefully over her body, she found that she now was the proud wearer of molten metal and plastic, now cooled to merely burning hot, that had spattered over her. 
A small river flowed across the ceiling below her, running between the windows, which were half submerged in the muck, and she could tell the vehicle was continuing to slowly sink. If she didn't escape soon, she never would. It would be impossible to force open the doors, assumed they weren't fused shut, against the mud, and the LTV didn't have a belly hatch.
That realization sent a jolt of adrenaline through her. She had to get out of her metal sarcophagus. Reaching for her harness release, she found that it had been fused closed by a blob of metal.
"Shit," she hissed. Curling herself forward, she reached out for her combat knife, which was strapped to her right calf. After a few fumbling attempts, as her right hand was badly burned, she managed to pull it free and was about to start hacking through the restraints when she caught a subtle movement out of the corner of her eye.
A Kreelan warrior, crouching down, was staring down at her through the melted window.
Dropping her knife, Walker reached for her sidearm, but she knew she'd never get a chance to draw it. She saw the flicker of the Kreelan's sword as the warrior cocked her arm back to stab Walker with it.
Then there was a boom and accompanying flash, and the Kreelan, a look of surprise on her face that echoed what Walker felt, fell forward into the muck, so close that her long braided hair whipped out and actually brushed Walker's nose.
"Hello?" Walker called, finally wrestling free her sidearm. 
"Walker?"
She closed her eyes in relief. "Davis! Is that you?"
"Yeah," he said, as if surprised. "Yeah, it's me!" 
"Well don't just stand there, you moron! Get me out of here — this pig is sinking!"
"Right. Hold onto your horses."
Davis pulled the Kreelan's body back through the mud. "Okay, come on."
"Dammit, Davis, I'm stuck! I can't release the harness and I dropped my knife."
After a moment, she heard him mutter, "Oh." Then he was on his back, wriggling through the window toward her. The LTV was still sinking, and there was barely enough room for even his skinny body.
"Hurry." Walker reached out and took the knife he offered, and was relieved to see that he had a second one. "I'll do the waist, you work on the shoulder straps."
"Gotcha." 
The two put their blades to work, and Walker was gratified to see that Davis kept his weapons at least as sharp as she did. In a few strokes, the tough shoulder straps parted. Walker cut most of the way through the waist strap, then put out her free hand to try and break her fall as she cut it through the rest of the way. With a yelp, she fell unceremoniously into the water in the top of the cabin. "Help me," she told Davis as she tossed the knife past him. She wasn't sure what she feared more, being trapped in the LTV or being torn apart by the damn amphibians. It couldn't be long before they started to come out of the ground here, too. "Get me out!"
Grabbing her arms, Davis braced his feet against the side of the sinking vehicle and hauled her out. She was terrified for a moment as her body armor caught on the edge of the window frame, but with a powerful yank that seemed beyond the ability of Davis's scrawny body, she was free. Quickly getting to their feet, they staggered to where a tree as big around as Walker stood tall had fallen and clambered on top of it to get away from the things that must be lurking underground. Behind them, the LTV groaned and sank further, the window disappearing into the water and mud.
"Thanks, Davis," Walker gasped
"S'okay." 
She turned to him. She couldn't see shit in the murk, but he sounded strange. "You okay?"
"Not sure. I think...I think I got hit." He made what sounded like a sob. "I lost the lieutenant. I got turned around and wound up here."
"And it was a damn good thing, too." She gripped his arm. "Listen, Ortiz can take care of herself. Now let me take a look at you." She quickly ran her hands over the front of his armor, not daring to risk a light, then had him lean forward so she could check his back. A Kreelan throwing weapon protruded from his back plate, one of the blades having penetrated between his ribs just below the heart. She knew that normally she shouldn't remove a blade without a corpsman ready to seal the wound, but it had to be tearing him up inside with every step. She was amazed he was still alive. "Yeah, you caught a little something. Hand me your sealer."
He extracted a tube from his emergency pouch and handed it to her, and as he did so, she undid the lower latches on his armor.
"Okay, hang on. This is gonna hurt." Without giving him a chance to think about it, she grabbed the weapon, careful not to cut off her fingers on the other blades, and yanked it out. Davis grunted with pain and arched backward. Walker pushed her hand under the armor and felt around until she found the wound. Pressing the tube into it, she squeezed hard, squirting every drop of the liquid bandage into the opening in his flesh. 
Davis didn't make a sound, but she could feel him quivering in pain. 
"Okay," she told him, pulling her hand away and refastening the catches on the armor, pulling the adjustments tight. "That's it."
"That was enough," he gasped. "That hurt."
"Hey, you should feel what it's like to get spattered by molten LTV."
She could see his teeth as he parted his lips in a grin. "Yeah, that must hurt, too."
"Enough screwing off, Marine," Walker said as she forced herself to return to the ground, then helped Davis down. The sounds of battle still carried through the rain. Having lost her rifle, she picked up the dead Kreelan's sword. "Time to earn our pay.

 ***
For every time in his life when Eustus was sure he could not be more terrified, another event would come along to prove him wrong. He mentally cursed himself for being a stupid fool as he plunged into the maelstrom as the prime movers growled behind him, hauling the civilians to what he hoped would be safety. Stupid or not, terrified or not, he simply couldn't leave Reza behind.
He let out a curse as he landed in knee-deep water. The curse turned into a sputter as his feet were mired in the muck and he pitched forward, landing face first in the mud and swirling water. His poorly made landing saved his life as a shrekka sailed over his head, the Kreelan's aim thrown off by his fall.
Struggling to his feet, he clambered out of the watery hole, squirming along the muddy ground until he felt slimy, spiny things moving under his hands.
"Shit," he gasped as he struggled to get to his feet. 
He slipped and would have fallen back into the hole that was now churning with amphibians, had not someone grabbed his combat harness and hauled him out.
"Camden, you're a dumbass!" Ortiz shouted in his ear as she pulled him over to a log, behind which they both collapsed. It was perched over a large rock, which for the moment kept them safe from the amphibians. "Why didn't you stay with the convoy?"
"Reza jumped," he gasped just before he fired a few rounds at a moving shadow that he hoped was a Kreelan. "I have to find him."
"You're an idiot. You're all idiots."
They both turned at the sound of splashing feet coming up from the far side of the log, and popped up just far enough to level their rifles at whoever - or whatever - was aproaching.
"Don't shoot!" A familiar figure cried.
"Davis!" Ortiz shouted with obvious joy. Then she saw that Davis wasn't alone: he was supporting another Marine who was limping badly. "Walker! Jesus, I thought you bought it!"
"I would have, if not for this lug," Walker gasped as Ortiz and Eustus helped Davis get her over the log. With a grunt of pain, she collapsed on the rock beside them.
Someone screamed off to the left. Peering past the end of the log, they saw a Marine staggering in the direction of the Kreelans. He, or she, was covered from head to toe with the amphibians, which were busy eating the poor soul alive.
A shrekka sailed out of the darkness, mercifully cutting the scream short, and the Marine crumpled to the sodden ground. The blood and flesh drew even more of the creatures, and in seconds a pile of them thigh high were swarming over the body, snapping at the Marine's flesh and one another in a murderous orgy.
"Lord of All," Eustus whispered. 
Ortiz spat. "He's got nothing to do with this shit," she muttered.
"That's not exactly the way I planned on punching out," Walker said.
"We're not punching out," Eustus told her, forcing some steel into his voice. "We're going to find Reza and somehow get the heck out of here."
"Reza's out there?" Walker asked. "I thought you had him on one of the damn flatbeds."
"He jumped," Eustus told her. "He wants to fight the Kreelans."
"Of course he does," Ortiz sighed. "Well, since we're stranded here, I guess we don't have anything else to do. But how the hell do you plan to find him in this mess?"
Eustus paused, not sure how to answer. Then he heard something through the cacaphony that tore away the imminent sense of doom that had begun to enfold him: faint though it might be, it was the unmistakable ring of sword upon sword.
"Come on," he said, getting to his feet and helping Ortiz up. "This way!"
***
Tia-Ulan leaned against a tree for a moment, her feet upon the elusive safety of an adjacent rock, gasping from the pain that radiated from her left arm. Baring her fangs, she growled in pain from the shredded flesh that was all that remained of her hand and lower forearm, the result of an encounter with the mindless creatures that continued to boil from the ground. But she consoled herself with the knowledge that, even so injured, she had killed two human warriors with her blade.
She sensed something behind her. Whirling around, she brought up her sword.
It was him. Reza stood a few paces away, his eyes fixed upon her. 
With pride welling in her breast, she awkwardly knelt and brought her tattered left hand up to her breast and bowed her head. "Greetings, priest of the Desh-Ka. Great is the honor you bring us in Her eyes."
"Rise, Tia-Ulan," he told her, bowing his head. "Let us honor Her together."
She joined Reza in a rough circle of rocky soil that had formed something of a tiny meadow in the forest that was free of the amphibians. For now. As he turned to lead her toward the center, she could not help but notice by his gait that he was injured. Badly. She mourned for him, that she could not hear his Bloodsong, and that he could not hear the song of the Empress in the blood of his countless sisters. And yet, she mourned all the more Esah-Zhurah, whose blood had echoed her heartbreak since the day Reza had been banished from Her grace. Theirs was a story known by all who lived and breathed across the ten thousand suns of the Empire, and not a soul among the countless billions of Her Children did not mourn the tragedy that had befallen the two lovers. Theirs was perhaps the greatest story recorded in the Books of Time since the days of Keel-Tath, the First Empress. Pity was an emotion warriors rarely felt, but in this moment Tia-Ulan was nearly overwhelmed by it. Despite the cascade of cool rain down her cheeks, she could feel the warmth of the marks of mourning for the priest of the Desh-Ka who would likely take her life in the next few moments. And should she take his, it would bring her only sorrow that would follow her until the day she stepped into the Afterlife.
Other warriors, those who had been able to pull away from the humans who still fought tenaciously near the trail, emerged from the dark rain to form a circle around the combatants in the time-honored tradition. They, too, would have their chance at Reza, but Tia-Ulan would be first.
Turning to face her, unable to sense her emotions in his own blood, Reza drew his sword. "In Her name," he said, "let it be done."
"As it has always been," Tia-Ulan replied, "so shall it be now." Wasting no time, she attacked with a swift overhand cut of her sword. The attack lacked her usual strength, as she was only able to hold the weapon with her right hand. Reza raised his own sword to deflect the blow, but he was far slower than she had imagined. Whether from his injuries or simply because he was giving her the advantage out of his sense of honor, it did not matter. She loosed a torrent of strikes that steadily drove him back. She managed to get through his defenses once, and was rewarded with a sharp hiss of pain from her opponent as her blade sliced through the leatherite in a gap between the armor plates that protected his left shoulder. 
But Reza was not to be finished off so easily. With her next attack, he deflected her blade to one side, then pivoted to bring his body close to hers. Taking advantage of her momentarily defenseless left side, he slammed a fist into the side of her chest, just below her armpit, that sent her tumbling to the ground, where she lay gasping.
Through the murk, she could hear the human warriors calling to one another as they moved closer.
"Quickly," Reza said to the warriors who stood silent in a circle around him. "You will never again be able to face a priest of the Desh-Ka, for all the days left to the Homeworld and more. Come. Make my end a worthy one, and glory in Her name."
As Tia-Ulan lay there, trying to regain her breath, the other warriors, weapons raised and war cries upon their lips, quickly closed in around him. The rocky clearing rang with the sound of swords and rending steel, of bellows of fury and screams of agony. Forcing herself to her knees, she watched, her soul torn, as Reza fought the survivors of her hunting party. They wounded him, over and over, before the last of them fell to his blade. Still gripping his sword, Reza swayed like a great tree whose roots had been exposed by a torrential flood. Slowly, he sank to his knees, his head bowed to his chest. His sword hand held his blade, the tip buried in the ground, a crutch that was all that prevented him from falling.
With a grunt of pain, now not just from her torn left hand, but from ribs that Reza must have broken, Tia-Ulan forced herself to her feet. Making her way to where he knelt, she fell to her knees before him, so close that her knees touched his. 
She saluted him and bowed her head. "I offer you my life, my priest."
"No," he whispered. "Yours is the greater honor. Do what must be done." He smiled, a trickle of blood, black in the darkness, running from the corner of his mouth. "It is an honorable death. That is all any warrior can ask."
She dared to raise her eyes to look upon him, and he returned her gaze. Giving in to a sudden impulse, she let go her sword and reached out with her good hand, touching him upon the cheek, wishing she could touch his flesh through the metal and leatherite of her gauntlet. "All the Empire shall grieve this day."
"Grieve not, warrior. It is as She wills, and through my death, glory shall be Hers."
Taking away her hand, Tia-Ulan gripped her sword and again forced herself to her feet. Raising it high, she carefully placed the tip at the base of his throat, just below his collar.
Raising his eyes to her, Reza spread his arms wide, embracing his release from life, even if he were to spend eternity in the Darkness. In his mind, he summoned an image of Esah-Zhurah, his love, that he would carry with him into eternity. "May they Way be long and—"
Tia-Ulan's forehead exploded in a warm spray of blood, bone, and gore as a single shot from an assault rifle echoed from the darkness. The sword slipped from her dead hand and clattered to the ground as her limp form fell forward on top of Reza. Their bodies, entwined like lovers, sank to the cold, wet stone of the clearing.
Too weak to move, Reza lay on his back, Tia-Ulan's body covering his like a sleeping lover. He stared into the black sky, raindrops burning his eyes, wishing that he could see the stars, wishing that he could cast his mind's eye across the galazy to the Homeworld to see Esah-Zhurah one last time. He had spent most of his life surviving the harsh ways of his adopted people, but the time spent among the race of his birth had seemed so much longer, and all the more cruel without she who held his heart, without the Empress, without the countless sisters that had once sung in his blood. He wanted to rest, for it to be over.
The dead weight of Tia-Ulan was tossed aside, and the dark sky and rain were replaced by Stalin's craggy face.
"It is not time for you to die," Stalin said as he pulled Reza up and slung him over his shoulder in a fireman's carry, carefully prying the sword from Reza's hand and taking it along. "Not yet."
"No," Reza whispered. "Leave me..." Then he passed out.
Stalin did not hear him, and if he had, he would have ignored Reza's request. Turning around, he saw that the other Marines had made their way to the relative safety of the rock-strewn clearing.
"We can't go back that way!" Ortiz shouted, putting a restraining hand on Stalin's arm as he made to go back the way they'd come. "Those damn things are right on our heels!"
"They're over here, too!" Davis cried. He was shining his tactical light on the forest on the far side of the clearing. Thousands, tens of thousands, of squirming bodies were flowing toward them.
The Marines began to fire short bursts into the tiny predators, hoping to dupe them into feasting on those that were blown apart. That the amphibians did, but then the ones behind them got wind of the blood and surged forward like an ocean wave festooned with millions of needle sharp teeth.
"Cease fire!" Ortiz ordered. "We're just making things worse. Shit."
"Lord of All," Eustus gasped as he stood beside Stalin, doing what little he could to help protect Reza. 
Stalin spoke, but not to Eustus. With his eyes firmly closed and a serene look upon his face, he was praying.
***
Calhoun guided the big tractor through the forest, his powerful hands gripping the wheel tighter than he had ever gripped the hammer he used to shape steel. Beside him, Chunlan clutched the children, who cried out as the vehicle slammed down into a culvert hidden by a stand of thick-leafed trees. The civilians on the flatbed behind him screamed, but all he could do was to spin the wheel to the left and jam on the accelerator, sending the tractor careening through the water. He followed the path of least resistance until the big tires gained what purchase they could in the muck, with Calhoun praying to the Lord of All every moment that the axles didn't get hung up on a hidden rock. Glancing in the display that showed a mud- and water-spattered camera view behind the tractor, he saw the other vehicles following his lead, their headlights blazing through the rain. 
He turned back just in time to see the ground change from mud to rock, and then to empty darkness as the vehicle sped toward edge of the escarpment that overlooked the titanic canyon.
"No!" Frantically stomping on the brake, Calhoun spun the wheel to the right, praying the huge vehicle wouldn't jackknife. The children and the civilians in the back screamed in terror as the transporter went into a sideways skid toward the abyss, the huge tires clawing for purchase on the slick ground. Fighting through his panic, Calhoun let up on the brake and instead put some power to the wheels as he continued to try and turn the rig to the right, away from the drop-off. With a shudder that shook the entire vehicle, the tractor's tires suddenly regained some traction, and he throttled forward as much as he dared, for the trailer behind them was still swinging toward the yawning chasm. Out of the corner of his eye, he saw on the rear view screen a number of civilians leaping from the trailer as the rear left wheel slowly spun out over the abyss. 
"No...you...don't," Calhoun said through grated teeth, the tendons standing out on his powerful arms as he wrestled with the controls. 
Then, as if the vehicle had passed through some invisible wormhole in space and time, he had control again. The tractor pulled the dangling trailer and its screaming passengers away from the edge, back onto safe ground. With a heaving sigh of relief, Calhoun brought it to a stop. He sat there for a moment, wondering how much of his hair had turned gray, when he heard the sound of cheers from the trailer behind him. Turning to look through the cab's rear window, he saw his passengers standing and clapping. He also saw with infinite relief that the vehicles following him had seen what had happened to his own rig, and had slowed down in time to avoid their own doom. One by one, they pulled up alongside. 
He nearly burst into tears as Talia and Ben threw their arms around him, and he squeezed his eyes shut and held them tight. 
After a moment, he opened his eyes and found Chunlan looking at him. Her dark almond eyes were sad. "I will look after them," she said softly.
The words tore through Calhoun's heart, because she knew exactly what she meant. He only wondered how the woman always knew the things she did. 
"What does she mean, Daddy?" Ben asked. 
"I've got to go back and get the Marines," he said, barely able to force out the words as he looked into his son's eyes. 
"No," Talia whispered, her hands now gripping his shoulders tight. "No, Daddy, you can't!"
"I can't leave them, honey," he said. 
"But you don't even know if they're still alive!" His daughter cried.
Calhoun's gaze shifted to Chunlan, who nodded. 
"Reza's with them," Calhoun told his children. "As long as he's alive, they have a chance. But even he won't be able to get them through the forest full of those things."
Talia glared at him, and Calhoun's chest tightened as he saw the passionate fury of his wife in his little girl's eyes. "If you go, we're going with you."
"No, that's —" 
Letting go of him, Talia sat back against the seat, crossed her arms and stared at the dash panel. After a moment, Ben did the same.
He looked helplessly at Chunlan, who shrugged. "They are their mother's children." She smiled. "And their father's."
"Lord of All save me," Calhoun muttered.
***
"Shit." 
Ortiz had no idea who had said it, but all of them were thinking the same thing. The surviving Marines were in a tight circle now, back to back, in the shrinking stretch of rocky ground where Reza and the Kreelans had fought. Ortiz longed to have their blue-skinned, sword-wielding enemies back, because she would have much rather faced them than the horrible little creatures that were soon going to tear her and mer Marines into little tiny pieces. They had been able to buy themselves some time by shooting and lobbing grenades into the swarm at differing distances away from their safe zone, causing the tiny predators to go into short-lived feeding frenzies and temporarily drawing them away. But that tactic was no longer working, partly because the Marines had nearly run out of charge packs for their pulse rifles, but also because there were no so many of the damned amphibians that they were simply flooding the forest. There were so many, in fact, that the act of digging themselves out of their deep hibernation lairs had compromised the root system of many of the trees, which had begun to crash to the ground, bringing yet more chaos to the night.
She had ordered her Marines to keep a single grenade apiece in reserve. When the time came, which shouldn't be long now, none of her people would have to worry about being eaten alive. 
"We should just do it," someone muttered in the dark. "There's no way out of this shit."
"Shut your mouth," Walker snapped. 
Ortiz was inclined to agree with just activating the grenades and being done with it all, but she was too stubborn.
The only one who didn't seem frightened at all was Stalin. He stood there like one of the giant statues he had once showed her of his namesake on centuries-ago Earth, still carrying Reza's unconscious body over his shoulder. His lips moved ceaselessly, the words she could hear in a language she didn't understand.
One of the Marines fired a quick burst from her pulse rifle. "Out," the woman said, disgusted, before she flung the useless weapon into the creeping tide of amphibians. Around the spot where she had fired, a storm of ravenous beasts erupted. But all too soon, the frenzy died out.
Having run out of words to say, they waited quietly amid the bedlam, now clutching their grenades. Ortiz was just about to give the order to activate them when she saw a pair of flashes through the murk. "What the hell..."
The flashes resolved into a pair of lights that bobbed and bounced in the darkness, growing brighter, growing closer. 
Then she heard the unmistakable growl of a transporter through the deafening noise of the amphibians. 
"Someone's come for us!" A Marine shouted.
"I'll be goddamned," Walker said.
The transporter crashed through a patch of thick brush and ground toward them, its huge wheels crushing thousands of the horrible little creatures with every revolution. The resulting chum of blood and smashed remains left a gigantic wake behind it of other amphibians gorging themselves on their dead fellows and one another. 
"Jesus," Ortiz said as she realized the their salvation could also be their undoing. "They're not going to be able to stop to pick us up or we'll be gobbled up by those fucking things! Grab onto the trailer as it passes by or your dead!"
The driver seemed to have the same thought: the big vehicle was coming right toward them, offset just to the edge of their safe area.
Then the night was torn by pulse rifles firing from the trailer into the mass of creatures, which set off feeding frenzies all around the stranded Marines. For just a moment, the amphibians backed off, drawn by the blood, and the driver of the transporter gunned the engine.
"Get ready!" Ortiz bellowed, her heart hammering in her chest. She did not want to die here.
The tractor went past, dead and dying amphibians flying from its wheels, and then the trailer was sliding past at what seemed like a ridiculously high speed. 
"Get aboard!"
She had planned to wait until the others had clambered on, but didn't get the chance. Two pairs of hands reached down and snatched her from the ground, even as the amphibians flowed into the safe zone, covering the rocks on which she and the others had been standing.
"We got them!" Corporal Mukherjee shouted toward the cab. "Let's get out of here!"
Looking around, Ortiz saw that all the others who had been with her were no safely aboard the trailer. Looking up, she saw the other Marines she had sent with the convoy, along with some civilians who had volunteered to come along for the ride. "Who's the lunatic who led you fools back here?"
One of the civilians, a woman she didn't recognize, said, "Calhoun. Who else?"
Shaking her head, Ortiz said, "Crazy bastard."
***
The return journey to the canyon's edge seemed almost routine. The Marines didn't bother trying to talk over the racket made by the amphibians, but sat and lay, exhausted, on the flatbed. Calhoun guided the big vehicle through the vegetation it had crushed on its way to get them, having made a trail that was now easy to follow on the way back. 
Eustus sat beside Reza, worrying over him. Oddly enough, Stalin sat on Reza's other side, scowling at the younger man as if willing him back to health. Eustus didn't understand Stalin or his motivations, but couldn't argue with the fact that Stalin had saved Reza's life. 
At last, the transporter emerged from the forest onto the rocky ground that led to the canyon's edge. Turning north, Calhoun took them up a winding trail that led to a large, rocky ledge that overlooked the edge of the forest, and was where the other vehicles had parked.
"Hey, will you look at that!" Davis cried, pointing in the direction of the other vehicles.
Turning to look, Eustus couldn't believe his eyes for a moment. Two assault shuttles, either of which was large enough to hold all the survivors of this wretched place, squatted on the ground just beyond the now-empty transporters and LTVs. 
"Well," Walker said, "I guess they heard my mayday call."
Calhoun wheeled the transporter around to the ramp of the nearest shuttle and brought it to a stop. 
"Everybody off," Ortiz shouted, "unless you want to get eaten!"
With passionate curses, the Marines and the civilians who'd helped them climbed down and headed for the shuttle. Shouldering Eustus aside, Stalin pulled Reza from the flatbed and again slung him over his shoulder. "Carry this," Stalin said, holding Reza's sword out to Eustus. Gingerly, Eustus took it. It was the first time he had ever touched any of Reza's weapons. "Do not drop it." Then Stalin marched into the shuttle, where corpsmen, obviously shocked by Reza's armor and hair, began to work on him.
Satisfied that his friend was in good hands, Eustus turned to look back toward the forest below. Although he had completely lost track of time, the sun must have been up, for the world was now merely a deep, dark gray instead of nearly black, and the rain had tapered off. Slightly. The sound of the amphibians was still deafening, even from here, and was punctuated by the sound of trees falling over. He could even see them now, where the forest canopy simply vanished here and there.
And then the swarm emerged from the forest. 
"Christ," Ortiz whispered from beside him. "Look at the little bastards."
Eustus could never have imagined such an awful, terrible sight. It was like a tidal wave of small living things had burst from the edge of the forest, flowing toward the edge of the canyon. In but moments, millions of the things were hurling themselves into the chasm thousands of meters below, and the wave continued to spread out along the forest edge to either side, including toward where the two Marines were standing.
"Come on, Camden," she said, patting him on the shoulder. Behind them, the engines of the shuttles began spooling up, their roar quickly covering up the horrible melody of the amphibians. "Let's get the hell off this damn planet." P.S. If you haven't seen/read my other books, please feel free to drop by my site at:
http://www.authormichaelhicks.com/book-table/
//Last revised on 9 September at 1205 PM EST//

 

Chapter 19

"Company..."
"Platoon..."
"Atten-shun!"
Reza snapped to attention in perfect time with the thirty-four other men and women of the platoon at the bellowed command. Davis, who stood at the head of the platoon's formation, now wore the stripes of a staff sergeant, and had been bumped up to the position of platoon sergeant. Walker, now standing like an ebony pillar at the rear of the platoon, was the acting platoon leader. Standing ramrod straight to Reza's right, Eustus now wore the three stripes of a sergeant and bore the responsibility of squad leader. As for Reza himself, he was proud enough of the addition of a single additional stripe to his sleeve, proclaiming his lofty rank of corporal. He bore none of the others any ill will for jumping further ahead than him on the rank ladder; once one had earned the sigil of the Desh-Ka, such trifles were not worthy of thought.
Their platoon was flanked on either side by the two other platoons of the company that had been formed from the remnants of several Red Legion fleet detachments, and which now called the old cruiser Pegasus home. The company was assembled on the ship's hangar deck, the only compartment of the ship large enough for all of them to gather at once, for the reading of the orders of the day, which was more of a tradition than a necessity. 
Stalin, the company first sergeant, after a final gaze across the formation with narrowed eyes, pivoted sharply on his heels to face the same direction as the rest of the formation as Ortiz strode from the side to take up a position of attention in front of him. They exchanged salutes.
"Post!" Ortiz ordered. With that, Stalin and the platoon sergeants rotated to the rear of their respective formations, as the platoon leaders came to the front to face Ortiz.
As Davis marched to his position at the rear of the formation, Reza suppressed a smile as he considered the strange man: Davis remained a complete lunatic, but largely an entertaining one. Even now, Reza was not sure if that made him a lesser or better Marine.
Once the others had reached their positions, Ortiz ordered, "At ease." The men and women of the company spread their feet shoulder width apart and put their hands behind their backs, relaxing. Slightly.
As Ortiz began reading the orders of the day, which were invariably a variation of the same list of dirty jobs as the day before, and the day before that, in the monotonous existence that had been their lives aboard the old cruiser Pegasus, Reza's mind drifted. Nearly five months had passed since their narrow escape from being eaten by the horde of tiny amphibians on the planet Carillon. Reza had spent the first month in sick bay, with the ship's surgeon clucking in morbid wonder at Reza's internal injuries. Eustus had dubbed him Dr. How-The-Hell-Did-That-Happen, for that was what the man inevitably said every time he came to examine Reza, which was at least three times a day. While the surgeon was competent enough in patching up the gashes and punctures in Reza's flesh, he could do little for the wounds that lay deeper inside his body. Even Reza's own efforts to heal himself finally reached their limit, and he knew that nothing more could be done without the intervention of a Kreelan healer, which of course would never happen. At last, he convinced the surgeon to release him back to duty. Reza knew that his body was again strong and that he could fight well enough, but he also understood that something within him, besides his heart, remained broken. He could wield his Kreelan or human weapons with his accustomed skill and retained his second sight, but the other powers endowed by the Desh-Ka Crystal of Souls were noticeably weakened. In particular, he could no longer summon lightning as he had in the village on Carillon. Even with focused concentration, he could barely create more than a tingle in his palms. 
It was a steep price for the lives of his friends, but he gladly would have paid it again. 
Then he thought of Stalin, the enigmatic man, the killer, who had saved his life. Reza had asked him why, but Stalin had only told him, "Because I am not yet done with you." During the weeks, then months, that followed, Reza had expected Stalin to challenge him to a final duel, but no such challenge had come. Reza could not decide if that were good or bad.
"After all of those entertaining tasks are done," Ortiz said in a voice tinged with disbelief, interrupting his reverie, "which should take all of about six hours by my estimation, the captain has authorized two days of shore leave for the entire company, in rotation by platoon." 
The landing bay was filled with cheers that echoed off the steel bulkheads. Had anyone turned around to look, they would have been shocked to see that even Stalin's face cracked into a smile. The Pegasus was old and probably should have been sent to the breakers years before, but any functioning warship was kept in service until it literally fell apart or was destroyed in action. She required an outrageous amount of maintenance just to stay space-worthy, and a lot of that, especially the really shitty jobs, fell to the Marines. 
"Pipe down!" Ortiz shouted. Reluctantly, the Marines quieted. "Since Second Platoon" — that was Reza's — "had the lovely job of cleaning out the air duct system last week, they get to go dirt-side first, followed by First and Third Platoons. So, the faster you get all this crap done today, the faster you can head down to experience the wonders of Kalimpong."
"Just as long as there aren't any damn frogs with teeth," Eustus muttered.
An involuntary shudder ran through Reza. "I would be perfectly happy with no frogs at all," he whispered back.
***
As it turned out, Kalimpong, or at least the spot where Reza and the others found themselves, was entirely amphibian-free. The most serious threat posed to the relaxing Marines was from tiny creatures not unlike Terran mosquitoes, but which had no desire to sample human blood. 
They were, instead, the main source of food for the fish in the local rivers, which were legendary among anglers throughout the Confederation. The rivers teemed with fish quite akin to Terran salmon, and which were both hugely entertaining to catch and equally good to eat. 
"This is amazing. I never, ever thought I'd be able to fish here," Eustus said in wonder as he worked his fly rod, whipping it forward and back before finally sending out the line to a spot where a big fish lurked near the shallow bottom, just behind a rock that jutted from the surface, where the slow-moving water burbled and broke around it. 
"Did your family do a lot of fishing?" Calhoun asked from where he stood nearby, his feet in the cool water, a rod in his hand. Young Ben was nearby, working to set up a simple fish trap that Eustus had explained how to make. The survivors from Carillon had been delivered here, and were now the inhabitants of a pre-fab "town" that had been hastily erected. Such towns were all too common throughout the Confederation. While they were not the most glamorous accommodations, they at least provided refugees decent shelter quickly. 
"That's where we got a lot of the food we put on the table," Eustus explained. "At least for protein. I come from a long line of farmers, but we lived near a stream, with the river it fed into not too far away. When my brothers and I weren't working the fields, we were out fishing, and Dad would come down when he could." He smiled, but the smile faded. "They're all gone, now. All but my mom and younger brother."
"I'm sorry," Calhoun said. 
Eustus shrugged. "It's part of the world we live in, I guess." The tip of his rod suddenly bent down as the line went taught. "Whoop! There we go!"
Reza watched them from his vantage point where he sat, legs crossed, atop a large rock that overlooked the river and his companions. Like the others, the only thing he wore were summer duty shorts. That had earned him some stares because of the scars that criss-crossed his body, but he was used to such curiosity and ignored them. Some of the Marines fished along the shore or out as far as waist-deep water. Others slept amid the calf-length grass that blanketed the shoreline. The rest chose their own pursuits. Ortiz plucked uncertainly at a battered acoustic guitar. Stalin read an ancient copy, actually made of paper, of the Holy Bible in Georgian. Davis played catch with Walker. It was an idyllic scene in many ways, but incongruous with the Universe beyond the atmosphere, where death and chaos reigned. 
Talia sat beside Reza, working different colored threads into a piece of fabric with a needle. Cross-stitch, she had called it. He had asked her some time earlier what she was making, but she had told him it was a secret and had kept her back turned so he couldn't see. Hailed like victorious heroes by many of the survivors who had come to welcome them, the Marines all had been offered lodging in the Carillon village. Sparse as the pre-fab rooms might be, they were far better than the Marine barracks. None of the Marines refused the offer. Reza and Eustus were staying with Calhoun and his family. Chunlan was also living with them, as sort of an honorary grandmother. Their reunion meal had been a warm and welcome one. Since then, Talia had been virtually glued to Reza's side. 
Leaning toward her, Reza said, "Can I see, now?"
Talia turned to him, a look of consideration on her face. "Do you promise not to laugh?"
"Why would I laugh?" Reza asked, perplexed.
She frowned. "Because it's not very good." 
"I promise."
After another moment's indecision, she held forth the fruit of her efforts, which she'd been working on since the previous day when she'd learned that Reza and the others would be coming down.
"Talia..." Reza paused, his heart caught in his throat. The material was black and dark gray, not unlike the look of his armor when caught just so by the light. And in the center, about the size of his palm, was the rune of the Desh-Ka in a cyan thread that shimmered in the sun. It was only about a third complete, but was unmistakable, and perfectly formed. "It is beautiful." He reached out and put a hand to her cheek. "Thank you."
She lowered her eyes, and he took his hand away. "I'm glad you like it. I saw it on your armor and thought...thought that it was pretty. Even if I don't know what it means."
"Think of it as a symbol of honor and duty," he told her.
"Why don't all Kreelans have that?" She asked. "Why just you? No one else in the whole village ever saw even a vid of a warrior with a marking like that. Don't the others where you came from believe in 'honor and duty?'"
"They do." It would have been difficult to explain under the best of circumstances, but there was little he could say to one not of the Way about the nature of a Desh-Ka priest. "Let us just say that this," he nodded at the symbol upon the fabric, "requires much more...focus, shall we say." And sacrifice, he didn't add.
"Focus, huh?" She sighed. "You won't tell me, is what you're saying."
Reza bowed his head. "I cannot. I am sorry."
"But it's really, really hard to get this award, or whatever it is, isn't it?"
"Yes," Reza said quietly. "It is a lifetime of struggle."
"And focus," she said. "Fine, go ahead and keep your secrets." With a sigh, Talia went back to her needlework. 
Reza looked out over the river before bowing his head and closing his eyes, seeking to lose himself in meditation, but instead finding himself in the past.
***
"You must focus, Reza," Esah-Zhurah told him.
Reza bobbed his head slightly in acknowledgement as he screwed his eyes shut, willing his mind to focus. The two of them knelt, facing one another, on the dais of the central arena of the kazha. A month before, Reza had endured his first Challenge, which had left him with new scars and a battered ego. While he was quickly learning the techniques of fighting and swordcraft, there clearly was a mode of thinking, or perhaps not thinking, that his peers were able to call upon, but that he could not. He knew that his skills would improve over time with repetition, as his muscles learned and remembered what they were supposed to do, without conscious thought from his mind. But there was a deeper well of clarity that Esah-Zhurah wanted him to achieve.
"You must empty your mind, your thoughts," she went on.
Reza shook his head, opening his eyes. "How can I focus - and what should I focus on! - if I am at the same time to clear away my thoughts?"
He could see the anger rising in her eyes, anger that would lead to punishment. His keeper was not the most patient of beings.
Before she could inflict her displeasure, verbal or otherwise, upon him, he heard another voice.
"Esah-Zhurah," Tesh-Dar, high priestess of the Desh-Ka, said from beside them, "leave us. I will send him to you later."
"Yes, my priestess!" Esah-Zhurah said, bowing her head and saluting. Without another look at Reza, she rose to her feet and departed. 
Reza kept his eyes upon the stone of the dais as Tesh-Dar knelt before him, taking Esah-Zhurah's place. He did not understand how the priestess could simply appear out of thin air as she just had. Of course, there was much he did not understand about her. But he did understand one thing: he hated her. He guessed that two years had passed since he had been snatched from Hallmark, and the memories of the friends he had lost there were still fresh. And he had not forgotten that this warrior, great among her people though she might be, had killed his parents when he was but a child.
"I am sorry, my priestess," he explained quietly, ruthlessly shoving his emotions back into a box in his mind. "I do not mean to disobey Esah-Zhurah, but I do not understand what I am supposed to do." He risked glancing up at her face, seeking out her eyes with his own. "You can show me a sword stroke by demonstrating the movement of your body, sword in hand, and I can emulate it and learn to do it on my own. But how do I focus my mind while emptying it of thought? And would not that make me less attuned to my surroundings in battle, not more? I cannot see it in order to learn it." He lowered his eyes and shook his head. "I would obey, but I do not understand."
"Your words are well-spoken, Little One," Tesh-Dar said. "Her Children, perhaps, understand these things better because of the Bloodsong, because we know from birth with absolute certainty that a greater universe exists than our senses tell us. And so it is with the mind. If you cannot focus your mind in the arena, you will be distracted. Even against an opponent of lesser skill, you will be at a disadvantage if she can focus her mind upon her blade, while your thoughts are divided, your concentration fragmented. We meditate to hone that skill, that ability to focus, that we may call upon it when it is needed in battle. And to help focus our minds on problems of particular complexity outside the arena."
"I understand these things, my priestess, as Esah-Zhurah has explained them to me in much the same way. But I do not know how to do it, no matter how many times Esah-Zhurah has tried to describe it." He sighed. "It is most frustrating."
"Then let us try a different way," Tesh-Dar said. "Look at me."
Swallowing his fear, Reza again lifted his eyes to hers. He was always afraid to look her in the eye, not just because it was disrespectful (and could lead to death, if she decided to take offense), but because he found it incredibly difficult to look away. If the eyes were windows to the soul, as he had once read seemingly so long ago, then Tesh-Dar's soul was equal parts fury, beauty, and wisdom.
"Do not fear, child," she told him as she put a massive hand to either side of his face, her long ebony talons resting upon his hair at the back of his head.
"Yes, my priestess," he whispered, forcing himself to relax as he stared into her eyes. 
She brought her face closer, so close that he thought their lips might meet. But instead, she brought her forehead to his. Everywhere her skin touched his, his body felt like it was on fire. Their eyes, so close now that he could no longer focus, remained locked, and he felt the rest of the world around them falling away, until all that remained was her gaze, her silver-flecked feline eyes boring right into his soul. 
"Now," Tesh-Dar told him, "close your eyes."
A momentary spike of fear shot through him, for he was afraid that he might swirl away into nothingness. But he obeyed, and his eyes flickered closed. 
Darkness.
"The world is no more." He heard her voice as if it were coming from everywhere, yet nowhere. "The universe is no more. All that remains is we two."
And Reza could sense that what she said was indeed true. He existed; so did she. But everything else, everyone else, was gone. Around them was simply nothing, forever and ever. "How...how is this possible?"
"Do not try to understand how, Reza," she told him. "Try to grasp the feeling of it, the sensation of nothingness, of emptiness. This is what you must strive to achieve. But it can only be felt; it cannot be understood."
Doing as she bade him, Reza focused on the sensations of the unreality that surrounded him. While at first he felt only fear, the fear gradually gave way to a sense of peace, and then a kind of tranquility that he had never known. The universe was empty and dark, but filled with warmth, as if it were a great womb. It was not a thing to fear, but to embrace. 
"Yes," Tesh-Dar told him. "Yes, Little One. This is the place you must seek. Now, imagine in your mind that your sword is in your hand."
Reza did so. And in the dark arena of his mind, he could feel his sword in his palm, see the blade shimmering as if it were under the sun of the Homeworld, even though this place was bereft of light.
"Now imagine we are back in the arena," she said, her voice drifting through the dark like waves lapping upon some distant and invisible shore. "All of your senses are now focused on the battle at hand. There are no distractions, only the clash of sword upon sword."
And it was so. Even though he knew his eyes were closed, Reza could see himself spinning and whirling, his sword slicing through the air. Then Tesh-Dar was there with him, her own sword sparking when the blades crashed together as they slashed and parried, his sword moving as if it had a mind of its own. He knew that she could have bested him in an instant had she wished, but also understood that was not the point of this imaginary contest. He had no idea how she had made this possible, but he threw all he had into every movement. They battled back and forth across the arena, lowly tresh and high priestess, in a ballet of ringing steel that, at last, Tesh-Dar called to a halt.
"Kazh," she commanded.
Reza instantly lowered his sword and sank to his knees in the imaginary sand, bowing his head in obeisance as he fought to catch his breath.
"Open your eyes, child."
"But..." He had thought he must have reopened his eyes at some point, but he was wrong. He blinked, and found himself in the sand of the arena, kneeling before Tesh-Dar, just like at the end of his imagined battle. Glancing down, he saw that his armor was dented and scored from her blade, blood ran from a wound on his cheek, and his own blade was nicked in a dozen or more places. Tesh-Dar's blade, as well, showed evidence of their combat. And standing at the edge of the arena, among a large group of onlooking tresh, was Esah-Zhurah, eyes wide in disbelief.
"Now you understand the feeling, Little One," Tesh-Dar told him as she sheathed her sword, "the sense of the place in your mind you must seek. How you reach it is a quest that falls solely to you."
***
"Reza, are you okay?"
Blinking open his eyes, Reza found Talia staring at him, a concerned look on her face.
"Yes," he told her. "I was...snoozing, I think you would call it."
"How can you sleep sitting up like that?"
Reza smiled. "I can sleep while I walk."
"You cannot!"
"I truly can."
She frowned, wondering if he was pulling her leg, but decided that he didn't have that much of a sense of humor. Scooting over, she leaned back against him, looking out over the group of anglers below.
"The fish aren't biting much. Eustus is the only one who's caught anything so far today," she said. "I wish I could catch something."
"Why don't you?"
She shrugged. "I'd rather stay here." Turning around, she put her arms around his waist and hugged him. He felt a tremor run through her body.
"There's nothing to be afraid of, Talia," Reza told her gently as he wrapped an arm around her. "Not here, not now."
Talia shook her head. "Nowhere is safe," she whispered, "except maybe with you. I...I have nightmares every night, about those horrible things coming out of the ground and the warriors, both. Ben does, too, but not as bad, I don't think." She sniffed, and Reza could tell she was fighting to hold back tears. "I don't mean to be a baby, but I don't think a minute goes by that I'm not afraid. I think I'm always going to be afraid."
Reza could think of nothing to reassure her that was not, at least in part, a lie. Their universe was a violent, uncertain place. While he had told her that she had nothing to be afraid of here and now, that was only because he was here and would not have let any harm come to her. But he knew that he would not always be there to protect her, her brother, and her father: his friends. So he just held her until the tears finally came.  
After a time, she let go of him and sat up, wiping her cheeks with the back of her arms.
Gesturing toward the river, Reza asked, "Do you want to catch a fish?"
"Didn't I tell you that they're not biting?"
Reza glanced at her with the hint of a smile. "Kreelan warriors do not wait for fish to bite. Come."
Leading her down the sloping side of the rock, Reza found a stand of saplings. Taking out his Kreelan dagger, he cut down two, with trunks about as big around as his index finger, and trimmed them to about Talia's height. Then, with economical movements, he sliced off all the branches and sharpened the ends into needle sharp points.
"Spears!" Talia exclaimed.
"Exactly," he told her, handing her one. "They take skill to use, but hunting this way gives the hunter the initiative, not the prey. And most fish on my world would not submit to mere hooks and line."
"Why is that?" Talia asked.
"Because they are predators in their own right, fearsome and deadly. What they are doing," he gestured toward some of the Marines standing in the water, fishing, "you would never see in any river or sea of my world. They would be food for the fish."
"Sounds like a great place," she said with sarcasm appropriate for a teenager.
The pair headed back to the river, taking up a spot atop some smaller rocks not far from where Eustus and Calhoun continued to fish. 
"It's not just about catching fish," Calhoun called out to Reza with a smile. 
"Says the fisherman who hasn't caught one!" Talia quipped, sticking her tongue out.
"It's more about the beer," one of the Marines called out.
Calhoun and Eustus laughed. 
"Just don't fall in!" Her father warned.
"Reza will catch me if I do," she said, holding onto Reza's free hand with her own.
After giving her hand a squeeze, he let go and focused his attention on the water. "There," he pointed with his spear, "do you see?"
A silvery shape hung in the water a few feet away. Pointing into the current, the fish undulated slowly, just enough to keep its position.
Talia leaned forward. The fear in her eyes from earlier was now replaced with excitement. "Yes!"
Showing her how to hold the spear, Reza said, "Now, you must..."
"No," she said, "you do it first! Let me see how you do it."
"Very well." Reza looked around to find another fish. "There," he pointed again, this time in the direction of Calhoun and Eustus.
Holding her hand up to block the reflection of the sun from the water, she squinted. "Okay, I think see it. But that's so far away!"
"Come on, Reza," Calhoun said. He and Eustus, along with a number of the others, had reeled in their lines and were watching the demonstration. It seemed that anything that Reza did seemed to attract attention. The fish was the one Calhoun had been trying to coax into biting, and was perhaps four, maybe five meters from where he stood. But it was at least twenty meters to where Reza was. "I don't know how you can even see it, let alone spear it."
Eustus just smiled and shook his head. He set down his rod and started wading into the water toward the fish.
In the blink of an eye, Reza twisted back, spear in hand, and then twisted his torso and flung his arm forward, sending the spear whistling through the air. It entered the water with a muted splash, neatly skewering the fish through the gills.
The others hooted in awe as Eustus grabbed the spear and held up the fish, fully as long as his arm and still wriggling, and began making his way back to shore.
Turning back to Talia, who stood staring at him, open-mouthed, Reza said, "Now, you try."
"I'm just going to miss, even though it's so close."
"Remember what I was saying earlier about focus?" Reza reminded her as he stood behind her. He helped her adjust her stance, spreading her feet farther apart, and guided her arms to where they needed to be for the start of the throw. "Now," he told her softly, touching his head to hers much as Tesh-Dar had all those years ago, "close your eyes. Focus your attention on the fish. Forget about everyone else, about everything else. See in your mind the spear striking the fish. Only that. Do not question or doubt yourself. Do not worry about missing. Let yourself become still." 
"Okay," she breathed. "I'll try."
After a few moments, he said, "Now, what do you see in your mind?"
"The spear hitting the fish, right behind his head."
"Open your eyes."
Talia did, and Reza stepped back. "Now."
Stepping forward, Talia whipped her throwing hand toward the fish, sending the spear on its way.
She squealed with surprise and delight as it hit the target, the spear point penetrating about a hand's breadth ahead of the tail. 
"Fetch it, quickly!" Reza told her, and Talia leaped into the water, chasing after the spear as the wounded fish, being dragged downstream by the current, fought in vain to get away.
"Dad!" She shouted. "Did you see? Did you see that?"
The shoreline, now crowded with the entire Marine detachment and their civilian hosts, erupted into applause and cheers, Calhoun loudest of all. Ben stood beside his father, mouth agape.
As Talia wrestled her prize from the water and held it up for her father and brother to see, a huge smile on her face, an LTV burst from the tree line along the trail that led to the village.  The vehicle skidded to a stop near Ortiz, and a Marine in full combat bear leaped out of the passenger seat and made his way to their commander, who was now on her feet.
After a terse report, Ortiz, her face grim, nodded, and the Marine hopped back in and the vehicle took off, no doubt to round up the other stragglers.
"Time to go back to work, people," Ortiz shouted. "Kreelans have been spotted in the system."
"No," Talia whispered as she clambered back onto the rock beside Reza, the fish, wounded and dying as it was carried downstream, now forgotten. She took his hand, squeezing it in a white-knuckle grip. "Please, no."
Nowhere was safe.