Risen
by bloodsword

Imagine living a full life, dying months after your beloved wife passes and being buried.  Only to wake up 300 years later, called out of the grave to fight a final war against an alien invasion.  Join Max Niekro, formerly living and now Risen as he deals with this reality as the forces of Earth, both living and dead, are marshalled in a last ditch effort to save the world.

**cover by hellvis



 

Risen

I buried my wife of 55 years when she died of cancer at 72.  I remember laying in our bed that night, reaching over and finding her place empty and feeling my heart break.  I think I began dying myself in that moment.  Even as I think of it now, it hurts.  My sweet Abby had been my everything, married right out of high school before she watched me serve in Iraq and Bosnia.  When I came back, my spirit broken from the horrors of war, she was there, waiting for me.  She put me back together again and stood by me as I opened that small book shop in downtown Seattle.  Abby couldn't give me children but she shared my triumphs, and my failures, always there to catch me when I fell.  When I couldn't catch her, couldn't save her from the cancer, my life ended. They buried me two months after my sweet Abagail went into the cold, hard ground.  My heart broken, I could no longer stand life without her.  The empty house, the cold bed, never hearing her voice calling my name again; for me, all the color had been bled out of the world.  The last thing I remembered was closing my eyes one night, the bed cold, so cold beneath me, . . .  **cover by hellvis, whose talent and skill has produced a cover truly reflective of my story.  Thanks, Ell!

 

Chapter 1: Awakening

I awoke with a jerk, feeling dazed and unable to focus.  What, . . what was happening?  Where, . . where was I?  With my mind still struggling to full awareness, I stared into the absolute darkness of where I was for a long moment, feeling my body slowly return to full sensation with a strange, warm tingling.  Then a sharp knock on a hard surface maybe a few inches from my face, startled me into another shiver.  Was that someone at the door?  But that was downstairs; why did it sound so close? Frowning, I pushed my brain to full awareness, to try to figure it out.  Abby always told me that I spent too much time overthinking things.  That sometimes I had to think faster. "Abby."  I mumbled, my voice hoarse and ragged like I had swallowed a desert and spit out the cacti, which had come up rough. "Abby, honey, I think there's somebody at the door."  And I reached over to my beloved wife of over 50 years to let her know I was going to get up and check. Only to find my hand hitting the padded edges of something between her and I.  What, . . .?  Thinking to reach over with both hands to see if something had somehow fallen between us, I found that one hitting another padded something.  Frowning, I tried to sit up, and quickly struck something with my forehead in the effort.  Now what?? Dragging my hands up, I let them work over both the things on either side, and what was over me in the darkness which was beginning to feel warm and uncomfortable.  If I didn't know better, they seemed to be telling me I was not in bed with my wife, but in some kind of, . . . . box. Wait a minute, . . the bump on the head had stirred my memories back to life.  And the only box I remember being in recently was, . . . My screams of terror filled the small space of my coffin as I began to frantically pound on the lid above me with clenched fists.  Fists that made the heavy panel wood actually jump with each blow.  Why the hell was I waking up in my own damn coffin?? "Hey!"  A voice cried from the other side of the lid.  "Hey Max!  Quit screaming and get yourself out of there!" "How??"  I howled back, now pounding with both fists.  And watched as the lid visibly shifted enough to let in flashes of outside light. "Focus!"  The voice yelled back.  "You need to focus your strength and your goa." Goa?  Just what the hell was that? "Focus, damn you."  The voice snarled, suddenly twisted with something else.  Something that sounded alot like fear. "Tate is on his way and you need to be out of there before he gets here." Teeth grit, I heaved against the lid with both hands, throwing everything that I had against the reluctant slab of paneled wood.  It began to move, letting in a trickle of dirt and light at the edge.  Slowly, surely it went up. "Now, Max, now!"  The voice, now clear as it slipped through the widening crack.  "He's here.  You need to get out NOOOW!" The voice galvanized me as I roared and threw all my strength into pushing the lid out of the way.  And watched in amazement as an eldritch blue-green light danced over my arms and hands for a moment before the lid exploded outward with a snarl of discharge and a flash of brilliance.  The lid's abrupt departure left me trying to blink away purple afterimages. "There you go, Max!"  The voice, now filled with satisfaction, crowed from a position some distance up and away from me. "Now get him out of there, boys.  Quickly, now.  I can see Tate's carriage pulling into the graveyard's south entrance."

Skeletal hands reached into the darkness to take firm hold of my trembling arms and, with surprising strength, they pulled me free of the ruins of my casket.  Still dressed in the dark suit I had been buried in, my dress shoe-equipped feet kicked at the dirt to try to find purchase as those hands pulled me around to stand on the naked dirt heaped on the bottom of my still partially buried coffin. Finally settled, I looked at my two saviours.  And gave a start when I found myself looking at two skeletons, dried pieces of skin and hair clinging to the odd bone, tattered clothing drapped haphazardly over what could only be their bodies, though they didn't resemble any living creature I knew. "Zombies??"  I whispered hoarsely, feeling the panic begin to rise again even as the two creatures aimed rotted tooth leers at me, their empty eye sockets dancing with strange blue-green light.  That same light danced over the dirty, yellowed bones of their empty ribcages and spines, giving them a strange sort of substance. "Ghouls, actually."  The voice corrected from its place on the edge of the partially dug out grave, the claw marks in the fresh dirt easy to match with the bone creatures' dirty, skeletal paws. The voice's return was enough to pull my attention around. The creature that was perched on the edge of the ragged hole in the ground that once was my grave was different than the raggedy things that had pulled me from my casket.  But not by much; with skin dry and stretched parchment thin over fleshless bone, a rictus grin and empty sockets, the voice's owner didn't appear to have much more substance than the ghouls.  Yet I could feel its greater strength and power, as if it somehow had more existence. As if acknowledging that, the mummified thing was actually dressed in real clothes, albeit dusty and worn, a burial suit almost exactly like the one I was still wearing.  It flashed me that grin with a dry laugh as it caught me looking at its clothes. "Aren't we fashionable, Max."  It deadpanned before reaching behind it to grab what looked like a backpack which it smoothly tossed to me. "But outside the graveyard, it also calls attention.  So if you would be so kind as to change into the clothing there, in the backpack, I would certainly appreciate it." Trying to calm my pounding heart, I dragged my eyes off the mummified creature to pull open the bag to find an all too familiar set of military fatigues inside. "You remember how to put those on, don't you, soldier?"  The grinning creature said with a quiet laugh, the two ghouls beside me chittering along with him in undisguised amusement.  Which I would've thought impossible, as they didn't have anything beyond their jaw bones with which to make a voice with, little yet laughter. "Stop tormenting the man, lich."  A deep, sonorous voice boomed and immediately the creature in the dusty suit cowered, fear emanating from it in waves. "And get him out of that hole!" "At once, Tate."  The creature said with a hasty bow before turning back to me and my ghoulish escort.  "You heard him.  Get Max out of that hole, boys." Taking hold of me with those nothing but bone hands, which, when they brushed against unprotecting skin, bore a strange warmth, the ghouls quickly frog marched me out of the ragged hole my grave had become.  And once out and precariously balanced on the edge of my former location, I clutched the backpack to my chest and looked around with me with not a little fear and apprehension. As the lich had commented, I indeed stood in a graveyard.  But, beyond the odd weathered stone marker, it didn't resemble the graveyard I had been buried in.  Which immediately brought my attention to the matter at hand.

"How am I, .  .?" I began with a stammer. "Alive?"  The deep, powerful voice that belonged to the being the lich had named Tate, boomed from several paces away and I found myself turning towards it. "Y-yes.  Alive.  I remember dying, taking my last breath, . . ."  My voice trailed off as I caught sight of the tall, dark coated form striding towards our impromptu gathering. Just as the skeletons reminded me of the zombies from the movies, the newcomer reminded me of another creature out of a horror story: a vampire.  Tall and slender, with pale skin, dark eyes and long, dark hair pulled into a ponytail, he moved with a feline grace, all power and menace.  A slight smile touched his thin lips, adding a hint of warmth to his chiseled features.  The only thing that could've been more useful in completing the image would've been a romanian accent. The ghouls and the lich hastily backed away as Tate drew up to me, his eyes sweeping over me quickly before he returned his gaze to my face. "Technically you're not alive, Max."  Reducing the volume on that powerful voice made it boom only slightly less as he stopped beside me.  "You are Risen, summoned by the power of the Earth Mother from her cold embrace, to take up her cause against her enemies." "Summoned from the grave?  You mean, you have the power to summon people back from the dead??" My eyes quickly looked around, frantically searching.  Where was it, where?  It was supposed to be right beside mine.  Then my eyes caught sight of it, worn and broken, knocked from where it was supposed to be: Abby's gravestone. Desperately I scrambled towards it, pushing one of the ghouls out of my way as I made a direct path to the worn piece of weathered granite.  Trembling fingers confirmed the name: Abagail Jessica Niekro, barely legible on the worn surface. "Abby!"  I breathed before falling on my knees to desperately claw at the hard ground.  Though it was rock-like, somehow my fingers ripped through the upper crust with relative ease, big chunks flying in each direction. "You, you have to help her."  I gasped.  "You brought me back.  You can bring her back."  Oh Abby!  She would be alone down there, in the dark.  Waiting for me to get her out.  She always hated the dark.  It made her lonely, reminded her of when I was at war, thousands of kilometers away.  She would be so scared down there, in the dark. "Damnit, help me!" Then Tate's big hand was on my shoulder. "It doesn't work that way, Max."  He gently said with more emotion than I thought would come from the pale man.  "Only those called by the Earth Mother can be summoned.  Only those with a task to fulfill can be brought back." My frantic digging slowed. "I, I don't understand."  I stammered, tears flooding hot into my eyes.  What was the point of being brought back if she couldn't come back with me?? "Abagail passed without burden into the hereafter, nothing weighing on her soul.  The Earth Mother knew her as a perfect soul, and so let her go to her reward in eternal peace." The tears began to drip onto the torn ground, my hands pausing in their scrabbling at the hardened soil.  It didn't even register that they were oddly unmarked, as if somehow stronger and tougher than they were before.  All I could think of was my loss, now fresh once again in my mind. "C'mon, lad."  Tate's hand looped under my arm and he easily lifted me to my feet, possessing a strength his stature belied.  "As much as I'd like you to have a moment to finish grieving over your realization, we need to leave before the enemy realizes we've awakened another soldier in this war.  Come."

Unresisting and in stunned shock, I let Tate guide me to the flattened ovoid he had arrived in, an opaque bubble that hovered above the ground with no means of support in complete silence.  A wave at the door and it slide just as silently aside, revealing a fairly spacious cabin inside with facing padded bench seats.  Everything was in a shade of gray, like the strange mist that had appeared suddenly to hide the lich and its two ghoulish comrades somewhere behind us. "In you go, lad."  Tate indicated with a gesture.  "You can change out of that suit inside." Numbly I did just that, peeling off the stiff fabric and leaving it in a pile on the floor before pulling on the strangely soft and comfortable fatigues.  As I did so, Tate made another gesture and, while it was subtle, I felt the ovoid begin to move.  Again, in complete silence, as if the wind was pushing it. As I settled back onto the bench I had chosen to dress on, Tate took the opposite and fixed a baleful gaze on me while he waited for me to finish. "I know a thousand questions must be buzzing around your brain at this moment, Max."  He began as soon as I was finished changing. "And I wish I had a thousand answers for you.  But I don't.  All I know is this: we are at war.  And, with the armies of the living laying slaughtered on the battlefield, the Earth Mother has no other choice than to fight with what she has left.  Us." "What, exactly, are 'us'?"  I found my voice to ask, my mind still reeling with the events of the last few minutes. A slightly mocking smile appeared on Tate's pale visage. "We are Risen, of course, Max."  He quickly replied.  "The name says it all, I think.  We have been pulled from our slumber in the Earth Mother's bosom to return as her last hope."  A dark eyebrow climbed up his forehead towards his hairline. "Of course, not all Risen are equal."  He went on to say.  "Much like the living." At my uncomprehending look, Tate continued. "I should stop assuming you are aware of anything that has transpired since you were laid in your grave over 300 years ago."  What?  300 years??  Then my attention was being recaptured as Tate's voice became quiet, his face lost in reflection. "Just like we Risen are something out of a bad horror movie, what happened to our world is like something out of a bad sci-fi movie."  He paused, his face visibly tighten with the memory.  "They arrived maybe 50 years ago.  We had just begun to explore regions of space near us with fledgling FTL and primitive spacecraft."  Eyes hooded with those dark memories, he looked over at me, his arms folded.  "Their ships were massive, bigger than anything we had ever seen before, equipped with technology far in advance of our own."  He husked, the timbre of his voice now totally sapped by his tale. "They attacked without provocation or warning, smashing aside our defenses in minutes.  The first to die were our soldiers, thousands in the first wave, hundreds of thousands in the second.  Within a half hour we had been completely and utterly defeated."  Tate's eyes narrowed. "And that was when they began their landing." "What, what did they want?"  I stammered, thoroughly entranced by his dark and dangerous tale. "Us."  He rasped, fixing me with those dark eyes.  "They wanted us." "For what??  As slaves?" "As food."  As I gasped in shock, Tate grimly pressed on. "Our soldiers went first, their torn and tattered bodies loaded into transports and taken up to their ships in orbit where they were processed into meals for their waiting crews.  Once our military was accounted for, they began working on the civilians.  You see, they're hunters.  And their preferred food are other sapient species.  Once their hunters were on the ground, our people began to die in the millions.  Some were eaten where they fell, others loaded in those transports and taken into space." Not wanting to believe what Tate was saying, I could only stare back at him at this point. "I died in that first wave of invasion."  He rasped.  "My wife and three daughters, too.  I, I don't know exactly what happened to them, though I can imagine.  I was thrown into a ditch by an explosion and covered with debris.  I must've been buried deep for my scent to be hidden because they never found me.  I was awakened a few months' later much as you see me now, with a thirst for goa and a hunger for vengeance."  He sighed and sat forward slightly, his expression pensive. "It didn't take long for the resistance to find me after that.  A resistance made up of the dead, brought back to life by a planet desperate to save not only the creatures living on it, but it's own very existence." "How, . . "  I cleared my throat, my voice froggy with emotion.  "How is that possible?  I mean, how can we be brought back from the dead?" "I wondered that myself, quite frankly."  Tate admitted.  "Apparently the Earth remembers every creature born on it, from the smallest single cell organism, to us humans.  Each is born with a small part of the energy that gives the Earth her own form of life.  We call that energy goa, after a province in India known for fertility and life.  And not only does she remember us, but she marks some of us for important jobs to do for her.  Those that are marked, can be brought back.  I'm not exactly sure of the mechanism.  I just know a lot of goa is involved.  Those that have the most important jobs, are filled with enough goa to perform those tasks; almost enough to make them alive again.  Like you." "Me??" Tate's smile was thin. "You.  You're no ordinary Risen, Max.  You're Transcended.  You've got more goa in you than ten normal Risen like me, with the ability to pull more in when you need it.  I felt you awaken ten kilometres out.  That's why I had the lich pull you out so quickly.  I couldn't run the risk the enemy would find you first." "Is, . . is that possible?"  I wanted to know.  "I mean, the lich and those ghouls moved with little fear of being attacked." "Again, I'm not sure.  The aliens prefer their meat fresh and so generally ignore the Risen.  But you Transcended are nearly alive, so much so, you might fall within their ability to sense you.   The oracle at the Earth Shrine will have a better answer on that than I, however.  We just, . . ." Abruptly the lean Risen paused, frowning. "What?"  I asked, feeling a strange sense of forboding going through me at the expression on his face. "Do, . . do you hear that?"  He asked.  Then the world exploded in a flash of light and motion.

 

Learning Curve

It took a moment for the world to stop spinning.  Then my eyes were fluttering open and I took a quick look around and found myself laying awkwardly a few paces from where the remains of Tate’s carriage silently smoldered.  Then I was fighting not to scream as pain washed through me.  How was this possible?  How could I feel pain with an undead body?? It was good that I managed to avoid screaming; even as I bit my tongue against the agony and began a frantic inventory of my injuries, I felt a shudder go through the ground as something heavy landed nearby.  Then massive shapes were all around me, armored forms nearly five metres in height, carrying what looked like long barreled rifles that they used to prod the carriage’s wreckage with. Were these the aliens Tate had been talking about? “They must’ve spotted the carriage with motion detection.”  The pale, thin Risen whispered hoarsely as he slithered into my field of vision, moving closer while never taking his eyes off the cluster of armored forms investigating the wreckage.  Outside of his clothing being somewhat tattered and abused, he appeared unhurt. “And put a rocket into us for our troubles.”  He paused to glance over at me, a grimace immediately twisting his pale features at what he saw. “Now that is a mess, my friend.”  He husked, crawling around my broken body.  “You’ve got multiple lacerations, broken bones and blunt force trauma.  Not to mention, you’re missing your left arm.” “W-what?” I hoarsely stammered, the pain so consuming, I almost couldn’t speak.  I tried twisting enough to see my left arm which, to me, felt like it was still attached.  But in doing so I only unleashed another wave of searing pain through my battered body. Unable to hold it in, I cried out in agony. Instantly several helmeted heads swung around to bring dark visor-covered faces to bear on us. “Damn.”  Tate hissed.  Then he was on his feet and charging them in one fluid motion.  As he ran towards the giant forms, he yelled over his shoulder. “Use your abilities, Max, to heal your wounds and return your arm to its rightful place.  Then seek out others like you.”  Then he was jumping with impossible speed and agility just in time to avoid a blast from one of the rifles that, with an ear-splitting howl, screamed by overhead without striking anything. Landing on the shoulders and chest of one of the armored forms, Tate then clawed the creature’s helmet off with a surge of unnatural strength, revealing a large, rounded, hairless head, sloping face with deep-set black eyes, a heavy lower jaw and a ravenous mouth surrounded by finger sized tendrils.  It appeared to be covered in greenish black scale, like a reptile’s, yet gleamed as if covered with slime, like an amphibian. It was repulsive, and horrifying as it threw open a mouth filled with needle-like teeth and snarled something in a language filled with gobbling and barking sounds.  At the same time it fumbled for a weapon attached to its waist, Tate too close for it to use the rifle on him.  If he was intimidated by the giant alien’s terrible face, Tate didn’t show it, leaning in for what looked like a kiss from those lashing tendrils. Stunned by the viciousness of Tate’s counterattack, I nevertheless half expected the thing to use those teeth and that heavy carnivore’s jaw to take a bite out of the pale Risen’s face.  Then, despite my battered condition and being consumed with pain, I gasped out loud in shock when, with actinic snarls, tendrils of greenish-blue energy erupted from Tate’s open mouth to bite deep into the alien’s face. Immediately the creature screamed in pain, throwing its rifle away to grab and pull at Tate’s body.  To no avail; despite the alien’s massive size, it didn’t possess the strength to pull the determined Risen free.  Then it’s screams of pain took on a new, desperate tone and its fellows rushed to help it.  A heart beat later I saw why: Tate was somehow using the tendrils to pull energy from the alien’s body, the tendrils themselves pulsating as if sucking, the alien’s skin losing its luster with each second the tendrils were connected to its face, its scream of pain swiftly fading.

Then, with a final croak, it was falling and with a snarl on his lean face, Tate was launching himself at the next nearest alien, the big creature reaching for the wiry Risen with oversized hands.  And in that instant I knew now what I had only suspected before, and why the lich had feared him so.  He was indeed a vampire; a vampire that didn’t use fangs to suck blood from his victims but energy tendrils instead to drain their life force.  To a Risen whose very existence depended on borrowed goa from Mother Earth, to see a life force vampire was to glimpse the possibility of final death.  And that was something to be feared indeed!  I couldn’t help the chill that filled my own broken and ruined body at the sight. Yet, in that same instant, I couldn’t take my eyes off the cadaverous Risen as he continued decimating the alien landing party that had attacked his vehicle.  The stolen life force allowed great strength and incredible speed, healing his injuries in the instant they happened, and gave him an agility that made him more than formidable.  He was devastatingly deadly.  A fact underscored by the third alien body hitting the ground as the fourth and last of the landing party, which Tate had a strangle hold on after ripping off its helmet, began to scream in what was rapidly becoming the familiar death keening. Before I could see the last creature fall, however, my injuries finally took their toll.  Overwhelmed, I faded into the blessed darkness of unconsciousness.  Yet, I didn’t become insensate. Instead of blessed oblivion, I found myself in a treed park, birds chirping merrily in the branches over my head as I walked along a grassy path, an early afternoon sun shining down with midsummer strength from a clear blue sky.  What?  Where, . . where was I?  I looked frantically around, confusion missing with fear.  Wasn’t I just on the ground, holes ripped through my Risen body and agony searing my flesh with dante’s brand?  Where were Tate and the aliens? “Max!”  A woman’s voice cried out with a note of pleased surprise.  Not just any woman’s voice; that was my Abby’s voice.  I quickly spun around, eyes wide. “A-Abby??”  I stammered, not wanting to believe my eyes. Yet, there she was, her long brunette hair tumbling to her shoulders in fragrant waves, her flashing green and copper eyes dancing as they did when she was happy, her lovely heart-shaped face glowing with the smile she aimed at me.  She appeared as she always had to me, in the bloom of beauty after we had been married for about five years.  A simple summer frock danced about her athletic frame as she ran towards me, joy suffusing her features. Then she was in my arms and my heart sang. “Oh Abby!”  I husked, my voice cracking as I buried my face in her sun-warmed hair.  “How I have missed you!” “And I’ve missed you, my sweet, sweet Max.”  She whispered hoarsely into my ear, her arms wrapped tightly around my body.  “I love you so, so much.  But you shouldn’t be here.” I was so stunned by the blunt statement, I took a half step back so I could look at her. “W-what?”  My eyes flew wide in shock to see her look of joy had transformed into one of sorrow.  “I don’t understand, Abby.  What do you mean, I shouldn’t be here?” Her hand came up to lovingly caress my face, her sorrow deepening. “It’s not yet your time, my love.”  She said in her delightful voice, which I had dreamed of hearing again just one more time.  Yet it was heavy with regret. “As much as I want you here with me forever, you need to go back.” “Back?”  My voice dropped to a mere whisper as she took a step away from me, her hands slipping down into mine.

“Yes, Max.”  She nodded, her bangs falling across her left eye in that way that I had found so attractive when we were first dating what felt like just yesterday.  “Your task for Mother Earth hasn’t been completed.  She needs you to come back.” “No.”  My voice, filled with pain and longing, barely reached my ears.  And my heart thudded heavily in my chest when she took yet another step back, pulling her hands out of my clutching ones. “I, . . I want to stay here with you.” “No, baby.”  Tears began to trickle down her face and her voice became froggy with her emotion.  “You need to go back.  You need to save the world before the velkin consume it whole.  Please, baby, we need you to be strong, so very strong, just one more time.  Be strong and go back, stop the velkin before everything is gone.” “Abby.”  Tears began to pour hot and unchallenged down my face.  How could I leave her?  How could I forsake paradise with my beloved?  And why, out of all the people that I could’ve have seen in this strange, unsullied place, did it have to be Abby that was asking me to go back? “I can’t leave you, my darling.  Not again, not this time, . . .” “You have to, Max.”  She quickly replied, now openly sobbing.  Then she abruptly was running right at me. “You have to go back!”  She cried, hitting me in the chest. Shouting in surprise, I fell back.  But instead of hitting the ground, I fell into darkness, a inky envelope that collapsed around me to blot out all else.  Including the crying face of my wife. “NOOOOOOoooooooo!”  I screamed as I fell into oblivion. Then cold ground was beneath me and I was looking into Tate’s green tinged face only centimeters from my own. “Good.”  He husked, sounding distinctly relieved as he sat back before rolling to the side and vomiting loudly.  Wiping his mouth with the back of his hand, he looked over his shoulder at me. “I was hoping you weren’t unmade so soon after we had you summoned.” “Damn you, Tate.”  I managed, the pain returning to swiftly dominate my senses.  “And damn this war.  I did my time.  Let me go so I can be with my wife in paradise.” Despite looking obviously ill, Tate managed a weak smile before twisting once again to vomit.  This time blood, dark and ugly, was smeared on his face when he looked back at me. “I didn’t bring you back from the edge, old son.”  He rasped, his normally resonant voice reduced to nearly a whisper, one touched with a light british accent.  It had been hidden before, when he was speaking with full strength. “She did.  She still needs you.  Did you really think a few holes and a missing arm was going to stop her from getting what she needed out of you?” I sagged back against the ground, its cold, unrelenting surface unyielding against my broken body.  I didn’t need him to tell me who She was.  I already knew: Mother Earth. “She won’t let me die.”  I rasped thickly, the pain fading somewhat as I stared up at a gray, cloud-filled sky.  “Will she.” “Not until she’s done with you, mate.”  The vampire bluntly replied before coughing roughly.  More blood appeared around his mouth before he wiped it away with a trembling hand. Hearing the cough, I looked over at him and saw the blood appear with each hacking cough. “Something wrong with you, Tate?”  I managed and he barked a short, humorless laugh. “You could say that, Max.”  He replied, carefully climbing to his feet.  “I think it was something that I ate.”  He staggered before catching himself.  When I caught sight of his face, the green tinge had darkened. “The alien goa isn’t compatible with our tissues.”  He swallowed harshly as he slowly straightened.  “I can purge small amounts with little difficulty.  But pulling enough from each alien to kill them?  And doing that four times?”  A trickle of dark blood oozed from his ear and he staggered again. “It’s poisoning you.”  I said, grimacing as I tried to use my one remaining arm to push myself into a sitting position. “Poisoned, old son.”  He retorted, his voice now reduced to a hoarse whisper as he turned towards me.  I could see the blood now flowing from his nose, his eyes darkening as they too began to fill. “The deed is already well done.”  Slowly he began to collapse back down, dropping first onto one knee, then both, visibly struggling to keep from falling onto the ground. “Damnit.”  I hissed.  I needed to do something, to help him.  I didn’t want to be left alone in this strange, war-torn world I had awakened into.  Even if my only companion would be a vampire. I cast about, looking this way and that.  And in doing so, found my eyes falling on my arm, several metres away. It was reflex that made me wiggle the fingers of my left hand, not quite believing it wasn’t still attached as I could swear it was still there.  And it was naked astonishment that filled me when I watched the fingers of that hand wiggle against the cold ground, sending sensations of hard dirt and cold up my phantom arm as if I truly were touching the ground. “Good.”  Tate croaked, blood now flowing freely from ears, nose and mouth, his eyes nearly black with it.  He had slowly bent over until only a hand bracing against the ground prevented him from falling over. “You’ve discovered your ability to control every part of you, connected or, . .”  He paused to cough and spit a mouthful of blood onto the ground.  “Otherwise.”  Blood dripped onto the ground from his face for a moment.  Then: “You just need to call that piece back to you.” “How?”  My own voice was hoarse, my eyes fixed on my distant hand as I made it move and twist with the same effort I made the one still attached, move. “Goa.”  Was his terse answer before he abruptly collapsed onto the ground. The sound of the vampire’s body thudding onto the cold, unrelenting dirt was enough to force me to pull my eyes from my severed limb to shoot a quick look over at his unmoving body. “Tate?  Tate!!”  Seeing him slumped in a puddle of his own dark blood, sent a surge of desperate energy through my body.  And, as green and blue forks of miniature lightning reached up from the ground to stab into my flesh in response to my silent plea for help, that energy was more than just adrenaline. My body jerked as my severed arm abruptly darted across the intervening space to slam into me, wiggling like a snake as it writhed its way up my side to reattach itself to the ragged stump.  A twitch of realignment and a surge of warmth and it was amazingly once again a part of my body.  At the same time, with almost magical speed, flesh regenerated and knit together to reclaim muscle, reweave skin, and reconnect truncated nerves.  In a second flash of tingling warmth, I was restored, hale and whole, as if I had never been injured. Staring down at my left hand, I almost couldn’t believe it was back.  Not only that, but the surge of energy out of the ground had filled in all the other holes in my body until all that remained was the faint throb of nerve endings remembering the recent insult.  All within the space of a heart beat. Then I was remembering why I had instinctively called for the goa in the first place and, scrambling to my feet, I started to run to where Tate had collapsed. I hadn’t gone more than a couple of strides before a burst of heat slammed into my back and I sprawled onto the ground, my body swiftly going numb.  This time, as I fell into the welcoming darkness, there was no sunlit park waiting for me at the other end.

 

Survivors

I came to with a great weight on my chest.  Thinking myself buried once more in the darkness of my grave, a surge of panic washed through me.  Until my eyes fully opened and I looked down to see a massive, armored boot pressing me back into the hard plastic seat I was in.  Following the boot along an equally armored leg, I found myself staring at the menacing form of one of the alien invaders, creatures Abby had called the velkin.  It had one of those tree truck energy rifles pointed right at me. Seeing all of that, oddly enough, made the panic go away.  It was swiftly replaced by a strange sort of smouldering rage, focused directly at the velkin.  'If you bastards hadn't of invaded Earth and slaughtered her people for food, I would be dancing with my Abby in paradise right now.'  I darkly mused.  'The sooner I kill you all, the sooner I can be with her!' A glance to either side showed two more aliens, barking in their incomprehensible language as they waved some sort of hand held devices over me.  Apparently they were confused as to what kind of creature I was, if I could go by their wild gestures in my direction, the two obviously arguing. It was like Tate said: as a Risen with more than my share of goa, I was almost alive.  Alive enough that these hunters could detect me.  But not enough to be categorized as food.  I felt a thin smile twist my lips upward at the thought, amused that my presence was giving the aliens difficulty. That smile remained on my lips for the remainder of the relatively short flight.  It felt like mere moments after I regained consciousness that I felt the transport begin to slow as it descended.  A stripped down vessel with no creature comforts whatsoever, with an exposed cockpit and a cage for the passengers behind it and in front of a tangle of thrusters and maneuvering rockets in the tail, the drop in the amount of wind that swirled into the open cage was obvious.  Then the mists that swirled over the ground beneath us parted under the insistent and noisy blast of the maneuvering rockets and I saw the aliens' destination stretching out in all directions over the ground. For all intents and purposes, it looked like a prisoner of war camp, with large, fenced compounds filled with what looked like people interspersed with guard posts.  Two large buildings sat at one end of the vast encampment and just beyond them a trio of large, ungainly looking craft that appeared to be bigger than ten city blocks. My eyes narrowed as I surveyed it all, taking it in with old, but practiced skill.  I had originally enlisted as Army, but found myself moved into the Rangers pretty quick when they saw I had exceptional covert operative skills during my first tour to Iraq.  I never told Abby, but I had done my fair share of duty deep behind enemy lines.  The things I saw, and was forced to do eventually broke me, forcing me to come home and rely on my beautiful wife to put me back together.  But the skill set I developed, I could never forget.  Maybe that's what got me tagged by the Earth Mother as a soldier she could use in the future. The velkin transport swung over the near end of the camp and began to drop towards the ground.  I was leaning to the side to see just exactly where we were landing when a sharp shock in the side of my neck knocked me back into the black of unconsciousness.  When I came to an undetermined amount of time later, my head pounded. "Uhhhhh."  I groaned, rolling over and sitting up on the dusty ground.  Immediately a hand lifted to the side of my head as I winced at the stabbing pain that threatened to split my brain apart. "What the hell, . . .?" "We call it the cattle prod."  A quiet male voice touched with a hint of a british accent said as a shadow passed over me.  Then he was kneeling beside me to carefully touch the side of my neck. "They use it to make sure we stay controllable before slaughter.  Hmmmm."  He paused as he continued his examination.  Prying open an eye I looked over at him and found a young man, perhaps in his early twenties, dressed in clean if not tattered and worn clothes, a week or so of stubble on his chiseled features.

"Usually it leaves a wound here on the neck."  He muttered, mostly to himself before he lifted clear blue eyes to look into mine.  And those eyes narrowed as soon as he caught sight of mine. "Ah, that explains it."  He said, sitting back on his haunches, a thoughtful expression on his face as he used a hand to finger comb fine, long blonde hair out of his face. "You're one of them." "An alien?"  I hissed, letting my eye snap shut once more as a particularly vicious throb of pain tightened up my entire body.  Thankfully it also seemed to signal the beginning of the end as the pain quickly faded, leaving me feeling somewhat drained as it left my body. "No.  One of the undead fighting them." That snapped both my eyes open and I threw a look back over at him.  A faint smile touched his lips at my expression of surprise. "Oh yes, we know about your kind, friend.  We see the undead of various types in the sanctuaries on the odd occasion.  Though this is the first time I know of that the aliens have gone through the effort of actually capturing one of you.  Usually they just blow your heads off and keep going." "Why are you talking to it, Gavin?"  A woman's voice interrupted with the distinctive nasals of an American from somewhere behind the young man.  She too sounded young, even younger than him. "It's bad enough they throw one of those damn zombies in here with us, now you're trying to make friends with it?  They're just as likely to eat us as the aliens are!" The blonde fellow snorted a quiet laugh before looking at me, his smile now more of a grin. "My friend there obviously doesn't understand much about 'zombies' outside of old movie discs."  He paused, his smile becoming mischevious.  "Unless you really do eat people." "Not since that last one gave me heartburn."  I deadpanned and he laughed out loud. "Outstanding!"  He chortled before extending a hand.  "My name is Gavin." Taking it cautiously, I gave it a shake. "Max." Gavin returned the handshake enthusiastically before letting go. "Pleased to meet you, Max."  He said, his smile genuine.  "Though I must admit your hand is significantly warmer than I expected.  Not what I would've expected from the deceased." I smiled thinly. "I get that alot."  I replied before pausing to take a quick look around.  And in doing so, noted that I was now in a relatively large cage, fenced sides and roofed with wire mesh, along with perhaps twenty or so humans, including Gavin and his female friend, a frowning redhead that stood several paces back.  In fact, they all stood back except for Gavin. "It would appear your colleagues don't share your tolerance of my kind with you."  I dryly noted as I brought my attention back to him.  It was ironic that I hadn't been Risen long enough to understand what 'my kind' was about.  I didn't want to think about the fact I was still coming to grips with the fact that I was now undead.  Only the anger triggered in the velkin transport was keeping me from giving in to the storm of thought and fear that Tate had first managed to quell.  With the pain from being stunned now completely gone, I used the anger's return to keep me focused.  And that focus told me that I needed to find out as much as I could from this kid so I could figure a way out of here. "Have any humans actually had family that ended up as zombie food?" Gavin shrugged. "Not any that I'm aware of.  Your kind spends most of its time fighting the aliens.  Not worrying about eating what is left of human kind."  His smile returned, somewhat sardonic.  "The aliens are taking care of that part all on their own."

"I can imagine."  I said.  Time to get some answers.  "You seem to be more aware of my people than most, Gavin.  So perhaps you can answer some questions for me." Gavin's eyebrow slowly lifted. "Okay."  He carefully replied.  "Although quite frankly, I would've thought you'd have all the answers, being one of them and all, . . ." "That's logical."  I conceded with a grimace.  "Unfortunately I've only been Risen for perhaps two or three hours.  The Risen sent to retrieve me was killed in the ambush that saw me captured.  He was starting to tell me what I was, and what kind of world I had been summoned into when we got hit." "Ah."  Understanding washed across Gavin's face.  "That makes much more sense.  You talk to me like a real person would.  Most undead that I've chanced across don't bother with such niceties.  Almost as if they've forgotten them."  He glanced back at the knot of people cowering in the cage's corner before returning his attention back to me with a nod. "I'll tell you what I know, Max.  It's not much but it might give you a start on things.  With the hope that you'll survive past being in this cage.  Unlike the rest of us." I frowned at that. "Do you think they'll come for you soon?" Gavin shrugged. "Sorry, my first cull."  He rasped.  "I just know I've been in here overnight.  With most of the cages around us empty, I don't think they let their food wait too long before it goes on the table." It was my turn to glance over at the knot of scared humans in the corner. "For your first cull, you seem to be relatively composed.  Unlike your friends there." Again the young man shrugged. "I'm not sure what kind of world you had while you were alive, Max, but Death is a constant here.  If you spend your entire life thinking about it, trying to avoid it, then you don't have much time to do any living.  I'm second generation sanctuary-born so I knew from a young age I would die before I reached my 25th year.  With that knowledge, I tried to pack as much living into those 25 years as I possibly could, before I was culled." Gavin's expression became reflective as he continued. "I married my childhood sweetheart at 15, had my first of five children a year later.  I learned how to be a blacksmith, and a leather worker, a hunter and a farmer.  I come into the cull being the only one that has seen all four corners of our sanctuary, from the highest mountain, to the deepest lake.  I have read a thousand books, write poetry and play music on a guitar.  I can speak all eight languages and dialects found in my sanctuary.  And, . . ."  He paused, his smile suddenly proud. "With the help of my beautiful wife, who was culled last month, I passed all of these things on to my two boys and three girls."  A soft sigh of satisfaction escaped him.  "And I could only do all of that, if I put aside fearing Death and spent my time embracing life instead." "Odd that you didn't mention fighting back against the aliens who took your wife, you and will take your children in a few years, as food."  I pointed out. Gavin's answering smile was wry. "Because I didn't.  What would I fight them with?  Bow and arrow?  The spear I used to hunt wild boar with?  They crushed our military, who possessed weapons far more advanced than what I could wield.  It would be futile.  While I don't fear Death, I haven't necessarily sought it out before my time either."  His smile tightened.  "Besides, now we have those who Death has already touched to carry on the fight for us.  Maybe the undead will somehow succeed where the living have failed."

"Maybe."  My frown deepened.  "Which brings me to my first question about being Risen: how could you tell?  I mean, you didn't know until you looked me in the eyes." "True."  Gavin easily admitted.  "You are remarkably well preserved.  Warm, skin tone fresh and alive, your face belonging to a man in his late twenties, your body fit and strong.  I can see why the aliens are confused about you.  You are certainly no ghoul, or lich, or even one of the more advanced of your kind, whose pale skin and cadaverous frames mark them.  Only the strange black and purple in your eyes mark you as undead, the same kind of eyes the pale ones have." Black and purple eyes, . . I had always had blue eyes.  I found myself barely resisting the urge to lift my hand to my face to see if it still felt like my face.  Rather, what my face felt like when I was in my twenties. "Tate called me Transcended."  I rasped instead.  "Do you know what that means?" Gavin shook his head. "I'm afraid I've not heard that term before.  But I'd also be the first to admit my acquaintance with your kind is fleeting.  We didn't have long, drawn out conversations like this one." "Fair enough." I carefully climbed to my feet, Gavin rising with me.  He reached out to tug at the edges of the hole in my shirt. "Looks like you took some damage during your capture, Max.  You were able to repair your body but not your shirt?" I smiled. "Holes in my shirt I can deal with, Gavin."  Again I glanced around the cage.  This place was starting to bother me, on several different levels. "Speaking of holes, has anybody tried to escape?" Gavin followed my gaze around the cage, his expression thoughtful. "Considering this camp is almost a hundred square kilometres and we are close to its center, we'd a considerable distance to cover before we reached the edge."  He noted, still looking around.  "The whole time avoiding the hunters, who would kill and eat you if they caught you.  Then, if we somehow figured out where we were in the world, and how we could reach our home sanctuary, there's the possibility of having to traverse hostile terrain where wild animals would join the aliens in hunting us." His eyes finally dropped back onto me, his thoughtful expression unchanged. "Then, if we somehow managed to survive to find our home sanctuary, there'd be a good chance the people we once called friends would stake us out for the aliens to find their next cull, as we had already been culled and so are dead to them.  Thereby giving another member of the sanctuary a little more time before they are culled next." I slowly shook my head in resignation, tired simply from following his logic. "Alright, alright, so you don't try to escape once captured."  I conceded, feeling a heavy weight descending onto me.  If no-one had tried to escape, then who would know if it were possible? - I would know. -  A quiet voice said into the depths of my mind.  Fighting the urge to scream out loud, I grit my teeth against the wave of panic that nearly overwhelmed me instead. - And exactly who would you be? -  I tautly asked into the heart of my mind, both hoping for an answer so that I knew I wasn't crazy.  And hoping for silence so I'd know the end of my sanity was close instead and soon my encrouching madness would make me forget this strange place where Risen fight invading aliens while the only living survivors accept the fact that they're now food. My heart did a rough double take when the voice quickly replied. - I am Tovin.  And I am a Transcended, like you.  A psyren, to be exact, with the ability to use powers of the mind. - - Including telepathy. -  I finished for her, having identified the quiet mental voice as belonging to a woman.  Or what was a woman at one time. - Just so.  And while I do have the ability to teleport people and objects short distances, I am too far from you currently to pull you out of there that way.  So I've sent in a wraith operative instead. - - A wraith?  What exactly is that? -  I asked. "I'm a wraith."  Another woman's voice said almost directly behind me.  Twisting around as Gavin gasped out loud in surprise, I watched light fold and fall away to reveal a slender, dark cloaked figure that stood only as tall as my shoulder.  An easy measurement to make, considering she was almost right on top of me.  A pert smile of amusement danced on the woman's lips, likely for the look on my face, the expression just visible under the heavy cowl that hid most of her head and face. "A covert capable Transcended, made to sneak into bear traps like this one."  She said, before thrusting a gloved hand at me. "I'm Twitch." I carefully took her hand. "Max." "Yes, you are."  The grin broadened as she gripped my hand firmly and give it a quick shake before letting it go.  "The newest and supposedly the most powerful of us to arrive to this party.  Now, shall I get our collective asses out of here?"

 

Escape

I looked from Twitch to an obviously stunned Gavin then back to her. "Well, I'm all for escaping," I indicated with a frown.  "But according to my friend here, it's virtually impossible." Twitch glanced at Gavin, then let her eyes travel to the cluster of humans in the cage's corner before returning them to me. "And you believe these meat bags, Max?"  she asked quite bluntly, the part of her expression that I could see under her hood disapproving.  "Look at them!  They're cattle, kept around by the enemy to make sure his stomach is full.  Of course they think escape is impossible.  They're bred to think that way.  Or to not think, however you want to put it." Oddly enough, I found myself chuckling at that.  Now I knew what Gavin was talking about when referring to conversations with other Risen as being less than cordial. "They do seem resigned to their fate, don't they," I replied, half turning to look at Gavin.  I almost wanted to see an expression of indignation on his young face in response to Twitch's relatively harsh assessment.  And I was vaguely disappointed to find that, while the astonishment had faded, all that was left behind was the same calm he had while talking to me. I mentally shrugged, my simmering anger pushing to the forefront again.  If they wanted to stay here and die, that was up to them.  I needed to get out of here, so I could find more velkin and wipe them out. "I, however, am not."  I returned my eyes to Twitch, feeling my expression harden.  "If you got a way out of this cage, then let's take it and get the hell out of here." A grin appeared on the wraith's face. "Now you're talkin', big man." she said.  Then, amazingly, I heard her speaking in my head.  - I've got Max, Tovin.  Preparing for extraction. - - Acknowledged, Twitch.  I am standing by at the rendezvous point for the two of you. - The psyren's voice replied. Nodding, Twitch turned to me and immediately her grin reappeared at seeing the querulous look on my face. "We call it broadband," she quickly explained.  "Only a handful of the psyrens can do it, and lucky us that we got Tovin, who possesses the ability.  It keeps an entire team in constant contact, regardless of the situation."  With a final look over at Gavin and the other humans, she indicated I should follow her. Nodding, I made to do so.  But, before I could go a foot, I hesitated.  Then abruptly I turned and walked to Gavin. "We're getting out of here, Gavin," I said in a low voice.  "Even with my understanding of your logic in staying, do you want to come with us?  You and as many of your comrades as are willing, . . ." Gavin's expression became thoughtful as he considered my offer for a moment.  Then, as I almost expected him to, he slowly shook his head. "We would only slow you and your colleague down, Max," he said, a resigned smile on his face.  "Go, and travel swiftly to your people.  Hopefully, now that you've joined them, you'll be successful in your efforts to drive the aliens from our world."  He held out a hand, which I took without hesitation. "Good luck, Max." "Thanks, Gavin," I somewhat sadly replied, giving his hand a firm shake.  "And swift passing to you and yours." He smiled as he let go of my hand. "Now that I can appreciate.  Thank you." I nodded and, with a final smile at him, I turned and quickly made my way back over to where Twitch was waiting at the fence.

"Touching," she said dryly as I joined her.  "Your little farewell there made me all warm and fuzzy.  Can we go now??" I chuckled at Twitch's comment and nodded. "By all means." Nodding in acknowledgment, Twitch held out a gloved hand.  And I felt a wave of amazement go through me with the tips of her fingers began to glow with a bright blue-green light.  Making a blade hand, she then passed those glowing fingertips over the woven metal of the fence.  At first glance, it appeared like any chain link fence I had seen before. But now that I was up close, I could see it was made out of small metal cables, each twisted together with some process, and out of a metal I couldn't recognize, woven together like a loose basket.  Intuitively I knew it was most likely quite stronger than any metal we had, the fence basically unbreachable.  Not that it mattered: the survivors didn't want to escape anyway, so the point of the fence was almost moot. Despite it's strength, however, Twitch was making quick work of it with her glowing finger tips. "Focused goa: hotter than any cutting laser," she quietly explained when she noticed me paying attention to her smooth and steady progress.  "Which is good, when you're dealing with their exotic metals."  Reaching the ground, she stepped back as her finger tips stopped glowing.  A quick look yielded her gloves weren't even scorched by what was obviously high temperatures.  Then she was pushing the piece of fence aside to give us an opening just big enough to slip through.  Which I quickly did, immediately feeling a sense of freedom outside the cage.  Twitch was right behind me, tugging the piece of fence back into place.  I started with surprise when I saw the metal edges suddenly grow tendrils to reach across the space she had cut to pull the two edges back together, quickly sealing the cut line. "Holy damn!"  I exclaimed, looking over at the wraith who quickly nodded in agreement. "I know, right?  Organic metal that acts more like living tissue."  She took a quick look around.  "It can also talk." "What??" "Yeah.  So there's a good chance it's told its masters that we cut through it and they're on their way to see what happened." "Then what the hell are we standing around here for?"  I wanted to know.  "Let's, . . ." The blast came out of nowhere, cutting through the fence right beside us to slam into Twitch.  The impact hit her like a battering ram, flinging her back several metres through the air before she hit the ground hard, rag-dolling as she tumbled to a rough halt. "No!"  I snarled, feeling the rage boil to life within me.  First Tate, and now Twitch??  That was so not going to happen! I'm not sure what happened next, to tell you the truth.  All I knew is that I could feel goa rush into me like I was an empty vessel being filled with pure power.  As that power burned into my flesh with so much force it made me grunt with the surge's impact, I felt first one strike against my side, then another caroming off a shoulder.  Neither affected me beyond feeling them hit me. I twisted towards the source.  And found myself looking at no less than four of the giant velkin, as Abby had called them.  Each armored alien held one of their portable cannons aimed right at me.  Without thinking, I charged. The first I simply smashed aside, its legs snapping like a pair of dried twigs as I ploughed through them.  It flipped over me to drop awkwardly on the ground, shrieking in agony.  Somehow I then went immediately to my right to hammer into the next pair, snapping their legs upon impact even as the fourth opened fire with abandon at me.  Most of the blasts missed, but for those that hit me, I shrugged them aside as easily as the first two they had fired.

I wheeled in a tight circle to bring the last of the velkin firmly into the center of my view.  Then, moving faster than I thought possible, I leapt onto the nearest of the three fallen aliens, my feet somehow crushing in its chest, before I kicked aside the next one and barreled directly into the last, shedding energy blasts as I came on. The final velkin hunter had just enough time to cry out in what sounded like fear.  Then I was running roughshod over its body, each step caving in armor and crushing bone and tissue beneath.  Three steps and I had mangled giant underfoot, pale fluid and body pieces everywhere. Letting my momentum carry me beyond the fallen alien, I again spun a tight circle to my left and made my way towards where Twitch lay unmoving on the ground, running over the first velkin I had dropped in the process.  Crushing the life out of that one, I took two more steps and smoothly scooped Twitch's limp form off the ground. - Tovin, are you still on line? -  I shouted into the depths of my mind as I turned and began to run flat out into the nearest opening between the cages, Twitch held tightly to me.  And watched them blur into unrecognizable color and shapes with the speed of my passage. - I've got you, Max, - the psyren's calm voice filled my mind and I heaved a sigh of relief. - We got jumped as soon as we cleared the cage.  I took care of the velkin hunters, but Twitch is down.  I need a path out of here, pronto! - An image of the camp immediately appeared in my mind's eye, along with a flashing dot that I assumed was my position connected to a line that stretched towards the camp's eastern edge. - I am detecting rapidly escalating enemy activity in the area, Max, - Tovin quickly added, several red triangles appearing on the image that seemed to float in front of me, an eerie telepathic Heads Up Display, as I charged forward, cages whipping past me with hisses of compressed air. - They are keying on where you terminated the hunters.  However, it won't be long before they extend their net.  Can you evacuate before they establish a perimeter around the camp? - - I guess I don't have much choice, do I? -  I couldn't help the wry tone in my mental voice.  If she was offended, Tovin's voice didn't carry it. - I will try to give you a better layout of the territory beyond the camp. -  Already I had moved past the half way point to the camp's edge on the telepathic HUD the psyren was feeding into my mind. - But we have next to no resources in the area.  You will have to affect your extraction on your own. - 'Lovely,'  I thought, dodging what looked to be some sort of ground effect vehicle that had lumbered into my path, darting around it without slowing down to leave it far behind. Oddly enough Tovin's revelation didn't trouble me.  As a Ranger behind enemy lines, it was fairly common to find ourselves relying on our own resources to get out.  Even as I considered that, a second ground effect vehicle appeared in front of me, another just beyond it, their presence marking the approach of the camp's edge.  This time I didn't bother trying to avoid them.  There was something about the goa filling me to overflowing that made me faster, stronger, . . . more invulnerable.  So I simply put my head down and went through both.  Like the armored bodies of the aliens I had trampled in the camp's heart, my momentum and the outrageous amount of goa I had in me, allowed me to tear through the exotic metal like it was tissue paper.  Cutting the first in two and shattering it in the process, it exploded in my wake as I left it behind to tear into the second.  It too exploded in a electric cloud of discharge and debris, my body suddenly too dense, and too heavy for the metal to resist, my feet abruptly having the power to cave in the vehicle's power plant and rupture whatever fuel it had stored there. Then I was clear of the camp and racing towards the edge of a nearby forest, looming dark in my path. - Okay, Tovin, we are clear and heading towards a nearby forest. -  Even as I thought it, I was in the dark shadow cast by the dense stand of evergreens.  Somehow my goa-powered body had the ability to sense living things like trees and such and I was able to neatly dodge and duck out of the way of even the thinnest sapling.  All the while racing at a speed that felt like it rivaled that of a fighter plane from my era. - Acknowledged, - the psyren sent.  - I have you traveling max Q  in an easterly heading, twelve kilometres north of my position.  Angle south 65 degrees and maintain your heading until you are in jump range. - I shifted according to her instructions, keeping Twitch's limp body hugged close, Tovin's telepathic HUD still in my mind's eye giving me an overlay of the surrounding territory.  Thankfully it was relatively flat; at the clip I was traveling, even the slightest dip in the ground and I could make a misstep and be sent flying.  A pulsing green star marked a point I assumed would be where I'd be in jump range.  And I was rapidly closing on it. - Shift made.  Closing on your position, -  I reported, the pulsing dot that marked me and Twitch racing towards the green star at a rate that, if I wasn't seeing it with my own eyes, I wouldn't have believed.. - Acknowledged, Max.  Stand by for jump, -  Tovin's quiet voice said.  - On my mark, five, four, three, two, one, . . . mark. - And the forest disappeared with a twist and a ripple in space.  Damn, we did it. We had escaped.

 

Chapter 2: The Resistance

Space shifted then I was skidding to a halt on what was left of an asphalt road, the paving all worn and broken, pieces of it jutting into the air. "Max."  Tovin's actual voice, just as quiet and calm as her mental voice, called from a few metres to my right.  Turning that way, I almost dropped Twitch when I found a slender, cloaked shape hovering a good half metre off the ground. A deep hood completely hid her features, the cloak the rest, her hands hidden within voluminous sleeves and folded in front of her, the charcoal gray fabric dangling nearly a full foot beyond the downward pointing toes of her boots.  I could feel a shifting of energy fields coiling around her, keeping her motionless despite the brisk wind that was blowing down the old roadway.  Motionless and a half a metre off the ground in outright denial of the validity of gravity. "Tovin."  I carefully replied and in silent acknowledgement, the psyren glided forward.  That was enough to stir me to matters more important than my ever increasing astonishment.  Grimly I pushed that into the background yet again. "Twitch needs medical attention, ASAP.  She took a velkin energy blast point blank to the chest."  I felt invisible cables of energy wrap around Twitch's unmoving body and I let Tovin's psychokinesis carefully ease the injured wraith out of my arms. "Her vitals are still detectable."  Tovin softly noted as wispy tendrils of blue-green energy danced ethereally over Twitch's body, which now also hovered a good metre off the ground in front of the psyren.  Their shifting dance revealed the ragged hole the blast had burned through Twitch's tunic, the skin made visible by the hole blackened and charred. "She had sufficient goa left from her earlier top up to repair just enough damage to remain with us.  But she will indeed need immediate attention if we're to extend her existence."  I then got the feeling that she had turned her attention to me. "And you, Max?  Did you take any damage?  I see the tunic Tate gave you has been rendered virtually useless." "I, uh, . . ."  My voice trailed off when I looked down and saw my shirt had been reduced to tattered rags, barely hanging on to my body.  Which, to my amazement, looked chiseled and fit as if I was still a soldier and running 10k a day to stay in shape.  And it was also completely unmarked.  Taking hold of the tattered fabric, I pulled it off and tried not to marvel that I was not only unhurt, but had the body of my youth returned to me and, as an odd side note, didn't at all feel the chill in the wind as it snarled around me. "I appear to be unhurt, Tovin." "As expected."  She quietly pointed out and I frowned.  Expected?  What the hell was that supposed to mean? Before I could comment further, however, another person appeared with a soft hiss of displaced air. "Tovin."  The newcomer greeted the psyren with a nod then looked over at me.  "Max." "Ah, hello.  I'm afraid you have me at a loss, . . ."  I began.  Yet another Transcended that seemed to know me.  It was starting to be an alarming trend, . . . "The name's Boost."  He said with a smile and stepped forward, hand extended in greeting. For lack of a better description, Boost was ordinary.  Caucasian, medium height and build, with sandy blonde hair, cut short and spiky, dressed in worn but clean military fatigues.  He looked like any person you would see on the street.  And that, in itself, was disturbing in this strange world I now found myself in.  It was almost a relief to see the black and purple eyes of a Transcended looking back at me.  A friendly smile was pasted on to his rather ordinary looking face.

Before I could take it, however, Tovin was speaking. "Boost?  You have an urgent matter to attend to first.  Meet and greet later." "Right, right; Twitch."  The fellow said with an apologetic look in my direction before quickly moving to where Twitch hovered, unmoving.  A visible aura appeared around him, a green glow that shimmered with the odd dancing miniature fork of blue lightning. My eyes narrowed at seeing that and I took a half step towards them to get a better look.  Is he, . . is he using goa to put Twitch back together again? "Boost is a summoner."  Tovin quietly explained, suddenly beside me, her denial of gravity without sound.  Even the anticipated sound of her clothing moving in the wind was absent, as it didn't seem to touch her within her invisible fields of energy.  Despite that, I could sense her presence silently floating less than a metre from my side. "And as such, can draw tremendous amounts of goa in from Mother Earth, much like you.  Unlike you, however, he can then project that goa in vast quantities.  Enough to temporarily raise fallen from the dead, increase the abilities of Risen already summoned.  Or, . . ." "Heal injuries sustained by other Risen."  I finished for her, suddenly understanding.  Beyond his primary purpose, whatever that was, Boost was a healer.  And if I was to become a permanent member of this group, it would be good to know who could put me back together again if I got banged up.  Except, I wasn't sure if I could get banged up any more, after ripping my way out of that velkin culling camp. "You said 'unlike me' while explaining Boost's capabilities, Tovin."  I looked over at the psyren.  "Tate died before he could explain who or what I am.  Maybe you could, . . ." "While I know what you are, Max, I do not know who."  Tovin quietly replied.  "That will be a question only you can answer.  As for the rest, I'm not authorized to disclose that.  You'll have to get that answer from Finlay." I couldn't help my frustrated sigh. "Figures there'd be a chain of command even amongst the undead."  I dryly noted.  "Who's this Finlay?" "Our liaison with the rest of the Resistance."  Boost supplied, turning away from Twitch who was now standing on her own, fingering the hole in her tunic with a frown.  What little skin that remained visible through the hole was now completely healed.  Not even a scar could be seen. "He passes on our marching orders from the Seer of Stone, an oracle at the Earth Shrine who gets her instruction straight from the Earth Mother." "Okay."  I said hesitantly.  I remembered Tate mentioning some oracle at the Earth Shrine.  Was this the one he was refering to? "So when do we meet this Finlay?  I'd like to find out just exactly what's going on, sooner versus later." "Understandable."  Tovin noted.  "We've been advised that you'll be meeting him after, along with the rest of the team." "After?  After what?" "After you meet the Seer of Stone.  She has asked for you directly." I felt my eyebrow climb in curiosity. "She asked for me?  When will I see her?" "How about now?"  Tovin asked and, before I could answer, I felt time and space twist in on itself. An eyeblink later I was back in reality.  And standing on some solid surface in complete darkness.  'You know, this better not become a habit.'  I thought as I fought against the urge to panic.  Yet again I was in a situation where I was reminded of waking up trapped inside my coffin.

"Max Niekro."  A hoarse, rasping voice rumbled out of the darkness.  "You may put away your fear here, in the Earth Shrine.  You will face no danger within the Shrine's confines." "Thank you."  I carefully said, not sure I was really thankful or not.  And I swiftly noted that my voice echoed in a manner that told me my present location was in some sort of cavern or cave. "I was told the oracle of the shrine, an individual called the Seer of Stone wished to speak to me." "It is so."  The rumbling voice said and a gentle glow appeared out of the darkness.  While it was no brighter than a night light, it caught my dark adjusted eyes by surprise and I found myself squinting against the surprise illumination.  As I shielded my eyes with a hand, I saw a rough shape move slowly towards me, the glow coming from somewhere within it. As it came closer, the shape resolved into a loose tumble of stones, just under the height of a man.  The stones were both large and small, each moving over and around each other in a constant state of motion.  Some were suspended in the air, while others directly rubbed against their companions to generate a low, grinding sound.  It was from within this constantly moving collection of stones that the glow emenated, steady and unwavering like some sort of, . . . heart. "I did indeed wish to see you, Max."  The jumble of stones said, the voice coming from a harmonic generated by the rocks moving against each other. "You, . . You are the Seer of Stone?"  I stammered in naked astonishment. "Do you think it beyond the Earth Mother to animate her actual flesh in a manner that simulates life if she so wished it, Max?"  The heap of stones rumbled.  "After all, from the dust is your flesh derived.  And what is dust but the remnants of greater stone?  And what is stone but the flesh of our Mother?"  A quartet of medium sized stones lifted from the main mass to reach across and tap me on the shoulder. "This flesh was returned to dust by natural processes.  Yet you were summoned back to fulfill the Earth Mother's purposes, the power to do so given to her by the almighty Creator."  The stones returned to the shifting mass in front of me, the glow brightening slightly. "Dust  was rewoven into living cells and tissues.  Those tissues were then rewoven into bones, sinew and muscle.  That bone, sinew and muscle were refashioned into a body, with capabilities and skills.  All was done by the power of goa.  To accomplish her purposes, the Earth Mother has expended much of the life she was given by the Creator.  And that life begets life: yours, and mine."  The rocks shifted. "And now you will honor her sacrifice by accepting the task she has set out before you." Blinking rapidly, I tried to absorb what the seer was telling me.  By goa was life given to even stone?? "What, . . what is this task the Earth Mother has for me?"  I managed to ask, my mind churning. "Resist the alien invasion, destroy their armies and prevent them from biting deep into her flesh to drain her of her very essence."  Was the seer's swift and terse answer. "And how will I achieve this goal?" The stones shifted as if the seer was considering its answer.  Or perhaps getting its answer from the Earth Mother herself. "You have already taken the first step, Max."  The grinding voice pointed out after a long pause in which I felt increasingly anxious. "You have learned how to summon goa to repair your body, and give it great strength, speed and resilience." "But I did that out of need."  I quickly pointed out.  "Seer, I don't know if I can do so again, on demand." "You must."  The seer bluntly replied.  "There is no other way." Again the stones reached out, this time to tap me on the chest just above my heart. "Only you can accept this great burden, Max.  Only you were marked for this task.  Without you, the resistance is lost.  So you must find it in your heart to embrace what the Earth Mother has asked of you."  The stones dropped away. "You must become her unstoppable force, her undeniable weapon that will drive the enemy to extinction.  You will crush them underfoot, as they crushed the armies of the living."  The stones shifted and began to move away, taking the glowing light with them. "You must become her juggernaut.  It is your calling."  And then the light disappeared and I was left alone in the dark, staring at the dancing purple and green spots in my vision that marked where the light had burned itself into my retinas.  And out of the jumble of information and concept that seethed without end in my mind came a single word: Juggernaut.

 

So, What's the Plan?

Tovin, Twitch and Boost turned towards me as I slowly rose out of the ground, lifted into view on a smooth disk of stone. "You don't look happy." The wraith noted as Boost tossed me another shirt and a heavy jacket. Looking over at her, I sighed. "I'm not sure I am." I admitted then yanked the shirt over my head before pulling the jacket, a faded leather bomber, on after. As my first shirt had been, this one was strangely comfortable, the jacket equally so. Not that having clothing mattered with the weather failing to affect me. Even as I glanced up at a steely gray sky, fat and cold rain drops began to fall on our heads. Yet, though I knew they were cold, and could feel them as such, my body didn't react as it would've if I had been alive. 'Well, that's handy.' I mused darkly. Pity the ability to ignore the weather wouldn't keep us dry. With a hiss of parted air, the skies opened up and the rain sluiced down onto us. But not for long; with a shimmer of psychokinetic energy, a translucent dome formed over our heads, Tovin extending her abilities to shield us. Glancing up at the dome, I watched the heavy downpour skitter off the dome's shimmering upper surface for a moment before I felt a presence close by. "Hey, just wanted to say thanks for pulling my ass outta that camp back there, Max."  Twitch said, pulling off her hood to reveal a cute, heart shaped face with high cheekbones, fine, arcing brows and a rosebud mouth.  Light brown hair was cut short and tousled to adorn her head in a ruffle and go sort of look.  No wonder she wore the hood; looking like that, it would be hard to take her seriously as a stealth operative. "No problem, Twitch."  I flashed a quick smile.  "You were putting it on the line to get me out of there to begin with.  It was the least I could do." "Maybe so."  She conceded, a grin appearing on her lips in response to my smile.  "I appreciate it nevertheless, big man." "Any time."  I said with a nod. "Cool.  So, you said you weren't that happy with what the oracle had to say.  What did she say, if you don't mind me askin'."  "Frankly, we're all a little curious, Max."  Boost added as he and Tovin joined us, the psyren silently gliding behind him.  "We don't get to talk to the seer.  That's what Finlay does.  So you being called in to talk with her is definitely something out of the ordinary." I looked at him, then Tovin and finally back at Twitch before letting a sigh ease free of my nostrils. "She told me all kinds of things."  I hesitantly began.  "About Mother Earth's sacrifice to fight this war, and bring us back from the dead.  And about the velkin wanting to crack her open and consume her life force." "Wait, wait."  Twitch held up a hand.  "Velkin?  What the hell are those?" My eyebrow lifted in curiosity. "You, . . don't know?"  I asked somewhat incredulous.  "How long have you been fighting the aliens?" "Ten years, give or take."  Twitch said with a frown. "Ten years and you didn't know the aliens call themselves the velkin?" "Well, what the hell do you expect, Max?  It's not like I wanted to ask them for coffee so we could have a heart to heart, man.  I was killing the bastards, for shit's sake.  Not jotting down names for my little black book." "None of us knew they were called anything other than the enemy, Max."  Tovin added at catching sight of the expression on my face. "You giving them a name is something new."

"Did the seer tell you that?"  Boost wanted to know. I shook my head. "All the seer told me was that I needed to be the unstoppable force that will crush the armies of the enemy, as they crushed the armies of the living.  And that I would do that to honor the life she has given back to me."  My frown deepened. "She called me a juggernaut." The other three Transcended immediately let long sighs of relief go.  Well, at least Boost and Twitch did.  I felt the relief emanating off Tovin. "I guess you won't need to ask Finlay after all."  Boost pointed out with a grin.  "He ordered us not to tell you what you were called to be.  He said he was to have that privilege." "But the seer beat that bloodsucker to it!"  Twitch crowed with a grin. "Beat me to what?"  A cold, hard voice hissed. As one we turned towards its source.  And I found a pale, thin man a few centimetres shorter than me stalking towards us, a frown on his grim face. "Ah, . . Finlay."  Boost hastily slapped a smile of greeting onto his face.  "We didn't see you there, . ." "Skip it, summoner."  The pale man snarled.  "I'm not in the mood for your insincerity today."  The man's dark eyes swung onto me with almost physical force as Boost took an uncertain step back and away from the determined striding newcomer. "So this is the next great hope to be dug up, hey?"  He stopped in front of me, arms folded.  "You don't look so special.  Certainly not worth all the hype the seer has been trying to sell me."  My eyebrow climbed at that. "So, new blood, do you have a name?"  When I made to answer, he waved me to silence.  "Never mind; I actually don't care what your name is, pal.  You're just another zombie to me."  He settled back, sucking his teeth loudly as he looked me up and down, clear unimpressed. "Even worse than a zombie."  He continued in that same cold, hard tone.  "Transcended; wanna-be's that walk around here, pretending they're alive, like they're so much better than the rest of us Risen." That tightened my expression up as a surge of irritation and anger washed through me as Twitch shifted uneasily beside me. "I'm not sure who you think I am, . . ." I began only to have him cut me off with a hard chopping gesture. "Do I look like I give a crap about your opinion, new blood?"  He hissed.  "I'll tell you when I want you to speak, and not a second sooner.  You're lucky that's almost now.  Or I would've sucked twenty years out of you just for opening your mouth." As I rocked back on my heels in astonishment, my anger quickly racing towards the boiling point, he folded his arms once again and glared at me. "You can begin by telling me how you are supposed to help the resistance beat the aliens.  And why you let us do all the heavy lifting for the last fifty years just so you can swing by now and grab all the glory.  What's so amazing about you that we couldn't wake you up fifty years ago when we started this thing?" "There's nothing amazing about me, . . ."  I tried to answer again.  Only to yet again be cut off by a vicious downward chop of his hand. "Bullshit!"  Finlay snarled.  "Last to awaken, taken to speak directly to the seer, immediately assigned an assault team, . . . you can't tell me that you're nothing special when you're getting it all on a silver platter.  I hated your privileged kind when I was living, and I absolutely hate your kind now!"

Seething, I growled: "You know nothing about me, . . ." "Shut up, you filthy Transcended bastard!  I knew everything I needed to know when I saw your pink skin filled with fake life.  If I had my way, we'd put every last stinking one of you back in the grave.  Right after we sucked out our fill, of course, . . ." I'm not sure what happened next.  I just know the rage boiled over and next thing I knew I had a handful of Finlay's shirt, my other hand balled into a fist. "You've got a big mouth, you know that?"  I husked, barely resisting the urge to smash his face in.  "Keep talking and I'll shut it for good." "Oh?"  Finlay's sneer didn't alter one bit even with my fist poised in front of his face.  "You gonna do something, punk?  Then do it already before I puke.  Being so close to one of you is making me sick to my stomach." When I hesitated, remembering what I had did to the armored velkin hunters back in the culling camp, he barked a short, humorless laugh. "I didn't think so.  Coward.  Now it's my turn!" Moving faster than I thought possible, he brushed aside my clenched fist to take hold of my face with both hands.  He then leaned in, mouth opening wide.  A heart beat later glowing tendrils of goa erupted from inside his mouth to bite deep into my face.  The pain was instant, and blinding. I grunted when they hit me, astonished that he was able to penetrate whatever protection I thought I had.  'So much for being invulnerable.'  I thought.  Then all thought was pushed aside as I felt my life suddenly being pulled out of my body via those goa tendrils buried in the flesh of my face, leaving nothing but searing pain behind.  As agony consumed me, I thought I heard Twitch scream as she pulled fruitlessly at the vampire's arms: "Damn it, let him go, Finlay!"  And, so close behind it sounded like an echo, I could hear Tovin speaking: "We are all Risen, Finlay.  He has a part to play.  So let him play it!" "C'mon, man."  That from Boost.  "Just leave him alone!" But Finlay was unheeding.  Even as the pain sapped my strength, leaving me with nothing to fight him off with, he leaned back to add physical pain to the agony of having my life sucked out of me, the tendrils tearing at my flesh as he put pressure on them as if they possessed the fangs he should've, as a vampire.  I began to hoarsely scream.  At least, that's what I thought I did.  The pain was now so intense from the goa leaving my body and, thereby, letting my artificially restored body begin to rapidly break down to return to the dust I had been summoned from, that I could feel nothing else. - You are my juggernaut. -  The voice, calming and soothing, filled my mind in a wave of blue and green, pushing the pain aside as if it were nothing. - You are my unstoppable force, my child.  And now you will show the world your power. - The first fork of pure goa erupted out of the ground with a shriek to slam into my back.  It was nearly as thick as my wrist at the base, shivering with barely restrained power as it sent pulse after pulse of undiluted life force directly into my body.  It was swiftly followed by a second, which hammered into my side.  And a third, lifting up to drive into my other side. With their arrival, the pain of my life failing was gone. Teeth grit, I chopped at the tendrils attached to my face with a knife edged hand.  And watched with satisfaction as, after a brief resistance to my strike, they ripped apart with a shriek of discharge.  The tension abruptly terminated with his tendrils' forced dissolution, Finlay staggered back, cursing heavily.

The first time I reinforced my body to juggernaut status, it had just happened.  Almost instinctual, the power, invulnerability, increased density and speed was mystically just there.  This time, however, I felt each change as I willed it to happen. First came the strength, goa rushing into my muscles to superpower the fibres.  Then my tissues, densifying without gaining mass.  And finally the speed, my legs supercharging with even more goa.  A shimmering field of pure goa formed close around my body, like a second skin  and as it settled into place, the tendrils of goa reaching up from the ground evaporated and the solid stone beneath my booted feet crumbled when I shifted in place. "You want to know what I can do, suckhead?"  I grated, coiling myself in preparation. "I can do this!"  Then I was charging forward in a blur.  Finlay had barely enough time to blink before I hit him at nearly full speed in the three or four steps I took between us.  The impact drove his wind out in a rush and only by virtue of being filled to nearly overflowing with stolen goa did he survive. And that was all he could do as I churned forward, my speed and raw strength far in excess of what he could handle.  The first thing in our path was a stony pillar, a good two metres thick, that marked the presence of the earth shrine underfoot.  We went through it without pause, the stone shattering like glass as I powered my way forward, Finlay held in front of me like a bumper.  He was unconscious on impact, broken and bleeding by the time we finished going through a heart beat later. Still, I wasn't about to let up.  This clown went too far and now he was going to pay the price.  I went through two more stone pillars in quick succession before whirling about and racing back to where my comrades stood, shocked into silence and immobility by first the brutality of Finlay's unprovoked attack, then by my equally brutal retaliation.  Skidding to a halt in front of them, my speed and increased density digging my feet into solid rock like it was sand, I dropped Finlay's broken and bleeding body on the ground.  Then, before any of them could react, I dropped a knee into the center of Finlay's chest, crushing his body and driving him nearly half a foot into the ground. Returning to my feet in the same continuing motion, I spat on the vampire's unmoving body. "Demonstration over."  I grated. With a shift of motion, Tovin was between me and Finlay's broken body. "Perhaps not the wisest course of action, Max."  The psyren quietly pointed out as she moved close to me.  I could feel her gaze reaching out of her all encompassing hood to rest thoughtfully on me even as she formed a barrier between Finlay and us to prevent any further action.  Not that it could stop me, . . . "But so frickin' cool!"  Twitch crowed, dancing around the hovering psyren to flash me a brilliant smile.  She then threw a quick look over at the psyren. "And don't give me any flack, Tovin; you know that bastard not only was asking for it, but has deserved the beating of his second life for a very, very long time." "I just don't know if I can summon enough goa to put him back together again."  Boost said with a sigh as he knelt beside Finlay's broken body.  He extended a glowing hand over the vampire. "There's barely a spark left in there to draw on."  He threw a look over at me.  "Looks like your little ride was too much for him to handle, even with all that extra goa he stole from you." "Max."  Tovin gently urged and I grimaced. "I know, I know."  I growled.  "Risen shouldn't be killing Risen when there are velkin still standing on our world."  I stepped past her and Twitch as the psyren dropped the psychokinetic barrier to hold out my hand to Boost. "I got extra, if you need some." Nodding, Boost reached up and took my hand.  And he immediately gasped as he was filled with enough goa that he instantly glowed. "Damn."  He said, his voice hoarse with his effort to keep it contained.  "How do you keep that all in?"  He turned and with both hands extended over Finlay, began to generate a healing field. I shrugged, not even feeling the loss of the goa I had given him. "I just do."  I said and Twitch giggled. "We got ourselves a juggernaut."  She said with a grin, laughing out loud as she slapped me on the shoulder.  "A bloody, frickin' juggernaut!  The aliens, . . no, the velkin won't know what hit them!"  She looked up into my face, her smile both pleased and satisfied. "And I say, we should get to the hittin'!"  Her expression became somewhat expectant. "So, what's the plan?"

 

Meeting the Team

"Find the enemy, attack them and kill them all."  Finlay husked, sitting up out of the hole I had used his body to make.  He twisted his head slightly to spit dark blood before wiping his mouth with the back of his hand. "That's the plan." I looked over at him, Finlay still surrounded by Boost's healing field, my eyebrow raised in curiosity.  Now that Boost had brought him back from the edge of oblivion, would the vampire's attitude be any different?  With his pale skin still looking battered and bruised, he certainly looked the part of a man who had a change of mind forcibly put upon him.  Then I shrugged.  Regardless of what his attitude now was, Finlay was right.  The plan was attack the enemy and kill them all.  'Then I can join you in paradise, my sweet, sweet Abby.'  I thought. "That's the plan."  I agreed, looking back at first Twitch then Tovin.  "And we should be about it as quickly as possible." "Then we'll need to bring in the rest of the team."  Tovin quietly noted.  "They've been anxiously awaiting your return from seeing the oracle." The first to arrive was an African-American woman, or whatever they called her race 300 years into the future.  Her hair pulled into a tight braid, her features classically flawless, she moved with the grace and confidence of a big cat.  With eyes big in her beautiful face, it didn't take her long to spot me after Tovin's teleportation. "Max!"  She said with a toothy smile, quickly moving forward to take one of my hands.  "The big gun finally arrives!  I'm Kat." "A pleasure, Kat."  I replied with a smile of my own.  "And while I'm not sure I deserve being called a big gun, I'll do my best against the velkin." "All we can ask for."  Kat instantly responded with, her smile measurably brightening as she took me in with those big eyes.  Then we were both turning to the sound of air being displaced in time to see a hatchet faced fellow appear, a shock of black hair adorning his pale features along with being almost vampire thin.  Yet there was no mistaking the flush of life in his cheeks.  He was Transcended, alright. "Hello, hello."  He rasped with a distinctive German accent, spying me almost as soon as he was solid.  He walked towards where I was standing with Kat. "Max Niekro, I presume."  A bony hand was extended when he got close, which I took.  "I am Felix Schrieber, but most call me Jolt." I smiled as I returned his firm handshake. "A pleasure, Felix.  I look forward to working with both you and Kat." Another hissing of displaced air and the final team member appeared, a handsome, muscular fellow with the epilanthic folds, tan skin and black hair of an asiatic. "Late, as always."  He chortled with a toothy grin, his English flawless.   "My apologies, all.  It wasn't my intent to be the final member of our team to meet the newest member."  His Transcended eyes fell onto me.  "Max, I'm Charge.  Welcome to the team."  Then he too was striding forward to shake my hand. "Now that you're all here, we need to figure out just what the hell to do with you."  Finlay bluntly pointed out, his face still bruised and mottled.  He had waited for the rest of the team to arrive before stepping away from Boost to walk to a spot where we could all see him. - Attitude adjustment. -  Was Tovin's telepathic explanation at Kat, Felix and Charge's looks of curiosity at seeing the liaison so battered. "The Earth Mother has put five Transcended teams on the North American continent, but as yet none of you have made significant inroads on enemy emplacements or logistics.  She has asked that you become much more decisive in your target selection, and more devastating in your results."

"Making random strikes at relatively insignificant targets makes it difficult to be devastating, Finlay."  Felix pointed out with a frown. "Yeah."  Twitch quickly added.  "Give us something more important to hit and we'll make a heavier impact." Finlay's expression tightened and his mouth opened to deliver what was most likely going to be a scathing retort.  But a quick glance in my direction to find me standing with my arms folded over my chest and a grim expression on my face, changed his mind.  He kept his voice moderate and relatively professional instead. "I don't need to remind you that up to this point, it was the Earth Mother herself giving you the targets.  The failure to make an impact was yours, when you didn't execute a significant enough plan to use those primary targets to build to something more significant.  However, in the hopes of kick starting our efforts here, I will go once again to the Seer and ask her to request additional targets from the Earth Mother."  A quick glance at each of us, then the vampire was striding in the direction he had initially appeared in the small, rocky valley we found ourselves in. That left the team to stare after him, not a few puzzled and confused looks on their faces as they tried to get used to a change from what they were accustomed to in his attitude and style.  All of them, except for me.  Something had occurred to me while he was talking about the team's lack of impact that would certainly explain why the velkin had yet to experience a significant loss in battle.  It was Kat that noticed the thoughtful expression on my face before I could voice my concern. "Uh oh, looks like the newbie has something on his mind."  She quipped, flashing me a brilliant smile to show she meant no offense. "More like an observation."  I said in response, my thoughts sorting out as I focused on what they were doing.  "How many wars has the Earth Mother fought, exactly?" "Including this one?  Just the one."  Boost said with a thoughtful frown of his own. "Yeah, but she's witnessed every war that's ever been fought since we were stupid enough to make that first weapon."  Charge just as quickly pointed out. "Observing a thing isn't the same as doing a thing."  Kat said, looking from Charge back at me.  "Is it, Max?" "Having done both, I'd have to say no, it isn't."  I said. "Were you a soldier in your previous life, Max?"  Felix asked, a look of curiosity reappearing on his angular features, following the logic in what we were saying. "Yeah, a couple tours in Iraq and Afghanistan with Army Rangers."  I admitted.  Did I want to tell them that those tours, and the things I did and saw there, helped destroy me?  And that I only survived because of Abby's love and patience?? "Now I know why you were attached to our team."  Boost said with a grin.  "You actually know how to fight."  His grin faltered slightly.  "Although I don't know what Army Rangers are, or these places you're mentioning, . . Irack?." I looked at him for a moment, the debate still raging in my mind.  Then I let out a sigh.  Maybe the summoner was right.  Maybe this was indeed the reason I was awakened and attached to this team: to teach them how to fight a guerrilla war.  Because that's what they needed here, against the superior numbers and tech the velkin possessed.  Regardless, if teaching them to fight would help win this war all the sooner, then I was all for it. A quick glance at the rest of the team yielded expressions of anticipation and expectation as they steadfastly gazed at me. "They were one of several scouting and special operations divisions of the American military."  I explained.  "I served in the army, which had two well-known Special Operations groups, the Green Berets, also called Special Forces, and the Rangers.  I was a Ranger, specializing in scouting and operations behind enemy lines during wartime, usually inserted via parachute at platoon strength."

"So you often went up against much larger forces."  Felix noted, his thoughtful expression deepening as he considered the ramifications of what I was tell them. "Several times."  I replied.  "We also engaged specific targets, performed recon, suppression and support for larger units moving in behind us." "Sounds like the kind of war we're fighting."  Charge exclaimed with an excited grin.  "Think you could teach us how to do all those things?" A faint smile touched my lips. "Yeah, I think I could do that."  I said.  "Although it'll be just the techniques I learned.  Some of you have been fighting this war for a decade already.  I'm sure I'd be the one learning from you in those cases." "We will learn from each other."  Tovin said in her quiet voice.  "It's what teams do." I looked at the hovering psyren for a quick second then nodded in agreement. "Yes, they do."  I took a quick look around at the rest as they began to gather around me.  "Now, I don't want to step on any toes here, . . ." "Other than Finlay's."  Twitch quipped with a grin, drawing a chuckle from Boost, a smile from me and querulous looks from the rest. "Except our vampire friend." I agreed before returning to seriousness.  "Do we have a defined leader?" "We do now."  Kat said with a smile.  And when no-one objected, all of them looking with expectant smiles in my direction, I chuckled and slowly nodded. "Okay, I'll take the job, until you find somebody better."  I conceded.  "With that little piece of business out of the way, this is what I propose we now do: develop an actual battle plan.  And by that, examine all the factors we need to consider when choosing targets, identifying objectives and establishing measurable results." "Whoa."  Charge's grin broadened slightly.  "That sounds way more complicated than anything Finlay threw at us." I nodded. "Most likely because he was a civilian in his previous life."  I pointed out.  "And most likely lacked any idea of how structured and complex an actual military operation must be.  Nor would I expect the Earth Mother, more concerned about promoting Life, to have any concept of war."  My smile was grim. "We humans were the ones that invented that."  My smile disappeared.  "And now the Risen will need every bit of that conceptualization to push the velkin off Earth once and for all!" "Give us a plan, Max, and we'll do just that."  Boost promised, the other members of the team, including the usually silent Tovin, quickly agreeing.  I nodded. "I'll do my best, my friend."  I replied.  "And to do that, we will start at the beginning."  Another quick look around at the faces looking at me then I was switching to teaching mode, something I had done with fresh members to the Ranger platoon I had commanded. "The primary objective of any military action is to achieve a measurable goal.  Whether it be the elimination of a single target, destruction of an enemy installation or capture of territory, it has to be something defined that we can then go back and confirm with observable results whether we've succeeded or not."  I paused to look at my team and found them gazing raptly back at me.  I had their complete attention.  Good; I would need it to sell them on the idea of packaged warfare. "For our purposes, we're going to need to go through a quick series of steps to establish our own capabilities and how best we can achieve our objectives.  So, let's get a listing of our team members and their capabilities.  Tovin?  Would you do the honors?"

"It would be my pleasure, Max."  Tovin quietly said then switched to her telepathic broadband to list off the team.  She started with herself: - Tovin, psyren class psionic, with telepathic, psychokinetic, and teleportational capabilities.  Primary role: communication and support. - Max, juggernaut class heavy assault, with close support, direct strike and seige breaking capabilities.  Primary role: first strike, front line battle soldier. - Twitch, wraith class covert operative, with information and intelligence gathering capabilities.  Primary role: intel, recon and support. - Boost, summoner class medic, with healing and repair, as well as enhancement and reinforcement capabilities.  Primary role: battle support, and ranged attack. - Kat, animus class scout, with information and intelligence gathering, close and ranged support, and environmental interaction capabilities.  Primary role: battle support, light assault and ranged attack. - Jolt, tesla class tech specialist, with information and intelligence gathering, infiltration and subversion capabilities.  Primary role: battle support, and intel. - Charge, javelin class sniper, with ranged attack, intelligence and information gathering, and observational monitoring capabilities.  Primary role: tactical support, recon and ranged attack. - "Thank you, Tovin."  I said with a smile and a nod to the hovering psyren.  "That clarifies our capabilities immensely.  Now, with the amount of intelligence gathering available to us, we can properly recon and verify our targets.  Tovin?  Do you have a list of your recent targets?" A shimmer across my mind's eye and a scrolling list in white script on a pale green background appeared. "I've highlighted the ones we unsuccessfully attacked."  Tovin added as a number of the names began to glow. "Can you circle the ones you successfully attacked?"  I wanted to know. "I would, if we had any."  Was her reply and I frowned.  Well, that was unfortunate.  Then I mentally shrugged.  The good news was we could only go upward from here. "Okay, this gives us something to tackle."  I noted.  "Please drop out all unsuccessfully attacked targets." The list shimmered then reassembled with a third of the names missing. "Outstanding.  Now, drop those outside of our operational range." "With my ability to short range teleport, we don't have operational restrictions within the continental boundaries."  Tovin was quick to point out. "Okay.  Do the Risen have any bases nearby that we could co-opt as an operational headquarters?  As central as it is, the Earth Shrine should be designated as a non-combat zone to keep the Seer out of harm's way.  Anybody object?  No?  Good.  Tovin?" The list shimmered, then reduced in size as it dropped to the lower right hand corner of my vision.  In its place a topographical map, similar to the one she used to guide me out of the culling camp, appeared with several points marked by glowing dots.  One was a glowing star instead of a dot. - The star marks our current location at the Earth Shrine. -  Tovin's quiet telepathic voice spoke into my mind.  - The glowing dots are those Risen bases that are within a single teleportational jump, or approximately 100 kilometres. - "Okay, identify those bases that are two jumps away, to put at least 200 kilometres between the Shrine and them." The dots closest to the glowing star disappeared and a smaller handful to the north and west became visible. "Can you scroll out to give us locations of interest within 5000 kilometres?" The map shimmered and when it solidified I was looking at an image of the western half of North America, the Rockies marching down the left hand side. "Excellent.  Overlay that list of Risen bases, along with nearest targets, please." The glowing dots returned, this time appearing to cluster in the east as a number of red flashing dots appeared just east of the Rockies and out on the coast. "I don't think they like the mountains."  Boost commented.  "Every base on that list is either directly on the coast, or on the plain." "Most likely because the sanctuaries would be too difficult to reach in the mountains."  Felix said.  "No point in allowing their creation only to find you can't reach them for culling." I let my eyes scan over the projected map, quickly counting and assessing.  While we wouldn't be restricted as to where we could go, we needed an immediate fall back point where we could regroup and assess the situation if it furballed. "Tovin, please highlight the Risen base closest to any of our identified targets."  And one of the glowing dots in the central part of the map began to glow brighter than the others.  A quick calculation of distances showed it was within three jumps of no less than four velkin installations. I nodded with satisfaction. "And there's our base of operations."  I indicated with a nod.  "And I suggest we move to that location to continue our planning.  Any objections?  No?  Okay, Tovin, if you would do the honors, please?" It took a handful of jumps before we reached the Risen camp.  And I was immediately underwhelmed at what I found when I got there.  As the ground solidified under my feet, I quickly glanced around and found a handful of dirty tents, some pale skinned vampires and leathery skinned liches and that was about it. "Lovely."  Twitch stepped beside me, her hood once more pulled over her tousled hair to throw her pretty face back into shadow. "A fixer upper, that's for sure."  Boost rasped as he joined us. A slight smile made its way onto my lips. "It's a place to start."  I quietly said.

 

Tactical

I speared the nearest vampire with a hard look. "You."  I said firmly, pointing at him so there wasn't any question as to who I was talking to.  "Who's in charge here?" The vampire returned my hard look with one of his own. "Who's in charge?"  He repeated with a sneer.  "Well, wanna-be, it's commander 'none of your frickin' business'!" The ground beneath my booted feet grumbled as my absolute density abruptly climbed, anger surging through me.  Man, I was really starting to hate vampires. "Ooh, so not the right answer."  Twitch said, a half smile dancing over her full lips.  I got the impression she didn't particularly like vampires either. "No, it wasn't."  I grated, feeling my body go to juggernaut status almost without me thinking about it. Only Tovin's light touch on my arm stopped me from abruptly charging forward. "Risen do not attack other Risen."  She gently reminded me when I looked over at her hooded face. "Especially over something as minor as a lack of respect."  Kat added, slipping up from where she had been standing behind Twitch and I.  She speared me with a significant look before glancing over at Tovin then back at me. "Let me handle this, big man.  I'll get us some answers without you needing to smash the whole camp into the ground!"  Then she was moving forward, her feline grace and abruptly sensuous walk quickly making her the centre of attention.  The vampires and the liches may be undead but they still remembered what it was like to be living men, with wants and desires.  Seeing her well tuned curves stirred those memories and captured their attention without effort. I watched with a frown the vampire who had given me his rather terse answer as he in turn watched Kat approach.  That vigilence became even more determined when she was close enough to begin talking to him in a low voice, her expression playful and her light touches on his arm seductive. "If he bites her, I'm dropping this entire place into a hole."  I growled, my eyes narrowed as I continued watching Kat work. "No worries, boss man."  Charge stepped up beside me.  In his hands and raised to the ready was a strange contraption that resembled a crossbow more than anything else, formed from pure goa.  He took aim at the vampire. "Save your juice.  This suckhead so much as looks at her wrong, he's getting an extra blow hole in the middle of his forehead." "If I don't beat you to it."  Twitch rasped, a goa-forged throwing knife abruptly in her hand, her expression, or what I could see of it in the shadow of her hood, abruptly grim. "Risen do not attack other Risen!"  Tovin hovered closer and I could feel a psychokinetic field begin to weave into place between us and the group Kat was talking to. "Tell that to them."  Twitch hissed, gesturing at the vampires and liches, now beginning to cluster around the smooth talking Kat.  "It was Finlay, after all, that attacked Max first.  A frickin' vampire, . . . they've got zero cool going on when they pull shit like that!" "I do not condone Finlay's actions."  Tovin quickly replied.  "However, we must remember who we are and who the true enemy is.  If we can't do that then we're no better than the mindless shamblers left with just enough goa to move, sniffing after any scent of life force they can find." "Tovin's right."  I flatly pointed out, letting go of the goa I had been gathering to go into juggernaut mode.  And instantly I felt my body lighten.

"Let's keep focused here.  Let Kat work.  If she can get us our answers without smashing in some heads, then better for us." Charge grimaced then abruptly let his goa-forged weapon drop and dissipate in a swirl of green and blue light.  At the same time, Twitch looked over at me for a long moment before she too let her weapon disappear. Just in time: with a parting wave at the knot of vampires and liches that nearly had her hemmed in, Kat slipped through their midst and returned, her eyes not leaving me once she stepped out of seductress mode. "What do you have, Kat?"  I asked when she was close enough to talk with, without being overheard by the other Risen. "Nothing good, boss."  She said, stepping close enough that I could feel her warmth through my clothing.  At the same time the others also clustered close, Twitch pressing herself against my other side. "This isn't a military installation.  It's a fallback point for a company of Risen that tried attacking a culling convoy a few days ago.  This handful here is all that's left." "Damn."  Charge hissed, looking over at other Risen.  There was maybe twenty of them, all together.  Twenty out of two hundred, if company strength was the same now as it was back when I was in the military. "They got hammered." "They probably employed an ambush swarm attack."  Felix noted, his ever-present look of thoughtful consideration deepening as he obviously pondered how the company may have engaged the enemy. "It utilizes the vampires' increase in strength and speed during and after feeding.  But it also makes them vulnerable to barrage from the enemy's weaponry in the space before engaging.  They were probably cut down as they broke from cover and charged." "That must've pissed them off."  Boost noted, throwing a quick look over at the clustered survivors, who now watched us warily. "Which we might be able to work to our advantage."  I said, wearing a thoughtful expression of my own.  "Did they agree to let us utilize this location as our own base camp, Kat?" "They did, boss.  I might not be a succubus, but I know how to work a fella, dead or otherwise.  We've been given full access to whatever they have left." "Nice work."  I said with a nod and she flashed me a brilliant smile in reply.  "Now, we need to gather whatever supplies we can winnow from this lot, recon those bases within jump range and see how best we can hurt them." "How do we hurt them, Max?"  Boost wanted to know and the others murmured in agreement. "That depends, Boost."  Was my reply.  "We need to know what these bases do.  If they are simple cull bases then we disrupt their meal ticket by intercepting their culling convoys, like this Risen company attempted to do.  If they're resource gathering, to repair equipment planet side or in orbit, then we destroy or cripple those operations.  If they are communication hubs, then we disrupt their comm or feed them incorrect information." I let my eyes take in my team, each one of them gazing at me expectantly once more.  Without knowing me beyond an hour, they were already willing to put their lives in my hands.  I fought off a grimace as the pressure of responsibility descended onto me like a physical presence.  Then, as old habits took over, I accepted the pressure and carried on. "Twitch, Kat and Tovin, I need you three to recon the nearest base and get us some damn intel.  The sooner we know what we need to do to hurt these bastards, the better." "Roger that."  Twitch said with a grin, "You got it, big man."  Kat said almost at the same time. "While they're running their recon, Boost, Charge, Jolt, you're with me.  Time to get us a damn base put together!"

From all appearances, the Risen had taken advantage of the wholesale slaughter of Earth's military forces to help themselves to whatever equipment and supplies were left over.  While being empowered and fuelled by goa meant eating was pointless, the various abandoned bases still held vast quantities of weaponry, vehicles, clothing, electronics and other assorted equipment.  And since the survivors were too busy worrying about being culled as they cowered in their sanctuaries to raid the bases for supplies, it just made sense that the Risen would. I nodded in satisfaction at the pile of equipment and gear the four of us managed to gather in less than a half hour.  Tents, changes of clothing, satcom gear, various electronic packages, . . the list was as long as my memory of what a tactical squad needed deep behind enemy lines.  This company had obviously made a run to one of those abandoned bases recently to gear up for what they assumed would be a long campaign against the culling convoys. Dusting his hands off as he came to a halt beside, Charge looked at the pile of gear we had accumulated. "'Kay, now that we've got this stuff, what do we do with it?"  He asked, looking over at me.  I grinned. "We pick a spot and set it all up.  Staring with that command tent there."  And I walked forward to grab hold of the massive roll of weather proof fabric.  "Give me a hand with this, will you, Charge?" "You got it, boss."  And the muscular Transcended joined me in wrestling the roll away from the rest of the pile. Tactical battalions back during my tenure as a living man and a soldier, were relatively efficient entities.  Dedicated companies, each with a specific task within the overall operational mission assigned to the battalion, were clustered in such a fashion that they were both accessible and had access to whatever supplies and equipment they needed.  While we were barely at squad strength, it was my intention to run as a tactical battalion would, dropped in to the combat theatre and expected to carry on operations for extended periods of time without reinforcement or resupply. So I organized our camp accordingly, directing Charge, Boost and Jolt in setting up first the command tent, then our communications and survellience electronics, and data stores in the way I had been taught as a Ranger. Jolt sat down on a camp chair in front of a touch screen monitor that looked like a giant slab of clear plastic, and began powering things up.  I stood nearby, watching with interest.  While the equipment was far in advance of what I had been working with over 350 years ago, its basic operation was the same.  Thank goodness for stored power systems that basically lasted forever, or using any of this equipment would've been pointless. The screen flickered then came alive in a wash of color. "Ah!"  Jolt smiled.  "Sehr gut!"  Then his bony fingers were dancing over the screen, calling up system status displays, establishing connections to the data stores we had set up in the command tent and activating the other systems we had set up.  A heart beat later data was scrolling across the screen in heavy bands, along with several smaller displays within the display, showing an orbital schematic with glowing dots as well as a flat planet map with more glowing dots. "What do you have there, Felix?"  I asked, leaning in to get a better look at the screen. "It would appear, Max, that the aliens were so busy killing our soldiers, they didn't bother taking down any of our satellites."  A tap highlighted the slaved display with the orbital schematic.  "We've got civilian and military networks still active, with some satellites at the very edge of their life spans, and others fully operational."  He tapped a hot button and the slaved display swelled to take up two thirds of the screen.

"The system we're looking at here is fairly cutting edge, in terms of what the military was using in North America at the time of the alien attack.  And so it's automatically identifying which is which, which of those are operational, and which of those it has access to." Another tap and more data flooded across it before the map with the orbital schematic fell away to be replaced with the flat earth map. "Thankfully, whatever protocols the military launched during the attack to empower its systems are still active and this remote was able to access the entire network, both military and civilian.  A quick upload from that network and we have a clearer picture of what is available on the ground."  A tap highlighted a small menu, from which he made a couple of selections and the flat earth began to glow with dots appearing all over the continental masses.  Including several in the area where we had set up our camp. "The flashing dots represent bases that are still broadcasting with their locator beacons, which means active electronics.  The black ones are bases that aren't returning friend/foe confirmation requests and are most likely offline." I slowly nodded as I stared at the map.  It appeared that we had sources of additional equipment, if we needed it, with those bases nearby.  That need would depend on what Twitch, Kat and Tovin came back with in terms of intel.  I frowned.  No use considering too many possibilities; I'd just make the call after analyzing the intel. "You seem pretty handy with these computer systems, Jolt."  Charge noted as he came to a halt beside me.  He must've stepped into the command tent while we were powering up the system. "Are you sure you weren't military in your previous life?" I looked over at the javelin while he was talking before returning my attention to the display Felix was sitting in front of just in time to catch his answer. "Not military.  But I was a civilian contractor on a number of these systems, working as an integration consultant for a firm in central Europe.  Thankfully I died 10 years before the invasion and so didn't have to live through it.  But the Earth Mother must've seen that I would be useful and summoned me back maybe seven or eight years back." "Good thing for us that she did."  I said with a smile, clapping a hand on the bony man's shoulder.  "My experience was in setting these things up then going out to where the operators said the bad guys were.  I didn't actually run them myself."  A thought then occurred to me as I looked over at the data store, the power batteries, the communications array and the other equipment we had stuffed into the command tent. "Now Felix, since you're as close to an expert on this equipment that we got, maybe you can tell us if all this stuff is shielded against detection." Felix didn't answer right away, turning from the display to another pedestal of plastic and metal to activate it.  A swirl of color appeared above the pedestal then a topographical hologram two metres by two metres solidified. "There."  The thin Transcended said with not a little satisfaction.  "Now we have a tactical display.  To answer your question, . . ."  He glanced up at the tent's roof.  "There are elements in the fabric that provide some shielding and stealth capacity."  His eyes dropped to survey the equipment stack. "Additionally all military electronics are hardened against EMF attack and counter measures and heavily shielded against detection."  He turned his eyes from the equipment stack to me.  "But that was protection from our level of tech.  I seriously doubt our equipment could hide from the aliens' tech." "I don't think they're worried about our tech's capabilities either."  Charge pointed out.  "Like Jolt said, they left all our satellites in orbit and made little effort to destroy our stockpiled equipment and weapons on the ground.  They don't fear our technology at all.  With good reason: their tech is generations ahead of ours."  He looked over at me.  "We don't need to worry about hiding because our gear is so far beneath theirs, they just don't care.  They won't be monitoring for any of our stuff being active." "Maybe not."  I conceded.  "But that'll change as soon as we become a threat.  Which, if I have my way, will be shortly."  I turned back to Felix.  "So, I need you to do two things for me, Felix." "Whatever I can do to help, Max."  The thin Transcended replied with a smile of his own.  I grinned. "Excellent.  First, I need you to see if we can use what we have on site to penetrate their communication grid.  If we can hack their system and pull data straight out of their data stores, then we might get a leg up on them." Felix's smile disappeared, replaced by his omnipresent look of thoughtful consideration. "That, I can do.  And the second thing?" "Develop me a plan to shield our systems better for when the velkin start taking notice.  If we can stealth ahead of their efforts to locate us, we might stay hidden long enough to accomplish additional objectives.  Maybe your hack of their system will steal us some tech that we can then use to fortify our own systems." Felix nodded, his smile returning. "I'll begin immediately."  He said.  "If I can develop anything quickly, or come across anything vital, I'll let you know." "Perfect."  I looked out through the tent's partial walls, currently configured to allow for air flow. "Now we just need to know the results of our recon!"

 

Chapter 3: Recon

I was going over a supplies list when the soft pop of displaced air nearby announced the return of our three scouts.  Folding the list and stuffing it into a pocket for later perusal, I turned towards the sound and watched Tovin glide towards me, followed closely by Twitch and Kat.  All three had their attention firmly focused on me. "Welcome back."  I said with a smile.  "Good to see everybody returning in one piece."  I then turned and gestured to the neat cluster of tents that had sprouted up around the command tent. "Welcome to Fort Retribution." "Fort Retribution."  Twitch repeated, stepping past me a pace to look things over with an approving eye.  "I like it." Kat moved around to the other side, brushing against me as she did, a move that lifted my eyebrow in surprise, before coming to a halt close enough for me to again feel the warmth she was radiating. "You boys have been busy."  She said before looking over her shoulder at me, her eyes big. "Not as busy as you three, I hope."  I replied, choosing to overlook the heat in her gaze.  "C'mon; let's get to the command tent and you can tell us what you found!" Felix looked up from his displays as we stepped into the command tent and smiled in greeting. "Kat, Twitch, Tovin; welcome back." "Thanks, Jolt."  Twitch replied before she took another look around at the equipment filled space, Kat doing the same with a low whistle of impressed astonishment.  Only Tovin was her silent, serene self, hovering quietly beside me where I had paused to let my scouts be suitably impressed by our new command space. "You and the others have indeed been busy, as Kat noted."  She softly said after a slight pause, her words meant for my ears alone.  "You have intention here, I can sense it." "Only to do what I was summoned back to do, Tovin."  I replied in an equally quiet voice, looking over at the psyren.  "I want to be here only as long as I absolutely have to be." The hooded psionic returned my look for a long, contemplative moment. "You will join her again, Max."  She reassured me with more feeling than I had heard from her before.  "Just don't let your desire to do so become an obsession.  Now that you've assumed the reins of leadership, we need you here and focused on the task at hand. " "I know, I know."  I sighed, looking back at my three colleagues just as Felix began running through a demonstration of the holographic display, much to Twitch and Kat's delight.  "The Risen Counteroffensive has my full and undivided attention.  You'll just have to forgive me if I have a different goal in mind than merely pushing the velkin from our world." "As long as you don't let that goal put you unnecessarily in harm's way, you'll have no objections from me, Max."  Tovin said in reply. A smile quirked the corners of my mouth for a moment as I realized she knew I had thought about it in passing.  Damn telepaths, . . . "You have my word, Tovin."  I looked back over at her.  "No stepping in the way of a bullet." "I'll hold you to that."  The psyren retorted, again with more energy than I thought she would have. After Felix's demonstration and a tour around the command tent, I gathered the whole team around the holographic display. "So, Twitch, Kat, what did you two find for us?"  I asked, a notepad in one hand, a pen in the other.

"Well, big man, you were right."  Twitch said, reaching into the display to tap the dots representing the three nearest velkin camps.  Using an array of sensors to pick up gestures, the hologram was completely interactive and so, when she made like she was tapping the dots, the sensors picked up the gesture, compared it to a list of recorded ones in the data store and translated the action into display parameters.  And that translated into the dots immediately lighting up. "We've got two culling camps, and one transport hub.  Two or three hundred kilometres between each, with ground paths connecting all three."  She paused to look over at Kat, who took up the reporting thread. "The first camp is a cull camp, holding maybe a hundred humans when we did our recon."  The animus scout indicated.  She reached into the display, picked the southern most camp then used her two fingers on either side of the dot to expand the view of the camp by pulling her fingers apart.  With a shifting of color and shape, the culling camp came into full view, the hologram just large enough to give them a bird's eye view of the place. Kat reached back into the image and used her finger to circle a section in the southwest part of the camp, the display highlighting the area. "The humans were being kept here."  More gestures to highlight other sections of the display, then: "Entry point was here, guard quarters here, and processing here, along with the transports that would then carry the fresh bodies up to the ships in orbit." I nodded, furiously scribbling notes on the pad.  The velkin were making it easy: hit the quarters, processing and the transports and the camp would be taken offline. "Any sign of where our guys tried to hit that convoy?" Both Kat and Twitch shook their heads. "Not anywhere close to the camp, anyway."  The diminutive wraith added.  "I imagine we could run back along that ground path and we'd find the ambush point." "Later, perhaps.  Right now, let's focus on these camps.  So, that is cull camp one.  What's going on with the other two?" A collapsing gesture with her fingers and Kat made the first camp disappear before a swipe across the display made it travel to the north where she again expanded the view. "This is our transport hub."  Circles quickly highlighted several launch pads and storage facilities for both ground and air transports.  "Judging from the size, I'd say they handle a good deal of the non-victuals traffic for the western portion of the continent here.  We spotted raw materials carriers, equipment transports and various military craft."  She made several larger buildings glow with a wave. "And they have a significant hunter presence garrisoning the hub.  If we hit the cull camps on either side, we can just about guarantee they'll scramble the hunters from here." I nodded again, more furious scribbling making its way onto my notepad.  We would need to hit one of those cull camps first, to test how quickly the velkin reacted.  Then use that as a measurement of how they would respond to subsequent attacks. "Outstanding."  I muttered almost under my breath as my thoughts began to churn, formulating battle plans and discarding them just as quickly.  I paused briefly to look over at Felix. "Felix, can you pull up any data from the satellite network on how the velkin fleet is situated in orbit?  If they're positioned geosynchronously over that transport hub, we might be able to leverage that into a larger assault." Kat's sculpted eyebrow climbed up her brow as she looked at me with smoky eyes.  Or, as smoky as they could get, being Transcended purple and black.

"My, you are thinking big, aren't you, Max." Brushing off the flutter in my belly that look gave me, and the almost instinctual reach for a wedding ring I no longer wore to ward off unwanted advances, I nodded, keeping as professional as I could.  Is Kat really going there?  Damn it, we're zombies, for goodness' sake!  How does she think physical intimacy is even possible?  'Where are you when I need you, Abby??'  I cried into my mind.  Then I was grimly pushing all of those thoughts aside and carrying on. "We're a small outfit.  Yet we have big goals.  So, to make what we have stretch as far as possible, we're going to have to plan big.  Take advantage of what the enemy gives us.  Catch them by surprise whenever we can.  They already know the Risen exist, but so far we haven't hurt them enough for them to pay attention to us.  We're going to change that, shortly." "I've got some data for you, Max."  Felix reported when I paused there, one of the four monitors he now had running at his station awash with data and orbital schematics.  A bony finger quickly identified no less than fifty city-sized objects in a loose cloud around the planet. "It would appear the bulk of their primary fleet is still in orbit.  A couple hang over that transport hub the ladies found, but for the most part, they're scattered all over the place." "What the hell are they waiting for?"  Charge growled with a frown.  "The sanctuaries seriously don't produce enough humans to keep all those aliens fed.  There can't be more than a couple million humans left on the entire planet.  And an adult alien will eat two or three adult humans a day." "Unless, now that the invasion and harvesting is done, the crews went into some sort of hibernation while they wait for their leaders to figure out what's next."  Jolt suggested, looking over at the olive skinned javelin.  Who immediately snorted at the suggestion. "It's taking them 50 years to figure that out?"  Charge shook his head.  "They crushed us in a matter of hours.  There's nothing left here.  You'd think they would've moved on by now." "In my era, astronomers felt we were on the edge of the galaxy."  I noted, finishing my notes to look at Felix's display.  "And as such in a relatively sparsely populated area of space.  If the velkin indeed hunt only sapient species, they could be having trouble finding another one way out here to move on to." "What do you think got us noticed in the first place?"  Boost asked. "The vampire that helped pull me out of the ground said humans were just starting to explore nearby space with rudimentary faster than light technology.  It's possible that is what caught the velkin's attention.  We had advanced far enough to go out into space, confirming our sapiency, and therefore making us a worthy target."  I looked at the others.  "If only they had left us alone another couple hundred years, we might've been able to fight them off." "But they didn't."  Charge flatly stated, his expression grim once more.  "And now all that is left is a handful of scared and rabbit-like survivors, resigned to their fate." "And us."  Twitch added. "And us."  I repeated, my expression hardening.  "They should've burned the planet when they had the chance.  Because now we're coming back to kick their asses right into oblivion!" Smiles appeared at that, pushing aside for a moment the darker, more grim expressions they had been wearing up to that point. "Where do we sign up to be on the list to deliver that ass kicking?"  A dry voice asked. As one we turned to face it.  And found ourselves looking at nearly a dozen liches, their mummified bodies burned and damaged by their failed attack on the culling convoy.  The one who had spoken, seeing that it had captured our attention, shuffled forward.

"I know you're Transcended and all, with all sorts of abilities given to you by the Earth Mother and so will best hurt the aliens."  It began before throwing a quick look at its comrades, which were shifting uneasily.  "So you really don't need our help.  But we were summoned back too, to fight the invaders.  If you're planning something, we want to help.  Not to mention, a little payback would be nice."  There was a chorus of dry, rattling agreement from the other liches at that. "No offense, but you guys are beat to shit!"  Charge bluntly pointed out.  "What exactly do you think you can do for us, that we can't do for ourselves?" I held up a quick hand before the lich, who's mouth had opened to reply, could speak. "Actually, I think you lot can help us."  I said, thoughts once again churning furiously.  Remembering what Tate had said to me in that carriage seemingly forever ago, made me also remember how he had taken down those four velkin singlehandedly, with strength and speed given him by stolen goa.  Could we give other Risen the same advantage by overfilling  them with goa?  I stepped towards the lich, who kept a wary eye on me as I looked it over before looking at its comrades. "Boost, you can fix these boys up, can't you?" "We're not all boys."  A voice lifted from somewhere in the knot of undead that crowded under the command tent's edge.  A grin touched my lips at hearing that.  Then I was once again sober. "Can you fix this lot up, Boost?" The summoner nodded as he stepped around Charge and approached the first lich, the one who was acting as an impromptu spokesman.  A glowing hand lifted and a long tear that bared bone along the side of the lich's face grew closed. "No problem, boss."  Boost looked back at me.  "None of these Risen are damaged all that bad, despite what Charge thinks." "Whatever, man."  Charge growled, folding muscular arms over his chest.  "Bones and skin, and nothing else.  Good for building a fire with, maybe." I frowned at that, looking over my shoulder at the javelin.  It would appear Finlay's prejudice against Transcended also seemed to go the other way.  Perhaps the vampire's derision wasn't an automatic response to our presence, but a learned one.  I needed to deal with this, and immediately.  I turned to face the frowning javelin. "We were all summoned for a purpose, Charge."  I firmly pointed out, keeping my eyes squarely focused on him.  "We're Risen, brought back to fight the enemy.  So you're going to take that bigoted opinion and you're going to stow it right now, mister.  Or you can find some other outfit to finish out the war with.  Because I'm not tolerating it in this one.  I didn't take it from Finlay, and I certainly won't take it from you!" Charge threw a hard look at me upon hearing that, his expression quickly becoming belligerent.  Before he could say anything, though, Twitch was putting a hand on his shoulder. "I'd be careful with what you're about to say, Charge, if I were you."  The wraith suggested, keeping her tone relatively light despite the warning in her words.  "You so don't want to mess with a juggernaut that shrugs off velkin energy blasts like they're drops of water." That made the javelin think, his expression abruptly wary. "Good point."  He quietly said after a few seconds' worth of consideration.  A look of conciliation appeared on his chiseled face.  "Sorry, boss; won't happen again."  Nothing like being intimidated into compliance. I jerked a nod, satisfied that the issue was dealt with.  For now; if the javelin showed further signs of prejudice later, however, I would be forced to do something a bit more drastic.  I had a feeling we would be relying on other Risen far more heavily than the Transcended had in the past, so we would need a working relationship with them if we had any chance of succeeding. With that dealt with, I turned back to where Boost was still standing beside the lich.  Time to test my idea with something that had crossed my mind when I saw the summoner putting Finlay back together a few hours ago. "Now Boost, you use goa fields to repair damaged Risen.  Can you use those same fields to supplement a regular Risen to a higher level?" Boost frowned. "I, . . I'm not sure I'm understanding what you're asking, Max."  He said after a slight hesitation. "No worries; I wasn't absolutely clear."  I reset, then: "Each type of Risen is determined by the amount of goa they were given by the Earth Mother, which was determined by the task she wanted them to perform, correct?" "That's how I understand it."  Boost said with a confirming nod. "Excellent.  Now, based on that statement, would it be logical to assume that if you increase a Risen's level of goa, you increase their capabilities?" "I, uh, . . I don't exactly know, to tell you the truth."  Boost admitted with a frown. "Most likely nobody does."  I said, a thoughtful expression of my own appearing.  "Because nobody's tried it."  I looked at the lich. "Would you mind horribly if we tried something on you, friend?" "As long as I'm not unmade, I don't mind."  The lich was quick to answer, looking from me, to Boost then back again.  "Will it hurt?" "A fair enough question."  I replied, then smiled.  "Since this is the first time trying this, I unfortunately don't have an answer for you.  However, I'm going to ask Boost to keep an eye on your vitals, as well as having my psyren Tovin monitor your overall essence."  I turned to look at the hovering psyren, only to find her already moving close. "My abilities are ready, Max."  She quietly announced.  I nodded, and looked over at Boost. "How about you, Boost?  Ready to give this a go?" The summoner blinked, looking uncertain. "I'm not sure.  You'll let me know what to do, right?" I quickly nodded. "Of course, my friend, of course.  And if you need more goa, I've got it for you." "Okay."  He squared his shoulders.  "Let's do this thing, then!"

 

Upgrade

Boost took a position beside the lich spokesman, and I took one on the other side. "Okay, let's just focus on something isolated first.  Can you keep your field on something specific?  Like a hand?"  I asked, looking across the lich at the summoner.  He quickly nodded. "That's generally how I do it."  He confirmed.  I looked at the lich. "Do you have a preference?  Right or left?" "Well, I was left handed when I was alive.  Now, I can use either.  So no preference."  The lich said with a bony shouldered shrug. "Right it is, then.  Boost, . . ." Nodding, the summoner took the lich's offered right hand with both of his.  A goa field immediately  formed around all three. "Okay, my senses are telling me his hand is already completely healed."  He reported, looking up and over at me. "Okay, but are they preventing you from pushing more goa into the tissue?"  I asked, returning his gaze with a curious one of my own Boost frowned, concentrating on the hand. "Without a frame of reference, I can't see where I can push in the additional goa."  He said after a pause.  Again he looked over at me. "I need something to base the new levels of goa on, a template of sorts.  When I was first summoned, all the templates I needed for the various Risen types were already loaded into my mind." "Use this, then."  I took a step around the lich and held out my right hand. Boost held out a glowing hand over mind.  And he immediately grimaced at what he sensed. "I  don't know if I have enough goa to fill him up to your levels, Max."  He said and I frowned in consternation. Before I could say anything else though, Twitch stepped forward with her right hand held out. "Use mine then, Boost."  She looked from Boost to me.  "I have nowhere near the levels Max has as a juggernaut, but I'll have more than a lich." At my confirming nod, Boost reached out with his glowing hand and passed it over Twitch's.  At the same time, he kept his other hand under the lich's.  A moment's concentration and then he was nodding. "Interesting."  He muttered, then a bit louder: "I think I've got a way to use the Transcended template now."  And the glow around the lich's hand abruptly multiplied to the levels I had seen when he was healing Twitch following our escape from the cull camp. "I can see two things for every injury."  He said almost casually as he continued to work over the hand.  "The actual damage itself, and the level of goa still lingering in the tissue.  While the physical parameters don't change from template to template, the level of goa does." The lich abruptly hissed as his hand went from dried and withered to almost normal, complete with veins, musculature and finger nails.  There was even a little hair on the back of it.  As Boost pulled his hand back, the lich lifted the hand close to its face to stare at it with the glowing light in its empty eye sockets. "That, . . is amazing."  It husked, naked astonishment in its withered voice. I felt a smile of satisfaction crease my lips.  It was gratifying to see one of my ideas actually work. "How does it feel?"  I asked, an eyebrow raised in curiosity. "Like I remember my hand feeling before I died."  The lich quickly answered.  "I mean, it feels, . . alive."

"Well, technically it's still dead."  Boost corrected.  "Just more alive than you're used to." Nodding in mute agreement to that even as the lich continued to stare at its rejuvenated hand, I looked over at Tovin. "Psychic stability with the extra goa on board, Tovin?" "Outside of an obvious spike in excitement, the lich is still reading normally."  The psyren quietly reported.  "No mental fractures or fissuring that I can detect with the extra goa."  Then the lich was gasping out loud as the hand shimmered and disappeared. "Ha!"  Twitch crowed triumphantly.  "It can cloak, just like a wraith!" "Fascinating."  Jolt said from where he and the rest of the team were looking on, eyes wide. "Indeed."  I agreed.  After a quick look over at Tovin to confirm the lich was still stable, I then looked at the lich.  "How did you do that?"  "I, . . I'm not sure, actually."  It admitted, looking somewhat disturbed, if I was interpreting what was left of its facial expressions properly. "I just knew she was a wraith, with the ability to disappear so I found myself wondering if I could, too."  It shook its head in confusion and bewilderment.  "And that's when my hand disappeared." Again I nodded, this time scribbling furiously on my notepad.  It appeared as if impressing a more powerful Risen's template on a lower Risen could give that Risen the greater abilities.  And the possibility of that opened more doors than I could count.  Not until I did a little more testing, though. I looked up, intending on asking Boost to try to impress the entire wraith template on our willing volunteer.  Just in time to watch its hand reappear as it withered back to its previous state, the lich sighing in disappointment.  That observation elicited another quick round of note scribbling.  Okay, so we can impress a higher template on a lower Risen, but only temporarily.  We needed to know how long, and whether or not the level of that Risen affects how long the temporary effect lasts. "An interesting sequence of events, I'd say."  I noted before looking over at Boost.  "How long do you figure that was, Boost?  Three? Maybe four minutes?" "At least."  The summoner said, a calculating expression on his face as he mentally reviewed his own observations. "Okay, let's try it again."  I indicated.  "This time, volunteer, do not use any abilities.  Using our abilities as Transcended drains us so I can imagine it does the same to your borrowed abilities." The lich nodded, almost eagerly extending its hand this time. We spent maybe six or seven hours experimenting with what Boost could do to upgrade the liches.  Impressing templates, testing usage limits, overall absorption levels; it was a full blown science project.  All the while Tovin stayed close, to make sure the extra influx of goa didn't drive the liches insane.  And in the end, we had some data that more than excited me with the possibilities. "So, a full template charge lasts about six hours."  Boost said a bit distractedly as he jotted his own notes on a pad.  He had been scribbling furiously for nearly a half hour now.  Dusk had fallen and he was now writing by the light of a pulse arc lantern, standard issue in the equipment pods we discovered. "That drops to four with steady ability use."  A couple more notations then he was looking over at me.  "I just wish we had other Risen here that we could test the impressing on.  It's nice to know we can put an upgraded template on a lich, but what about a vampire?  Or a succubus?  Or even a ghoul or shambler?" Wearing the wraith template, the lich we had done our original experiment on, Abbas, leaned forward from where he was sitting on a camp chair.  Instead of the rags that once hid his mummified body, he was wearing combat fatigues, like us.  The transformation beyond that was remarkable: the withered and dried body and face were gone, replaced by the swarthy skin tones and proud features of the Arabic people.  He leveled the purple and black eyes of a Transcended at us. "I could always grab a couple lads and find you some of those."  He suggested, his Transcended voice carrying just a hint of his native Arabic.  Abbas looked from me, to Boost, then back again.  I could see he was struggling to contain his excitement at his upgrade body, his eagerness to get into the action almost palpable. "Shouldn't be too hard to find shamblers.  There's handfuls that wander around the cull camps, drawn in by the humans' life force.  Ghouls and other higher Risen we'd probably have to put a call in for.  There should be four Risen companies working in this area." I nodded. "An excellent idea, Abbas."  I said.  "Select enough for a squad and we'll give you all wraith templates, to make moving around a bit easier.  Once you've collected a full dozen, return here." Abbas flashed a brilliant smile, made even more dazzling by his dark skin and the darkness around us. "I am on it, sir."  Then, giving Boost a quick comradely slap of thanks on the shoulder, he was up and out of the command tent. I watched him disappear into the darkness outside before looking back at Boost. "Tired, my friend?"  I asked and the summoner chuckled. "Normally, yes.  But with you, the Transcended goa battery on hand, I don't ever get the chance to be." "Good."  I grinned.  "Because, if this works, and Abbas successfully leads his squad on his mission and returns, we're going to have a lot of work to do!"

 

Risen: Assemble!

Besides no longer needing to eat, I discovered Risen no longer had the need to sleep, either.  As long as there was enough goa, we could just keep on going, relentless and unstopping, truly like the zombies in the movies.  And so I worked through the night to hammer out a battle plan, gathering alternating working partners from the rest of the team.  In turn, Boost, Charge, Jolt and Kat found themselves around the holo-display in the command tent, hammering out details of our proposed strike against the transport hub and two cull camps that Kat, Twitch and Tovin scouted out earlier. The Risen psionic silently moved into the tent as I was finishing up the details just as dawn's first light was brightening the horizon. "A wise decision to include the liches in your campaign."  She quietly noted, coming to a halt a pace away.  As always, I could feel her gaze on me even without looking in her direction. "Their excitement is filling my mind with their chatter." I glanced at her with a frown, my battle plan momentarily forgotten. "Ah damn, I didn't even think of that, Tovin.  I'm sorry!"  I replied with a frown.  She, however, quickly dismissed my concern. "Only an observation, Max."  She whispered with the hint of a laugh in her tone.  "I easily can block their scattered thoughts from my mind.  I just wanted you to know that you are getting absolute buy-in to your upgrade idea from the liches." "And the vampires?"  I was curious to know. "Not so much."  Tovin confessed and got the impression she was somehow glancing without moving in the direction of where the vampires had set up their small camp.  It was isolated from not only us, but the other Risen as well. "They don't even want to interact with the liches."  I felt her attention return to me.  "Not that they did to begin with." I shrugged. "It's their call, of course.  We can't force them to upgrade, Tovin." "No."  She agreed.  "It's just that there's something about these vampires.  Something different than others I've scanned, . . ." "Anything you can put a finger on?"  I asked, my eyebrow rising in curiosity at the psyren's hesitant words. "Not yet."  Again I got the feeling she was looking over at the vampire compound.  "But I will keep an eye on them, and I'll let you know if anything changes." "Excellent."  I turned back to my battle plan to give it one last scan.  "And now that I have you here, can I get your thoughts on this battle plan we've hammered out?" I nodded with satisfaction a couple hours later as the last of Abbas' team was upgraded to wraith status.  He then joined the squad that was now pulling items from an equipment pod I had Tovin move from Stores.  It didn't take them long before they were geared in covert ops equipment and clothing to the assembly area just out in front of the command tent. "Abbas, muster them here, please."  I said, the sortie recs in my hand on a couple of pieces of extruded thin sheet plastic. Nodding, the liches' de facto leader quickly gathered his squad of a half dozen wraith-enabled upgrades and they jogged over to where I was standing. "Morning."  I greeted them with a smile, getting a chorus of 'morning' back, along with not a few smiles of their own. "Now, before we get started, any of you former military?  No??  I did a stint as a regular forces soldier and a special operations soldier in my prior life and we called this little meeting here a mission brief.  In a brief, or briefing, the mission's target and objectives are outlined, as well as any rules of engagement we need to be concerned about."

"Rules of engagement, sir?"  One of the upgrades asked.  "Aren't we just running a sweep for shamblers?" "That would be our mission objective, yes.  But we're doing so in occupied territory, close to enemy placements."  I pointed out, fixing the upgraded lich with a brief look before letting my gaze scan over the others.  "So I want you all to know what you can and cannot do, should you encounter a velkin presence."  I glanced down at the brief in my hand. "Thankfully you are right, soldier, about this being a sweep.  Nothing fancy; just find 'em, round up a dozen or so and herd them back here.  Hopefully the velkin won't be paying attention and it'll go without a hitch.  That being said, I need to point out a couple things about the templates you're wearing.  This is a wraith template, a stealth scouting class Transcended.  They are extremely capable and equipped for activities behind enemy lines, but not for up front engagements." I paused for emphasis, sweeping my eyes over them once again. "So I'm keeping your rules of engagement equally simple:  You will cloak and withdraw if confronted by enemy units.  In no way will you engage, unless pinned down.  Then you'll need to call for reinforcements and we will extract you ASAP.  We are still figuring out how templates and upgrading work.  Until we fully comprehend those things,  we can't have you pushing your new abilities to breaking points."  Another quick look around the half circle of eager faces. "Any questions about your ROE?  Good.  The remainder of your briefing will be handled by Captain Abbas."  I handed a packet of maps and data to Abbas, who immediately opened it and drew out a marked map.  Leaving everything else inside, he then handed a corner of the map to a colleague before he began to speak. "Thank you, Commander Niekro."  He said with a nod to me.  He then returned his full attention to his squad and the map and began to explain their objective in clear and concise terms. I stood back and watched, my eyes watching not only Abbas, but the rest of his upgrade team.  The Upgrade Initiative, as I was privately calling it in my head, was dependent almost solely on whether this upgraded team of liches could operate as Transcended in fulfilling their mission. This mission's success depended much on how well they adapted to the templates and operated within the mission's parameters. It was a lot of pressure.  So far Abbas and his team seemed to be handling it, thanks in no small part to the paramilitary training and information that came along with the wraith template.  The liches had been instantly transformed into soldiers with the overlay.  I frowned at that thought.  Maybe that was the ticket to winning this war.  If I could somehow transform the Risen into a military force, instead of a loose-knit militia, with that force running missions and sorties covert ops style, we could put significant pressure on the velkin.  Maybe even enough to force them into some serious mistakes. It was something I had considered before, shortly after I was forced to stop thinking about my former life and concentrate on destroying the velkin after their attack on Tate's carriage.  My expression tightened.  Now I needed to concentrate on this new path, or face falling back into mourning my life as a human.  The risk was there; I could feel the sorrow and regret hovering in the back of my mind where I had pushed it. - Focus, Max. -  Tovin's voice whispered into my mind.  - You promised you would stay here, and help us fight. -  - Damn it, Tovin, are you spying on me? -  I quickly sent back. - Not deliberately, Max. - The psyren just as quickly replied.  - Your thoughts were leaking all over the place.  I would have to be telepathically numb to have missed them. -

- Ah. -  I grimaced.  - Sorry about that.  Maybe you and I should sit down one of these days and you can teach me how to shield my thoughts. -  She was right, though; I needed to stay focused. - An excellent idea, as all your ideas are, Max. -  Tovin replied.  - By the way, Abbas is nearly done with his briefing. - I returned my attention to the upgrade squad just in time to catch Abbas wrapping things up. ". . . with a return at three hours, forty five minutes to stay within minimum safe operating restrictions."  Abbas paused there and took a quick look himself at the team. "Everybody got that?  Three hours, forty five minutes.  Time pieces, . . ." And each team member lifted an all environment multi-function chronometer, strapped to their wrists. "Starting, . . now."  The team synchronized their time pieces.  "We are now on the clock."  Abbas looked over at me.  "Briefing concluded, sir.  We are ready to roll." "Very good."  I said as Tovin hove into view, psionic energies already gathering around her.  "Stand by for teleportal insertion.  Tovin?"  There was a slight shift and she was gone, jumping to a point between Fort Retribution and the objective, as it was two jumps away.  Then the psyren's voice sounded in our heads. - Jump in site is clear.  We are go for full insertion. -  She telepathically reported.  - Teleportal opening in five, four, three, two, one. -  And the team winked out of existence. - Insertion is complete.  Team is on the ground. -  She said a heart beat later. - Mission clock is reading T minus three hours, forty three minutes, twenty two seconds and counting. -  A heart beat later she reappeared, as serene as always.  I nodded in greeting then motioned towards the command tent. "Shall we go and see how our soldiers make out?"  I asked and, at Tovin's nod I led the way to the tent.  As I stepped in, I spotted Felix and Boost already manning the primary display cluster. The holographic display was lit up with a map of the area around the northern cull camp.  Seven flashing dots were making their way across the map towards the camp where a cluster of orange dots were slowly milling around along the perimeter. "Morning, fellas."  I greeted them.  "Our upgrades are now in play.  Are we tracking them, Felix?"  I came to a halt behind the thin tech specialist, giving a nod to Boost in acknowledgement before settling into place, arms folded. "We are, Max."  The tesla replied.  "We're getting a good signal from their multi-links, which I've patched directly into the system.  That data shows the upgrades were successfully inserted five kilometres from the northern camp's southern perimeter, as per the mission objectives."  Felix crisply reported, hands moving over the display's control panel.  The perimeter fence lit up to show the cull camp's southern edge.  Then the orange dots that were swirling nearby brightened for a moment. "We've identified via satellite several small shambler packs there, milling about in an attempt to breech the fence and approach the humans being held inside."  Felix paused to look over at me.  "We should easily manage to corral a dozen or so for our purposes within the operational time limit." I jerked a quick nod of acknowledgement then focused my eyes on the display to watch the mission unfold. The seven red dots representing Abbas and his team quickly moved in on the closest shambler pack, cutting several from the main group.  They would be using stunners, a type of crowd control device we found in the equipment packs, to move the shamblers in the direction we wanted them to go in.  It was like using electric prods on reluctant cattle.

Leaving two of the team to watch the first half dozen the squad had selected, the rest targeted a second shambler pack, again quickly cutting several from the main group.  These were brought back to where the first half dozen were waiting.  'Too easy.'  I silently mused.  And in the next heart beat: - Max, Abbas is signaling they have achieved their objective.  They are now requesting extraction. -  Tovin reported. "Are we reading any velkin activity, Felix?"  I asked.  He quickly shook his head. "We are clear." "Outstanding."  - Tovin, set up your restraint field around the holding pen and transfer the shamblers directly to there.  Once they are secured, bring Abbas and his team in. - - Acknowledged, Max. -  The Psyren replied.  - Field is up and holding. -   A few seconds' later: - Shamblers are now relocated. -  And a few seconds after that: - And Abbas and his team have been successfully extracted. - I smiled. "Good work, all.  Now, let's go see what our upgrades have dragged in!" The holding pen was a simple corral made up of electrified metal rods jammed into the ground in a circle, set at regular intervals.  Fed a current from a nearby power cell, they generated just enough of an electrical field to make anything with senses feel uncomfortable trying to cross it.  While it wouldn't bar a Transcended, or even a high level Risen from moving through, it would be enough to keep the shamblers inside, like bubbles of air corraling fish.  At least, in theory, . . Not wanting to take chances on the shamblers escaping and running amok, I had Tovin erect a telepathic barrier as well that would firmly tell what was left of their minds to stay put.  Between the two, they shouldn't move. So I nodded in satisfaction to find them huddled in the pen's center, shifting uneasily and muttering to themselves in the typical low, gutteral moans one would associate with mindless zombies.  'Right out of 'Dawn of the Dead'!'  I thought as I paused by the fence and gave the shamblers a good look over. They were tattered and abused, as you would expect mobile corpses to be.  Some were missing limbs, others had gaping holes in their bodies and they all moved awkwardly as if their parts no longer worked properly.  Through those holes I could catch the smallest goa spark imaginable, far smaller than even the reduced amount I had seen animating the two ghouls that helped me out of my casket.  Thankfully these creatures weren't newly summoned or I had the distinct impression I would be looking at the bloody and gory walking dead that truly epitomized the zombie movie genre. "I never did see the sense in summoning such things."  Boost confessed in a quiet voice as he came to stand beside me.  I could sense that he was filled with as much goa as possible in preparation for our testing on the shamblers. "I mean, they truly do nothing except stumble around, moaning and looking pitiful."  He looked over at me.  "They don't even have enough strength to move anything, or carry anything." "Can they effect anything as a pack?"  I wanted to know, frowning as I stared at the huddled shamblers. Boost shrugged. "Outside of all moving together, I don't think they possess enough awareness to work in groups."  His hand lifted, glowing with a goa healing field.  "Nope.  Not picking up anything beyond the basic instinct to move towards a source of life force.  Blank slates." "We'll see."  I rasped.  - How about your scan, Tovin?  Are they blanks, like Booster said? - - Each Risen has access to their essence from their prior existence, from shambler to Transcended. -  Tovin quietly replied.  - Shamblers, unfortunately aren't gifted with sufficient goa to unlock that access.  So they instinctively search out more in a vain attempt to gather enough.  So, to answer your question, I can feel their former existences close by but they are barred from accessing them.  Definitely not blank slates. - "Do you think they'd actually get their lives back, if we juiced them to upgrade status?"  Boost asked, looking over at me.  Tovin had sent her reply on her telepathic broadband so he had heard the psyren's report. I shrugged as I looked over at him. "Only one way to find out, my friend.  Power up your goa field."  I then looked over at the hovering psyren, who had joined us.  "Tovin, select one of our low level friends there and drop him in the designated area, a single person restraint field in place, please."  And I watched as one of the shamblers winked out of the pen and immediately winked into our testing space with a shimmer of an active suppression field around it. Once I was satisfied the shambler was bound, I directed a look at the waiting Boost and gave him a nod.  Returning it, the summoner extended his goa field into the shambler and we watched it immediately begin to twitch and shift as more goa than it had ever before. First to reappear was the arm it had lost, several shattered and ragged bones and a part of its skull.  Then musculature, skin, hair and face; all shimmered into existence and filled in to normal proportions. "Max?"  Boost said, fatigue in his voice as he glanced back at me.  "Some extra would be useful at this point." I stepped close and put a hand on the summoner's shoulder and immediately felt the goa flow out of me.  In response, his goa field visibly strengthened and the shambler's restoration was finished.  Smiling in anticipation, we both looked at the former shambler.  And found ourselves immediately looking away with embarrassed coughs as the Risen now standing in front of us was a well formed woman, the rags of her former existence doing nothing to hide that fact. "What, . . what happened?"  She hoarsely asked, her hands lifting to touch her face.  "I remember, I remember, . . oh my, . . I'm, I'm, . ."  Then Tovin was beside her, her telepathy soothing and rebalancing the woman before her mind completely collapsed. "Fear not, Jace."  She softly said.  "You are among friends, now."  A cloak similar to the one that all but hid the hovering psyren appeared and on psychokinetic waves, lowered itself around the upgraded shambler's shoulders. "What template did you use, Boost?"  I quietly asked as Tovin and the shambler she had named Jace, continued to converse in low tones inside the test area. "Javelin, like Charge."  Boost replied, finally hazarding a glance over at the two women. "And her bleed off rate?"  I used the term we coined for the loss of the extra goa that gave an upgrade access to their new template.  Once the loss dropped the Risen below the Transcended threshold, they returned to their previous form.  Thanks to Abbas and the other liches, we had recorded and averaged that rate over several test subjects, giving us an idea of how long we could keep a lower level Risen upgraded to Transcended status. A scan with his healing senses made Boost frown in confusion.  Catching the expression, I glanced over at him. "Boost?" He looked back at me. "I, . . I'm not reading one." "What??"  My eyes snapped back to the newly minted upgrade.  "Are you saying we just permenantly upgraded a shambler to Transcended status?  We just forged our own damn Transcended??" "Yeah."  He said in a whisper, his eyes wide in shock as he too stared at the woman Tovin was talking to.  Already she looked almost calm, nodding as Tovin explained what was going on. Damn.  My heart pounded as I considered the possibilities. This. Changes. Everything.

 

Testing the Waters

I let a slow breath ease out of my nostrils as I watched three more Transcended come out of the acclimation tent Tovin had set up, quietly talking amongst themselves.  I almost couldn't believe it was happening.  How had we managed to discover a way of creating new Transcended from the creatures the Earth Mother seemed to have forgotten?  Unless she was deliberately leaving a number of the Risen as shamblers so they could be used later!  I frowned at that.  From what I had learned from Tate, and my subsequent experience, it seemed counter-intuitive.  But was there a better explanation for why the shamblers even existed?  From Boost's initial reaction, it seemed even the Transcended didn't know. "It's amazing, sir."  Abbas said beside me, abruptly interrupting my train of thought.  He was unable to keep the awe out of his voice.  "Your technique is reconstituting one of every three shamblers we retrieve into permanent Transcended." I looked over at him.  Just over two out of three, if you counted second pass attempts.  Apparently the shamblers wouldn't accept every template.  My own, for instance; there was still only one juggernaut.  Many of those that wouldn't accept a first pass template, accepted a different one the second time around, bolstering the second generation Transcended numbers even further.  I wasn't about to tell Abbas that as I studied his expression for a moment, looking for any signs of malice or envy. "And you're good with that, captain?"  I asked.  "I mean, I wouldn't blame you if, . . ." "We were jealous, sir, of these new Transcended because they're permanent?"  The Arabic upgrade finished my sentence, a faint smile on his lips.  "Not sure I would've been happy to have been a shambler for 50 years just for a 30% chance at restoration."  He turned to the three that were walking towards us.  "Besides, outside of the fact we have to recharge every four hours, there isn't much difference between these reconstituted Transcended and the upgrades." I slowly nodded.  He, of course, made an excellent point.  It was accidental, the discovery Boost and I had made that two thirds of the shamblers we tried to upgrade ended up becoming permanently transformed.  We were at fifty and climbing. "Speaking of which, commander, my team is due for a recharge and another sweep run."  Abbas turned to me and saluted sharply.  "By your leave, sir?" I returned the salute with a smile. "Good hunting, captain."  I said. "Thank you, sir.  Be back shortly."  And he turned and jogged lightly to the medical tent after I dropped my salute.  There Boost and a handful of second generation summoners were steadily recharging upgrades and reconstituting shamblers.  His team would top up before one of Tovin's psyrens jumped them out, most likely to the southern cull camp as we had pretty much exhausted the shambler population around the northern camp. "Excuse me."  A soft woman's voice interrupted my chain of thought and I turned back to where the three second generation Transcended had come to a halt a couple paces away.  Two females and a male, one female a wraith, the other a javelin while the male was also a javelin, if I was reading my goa levels correctly.  Charge was going to have his hands full with the training sessions I had in mind for the second gens. I pasted a smile on my face. "Yes, can I help you?"  I politely asked. The woman blushed when she saw she was the focus of my attention before glancing over at her two colleagues. "Uh, yes.  We,..." She stammered into silence, her flush darkening.  The other woman, the javelin, quickly took up the thread, reaching out to put a comforting hand on her colleague's shoulder as she did.

"The psyren indicated we needed to talk to you, sir.  To find out what we're doing, where we're going." "Oh?  Tovin has put me in charge of the second gens now, has she?"  My smile broadened at the look of uncertainty that flitted across all three faces.  "My apologies; I'm having fun at your expense.  Yes, I am the Transcended to talk to with regards to that.  In fact, see that big tent over there?"  I pointed at a conference tent I had set up close to the command tent.  The three nodded in unison after following my pointing finger. "I need you to go there and wait for a few minutes while we finish assembling you all together.  Then I will let all of you know what exactly we're doing, all at the same time." As the three second gens trooped dutifully off, I switched to my mental voice. - Tovin, you just about done in there? - - The last of the reconstituted Transcended have been acclimatized, Max. -  She swiftly reported.  - We should have a few minutes before Abbas and his team recover more and bring them in. - - Good.  That'll give us enough time to run an orientation and get things moving.  I don't want to sit on this many assets if I can get things moving in the right direction.  Broadcast a general muster for the original team and all the second generations to the conference tent.  I'll bring everybody there up to speed on the Upgrade Initiative and what we're going to use it for. - - Upgrade Initiative? -  Tovin replied, a question in her mental voice.  I could feel her leave the tent she was using for her acclimatization and jump over to the conference tent with a teleportal. - Yeah.  That'd be the old soldier in me coming out.  The military had a habit of labeling every little thing with some fancy name.  It gave grandeur to the insignificant.  Allowed them to have a sense of accomplishment, even if it was to dig a latrine out of the frozen ground.  Soldiers do like their measurable progress. - - That they do. -  Tovin agreed with just a hint of a laugh.  - Looks like everybody has assembled in the conference tent already, so I'm just broadcasting to the stragglers.  Will you be joining us shortly, Max? - - Already on my way. -  I replied as I broke into a light jog, the mass of the conference tent my goal. The tent was already packed when I arrived, the last of the stragglers coming in with me to take places near the back.  To the person, they had been given a personal equipment and supply package, or PESP, out of stores to clothe them, get them a place to sleep and basic needs.  Basic needs for a Transcended, anyway, which were fair fewer than those for a living person.  So I found myself looking at a sea of uniforms as I quickly scanned the room before climbing on the small dais set at one end of the oblong chamber. "Hey boss."  Boost greeted me as I joined him and the other members of our original team.  The summoner looked tired.  Not that I blamed him: we had been working nearly non-stop for two days since our discovery about permenantly upgrading shamblers to Transcended. "Boost."  I replied with a smile, reaching out to put a hand on him.  He immediately straightened as goa moved from me to him. "Aw, boss, you didn't have to do that."  He rasped.  "But I'm glad you did.  The last 48 hours have been crazy." My smile grew a little grim.  It was only going to get more so.  I gave him a hardy slap on the shoulder before aiming my attention at the floating psyren "Everybody here, Tovin?" "All Transcended and Upgrades accounted for, Max."  She reported after a quick sweep.

Nodding, I turned to the front of the dais.  Already quiet, the gathering went dead silent when I reached edge.  Seeing every eye in the place on me, I smiled. "Good morning.  My name is Max Niekro.  Wecome to Camp Retribution.  As my colleague Tovin has explained to you, the world has changed since you went to sleep in the Earth Mother's embrace.  We have gone from a time of relative peace and exploration to war.  War that threatens not only our existence, but that of the world that gave us Life." I paused to take a quick look around the room.  Good; I had their absolute attention.  "The Earth Mother has brought us all back for a singular reason: to win this war.  If we don't, we will die again when the velkin destroy our world.  I will not let this happen."  I leaned forward, my expression hard. "Will any of you?" "NO SIR!"  The tent shuddered from the response, lifting from a hundred throats. I nodded in satisfaction. "Good.  Now, to fight this war, the Earth Mother needed an army.  That army is us, the Risen.  We now have a second chance at existence to do what we can to defeat the velkin.  Who are the velkin, you ask?  They are giant flesh eating aliens that hunt sapient beings for food.  Humans are now on the menu.  As undead, we have a measure of protection as they won't actively hunt us for food.  But they will hunt us once we start hurting them like they've never been hurt before." "And how will we do that?  It starts right here, with something I am calling the Upgrade Initiative.  Using Transcended templates and goa overdoses, we have given Risen additional capabilities beyond their original summoning.  We will now use these upgraded Risen to carry the fight to the enemy." I paused to glance back at the rest of my team. "Now, the Transcended standing behind me helped me realize that to carry the fight to the enemy, we're going to need some organization.  How many of you have served in a military of some sort before?" I then watched as five or six hands lifted. "Good.  The more trained soldiers we have, the better off we'll be.  And I say that with no prejudice against those that weren't soldiers in their previous lives.  You see, I served in the United States of America's military, first as a ground pounding grunt in the army, then as special ops in the Rangers.  So I've seen both sides of a battle line.  My colleagues think that makes me the logical choice to take command.  Any of those that raised their hands have command experience?  No?  So just grunts.  No problem; at least you'll understand when I explain what we need to do to create that organization we'll need." "Now, up this point, the fight has been largely carried by militias, with hit and run-style guerrilla tactics.  I won't take away from those tactics as I've seen them work when I was a soldier.  However, we're now going to carry them out with a structured army, with defined units and support.  We'll define those units according to the type of Transcended you are.  And, with twenty to thirty years of experience fighting the velkin amongst them, the team behind me will become the provisional commanders for each unit type." Again I glanced over my shoulder. "Boost."  The summoner took a step forward.  "Will be in command of the summoner group, with responsibilities in field medicine, support and upgrading." "Charge."  The javelin nodded and stepped forward to join Boost.  "Will be in command of the ranged attack group, with responsibilities in tactical support and suppression, as well as battle support."

"Tovin will command the psyrens, with responsibilities in support, both tactical and battle, communications and long range transport." "Kat is in command of the animus scout group, with battle support, skirmishing and scouting." "Twitch will command the wraiths, with covert ops and scouting your responsibility." "And finally Jolt, our tech specialist, will command the teslas with responsibilities in intelligence gathering and support." As Felix came to a halt on the other side of the diminutive Twitch, a smile on his angular face, I returned my attention to the gathering. "I, of course, would command the juggernauts.  If we had been successful in duplicating my template, that is.  Perhaps in the future.  In the meantime, however, my team has asked that I extend my provisional command to include the entire contingent here, at Fort Retribution and I've accepted.  If any of you have a problem with that, I can see you transferred to another Risen camp." "Now, one last piece of boring speech making and I'll let you get on with it.  As we alter our battle plan to take into account our new assets, we will be running a quick training cycle to familiarize everybody with their new capabilities.  Once that's done, however, then it's game on.  Will you be ready when your name is called?" "WE ARE READY, SIR"  The assembly roared and I smiled. "Outstanding.  I will now turn you over to your group commanders to begin your training cycle.  Good luck and good hunting." It was nearly a week later that saw me walking through what had rapidly become a full blown military installation, complete with perimeter guards, central command, a field hospital and barracks.  There a company was lightly jogging in unison as a trainer officer bawled commands.  And over there, a squad of javelins were practicing summoning goa forged weapons and firing them.  And over in another training area a mixed team of wraiths and animus were going through hand to hand combat drills under the watchful eye of a pair of psyrens. It was almost enough to give me deja vu to the point where I thought I heard fighter jets howling by overhead, on their way to hitting another target before we were dropped in to mop up.  Almost. Instead I shook my head to refocus and looked down at the print out in my hand.  It detailed the most recent asset acquisitions from the southern sweeps.  Nodding in satisfaction, I folded the sheet and tucked it into a breast pocket before I angled to head over to the command tent. Fort Retribution, thanks to the Upgrade Initiative, was now home to nearly a thousand troops.  It was a number that ten days ago would've been inconcievable when we first jumped in to a battered group of lich and vampire survivors after a failed sortie against a velkin cull run. Now the possibilities that ran through my mind on a daily basis were almost too many to count.  'We're going to put the hammer down on these alien clowns, Abby.'  I silently vowed.  'They won't know what hit them!' "Tell me you have good news, Felix."  I demanded as I stepped into the command tent.  "Hacked networks, stolen tech, weaknesses in their armor and tactics, anything." Surrounded by nearly a dozen other teslas in amongst the stacks of equipment and monitors, Felix looked up to catch sight of me weaving between the work stations towards him.  He grimaced before a look of frustration appeared. "Sorry, boss.  The encrypts they have protecting their networks are so far defeating any and all efforts to crack them."  The thin Transcended replied with a sigh and a shake of his head.  "It's so far beyond anything our equipment was built for, we're getting zero purchase." I frowned as I came to a halt just behind his shoulder, staring at the monitor he had in front of him, which was currently filled with several dedicated displays, each detailing either a section of alien text, or a brain-numbing array of closely packed numbers. "Maybe capturing one of their comm arrays will give us some leverage into their network."  I mused out loud. "Having some of their tech to study would improve our chances."  Felix noted, his customary expression of thoughtful consideration reappearing on his angular features. "Let's go get some then."  - Tovin, have Captains Abbas and Merkur meet me, along with Charge and Twitch at the command tent! - The two upgrade captains stood at ease, Abbas and Merkur, a woman with the skin tones and proud features of Northern Africa, both wearing expectant expressions.  Standing just slightly apart from them was a tired looking Charge, who had been pushing his javelins and the heavier ranged assault ballistas to their operational edge in an attempt to get them ready for combat.  And standing close to me was Twitch, who, while not as tired looking as Charge, had been pushing her wraiths equally hard, going through scenario after scenario to prepare them for any contingency. "Morning, all."  I rasped.  "I know you're all busy so I'll get to it.  We need access to the velkin network.  Both for intel and to see if we can get the jump on those ugly bastards by stealing some of their tech.  So I'm initiating a scavenger hunt, starting with whatever we can pull off of one of their transports." "Well, unless the velkin are suddenly in the habit of leaving their transports laying around, that means we're going to have to take one from them."  Abbas pointed out.  I nodded in confirmation. "That, we will.  We're going to hit one of their culling convoys, as your company attempted to do, Abbas, Merkur.  That's why you two will be leading the charge on this one." "A little payback will be nice, sir."  Merkur said with a nod and a smile. "No doubt."  I said, before looking over at Charge.  "I need you to put together a ranged assault team that'll stop the convoy in its tracks and hold them in place while our upgrades move in." "Consider it done, boss."  Charge said as he pulled out a notepad to start jotting down some notes.  I nodded in satisfaction before turning to my wraith commander. "And Twitch, I need an extraction team that will stealth in and pull whatever you can carry off the transports while Abbas and Merkur's people keep the velkin occupied." "You got it, big man.  I have the perfect bunch in mind!"  The diminutive wraith said with a smile. "Excellent." I said, returning her smile before taking in my commanders all at once.  "Captains, you have a half hour to prep your teams and get me a battle plan.  Five minutes after I approve, the psyrens will be moving you into position.  Eyes in the sky will then monitor the situation, with the psyrens standing by for extraction.  Any questions?  No?  Let's go then." Thanks to the experience they had garnered from running sweeps around the culling camps, it took less than 10 minutes before the upgrade officers had their battle plan in my hands.  A quick scan was all I needed to confirm it was solid enough in taking the fight to the enemy. "Nice."  I rasped, handing the plan back to Abbas and standing from where I had been working in the command tent.  "It's tight, captains.  Let's roll with it."  Then, in a slightly louder voice: "Jolt, your team is on the clock.  We have insertion in five minutes." "Eyes are open."  Felix quickly replied, teslas suddenly moving everywhere at once as stations came online.  The lean Transcended watched as his screen filled with satellite imagery of the nearby cull camps.  It didn't take him long to find what he was looking for. "And bingo!  We've got a outbound convoy 100 kilometres from the northern camp, angling for the santuaries lining the mountains." I nodded curtly before looking over at Merkur and Abbas. "You have a target, captains.  Psyrens will jump you out in four minutes, 30 seconds and counting."

 

Chapter 4: Oh, It's On!

I folded my arms as I looked over Felix's shoulder at the monitor detailing the area north of the northern cull camp.  A highlight box marked the small convoy of five velkin vehicles as they moved along a well worn path that would shortly swing west towards the scattered sanctuaries that marched long the foothills of the Rockies. "Let's look sharp, people."  Felix sharply commanded as the teslas bustled all around him, calling up data, refreshing images from satellites in orbit and scanning for any additional velkin units nearby, pacing the convoy. "This is the real deal.  Let's make sure our people achieve their objective and return to base in one piece!"  'Amen to that.'  I silently agreed, eyes narrowed as I watched a sixth vehicle appear on the screen, this one moving with the grace of an aerial craft. "Add one."  A female tesla cried out near the back of the command equipment cluster.   "Medium range transport, eight velkin on board.  The convoy has an aerial escort." "Confirmed."  Another tesla, this one male, said from closer to where I was standing.  "Pacing the convoy roughly five metres up." - Ronin, C and C here.  We've got an add on. -  Felix switched to speaking inside his head, his thoughts quickly broadcast to everybody in the command post, thanks to psyren broadband telepathy. - Aerial transport, eight velkin hunters on board. - - Confirmed, C and C. -  Ronin, one of the first psyrens recovered from the shambler ranks, quickly replied.  Her mental voice was just a little deeper than Tovin's yet as quiet and assured. - Ground commanders have been advised.  They are requesting a go, no go confirm with the additional variable in play. - Felix looked over his shoulder at me, eyebrow lifted.  My nod was almost imperceptible. - Please advise all commanders, that they are still a go, Ronin. -  The tesla commander's voice quickly replied. - Charge, shift your ballistas a kilometre downstream, to counter the aerial presence. -  I added, using Ronin's broadband. - Copy that, boss. -  The javelin commander replied.  - Shifting now. - "Encounter clock?"  I asked out loud. "T minus three minutes 15 seconds, sir."  One of the teslas replied, their eyes glued to their monitor.  "Our team should have visual contact within a minute and a half." I let a slow breath out through my nostrils.  This was it!  Our first true skirmish with the upgrades and second gens against the velkin.  It was all I could do to remain in one place and not nervously start pacing. - C and C, we have visual. -  Ronin quietly reported after what felt like forever and I started to count down in my head.  Now that I was actually counting, it didn't take long to get to the end, marked by the convoy and its aerial escort coming into view on the monitor Felix was watching with a keen eye. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1; as soon as I was finished counting in my head, three thick beams of light darted from positions on either side of the track, hammering into the flying transport.  It took perhaps half a second of those beams, fired by the heavier ballista class ranged Transcended, focusing on the transport before there was a flash.  Then it was drunkenly falling to the side, billowing smoke.  The flying transport hit the ground hard, breaking apart and throwing giant bodies everywhere. A heart beat later more ballista beams were lashing out from cover.  They pinned down the first transport for another second or two before a second flare of light announced an explosion that ripped off its front section, pieces again flying in every direction.

At the same time lighter javelin fire was cutting down those velkin that managed to survive the flyer's destruction, each giant taking a couple of shots before they silently crumpled to the ground.  More javelin fire took out the handful that managed to escape the first transport as well. With the road ahead of them blocked, the remaining ground transports tried to maneuver around the destroyed flyer and the wreckage of the lead transport.  Which put them into perfect position to get pinned down by more ballista fire.  Silent flashes of light announced their deaths, the goa-fuelled blasts cutting through the reinforced armor like it was tissue to shatter power plants and propulsion systems. - Moving in on the first transport. -  Twitch's mental voice quietly reported.  Cloaked, the wraiths were invisible to the satellite's visual scanners.  Thankfully we had a slaved monitor watching Twitch's team moving in via displacement sensors on a second satellite, the sensors finding them by detecting how the air was forced around them by their passage through it.  My eyes flickered to that screen to watch her progress for a moment before returning to the main battle. Responding to Twitch's telepathic report, the javelin fire was suddenly focused on the first transport, smouldering beside the flyer wreck.  Two velkin that had managed to avoid the initial assault, and the subsequent suppression fire, were quickly cut down with precise shots to the head, leaving the way into the transport clear.  Then the wraiths were inside. - Initiating goa tagging. -  Twitch said as several shadowy shapes began moving through the wrecked vehicle, temporarily out of sight of our sensors. - Acknowledged, Shadow One. -  Ronin quickly responded.  - Teleportals are commencing on tagged items. - I watched Charge move his javelins around to keep the velkin in the remaining transports pinned down even as the ballista blew another one apart. "Enemy comms?"  I quietly asked. "Dead."  Felix let his fingers dance over his keyboard for a sec before lifting them to the screen to access more data and functions with taps to the touch-sensitive plastic.  "But I have a full jamming suite standing by in low orbit, in case they make as much as a peep." "Let's make sure they don't get the chance."  I indicated.  - Merkur, Abbas, status, please. - - We are on the move, C and C. -  Abbas' mental voice was taut with tension.  The upgraded lich was definitely thinking about the last time his company went toe to toe with a velkin convoy. - Charge? - - Suppression fire. -  Was the javelin commander's reply, more at his command than to us.  And we watched the monitors light up as the javelins laid down heavy suppression to let Abbas and Merkur move their teams in.  A mix of javelins and animus, they were equipped for light assault.  It was their task to move into the gap between the downed transports, now four out of the original five, and the remaining transport to give the wraiths a buffer while they scavenged tech from the downed craft. It was as the upgrades were settling into position, hunkering down and returning fire in response to the surviving hunters firing on them with their massive weapons, that one of the teslas suddenly piped up. "The secondary array just picked up a velkin broadcast of some sort." Several heads, including mine, turned towards the spare looking Transcended, who was feverishly working his hands over his monitor. "Comm?"  Felix tautly asked. "Negative.  Some sort of wireless, infra band.  The surviving transport is broadcasting and receiving on that band, but not in any pattern recognizeable as a comm signal."

"Wireless?"  Felix frowned, looking over at me.  I could only shrug.  Nobody knew for certain what those bastards used for communication, least of all me, late come to the party.  If it was stumping Felix, then we were in trouble. "I've got multiple signals, vectoring in from the south."  Another one of the teslas abruptly announced.  A glance in her direction found her with her hands dancing over her monitor, identifying the new signals. "Velkin flyers."  Her fingers circled the images on the monitor then expanded them with a sweep of her hands. "Armored and heavily armed."  She looked up, concern on her face. "I'd say combat vessels.  100 kilometers out and closing fast!" "Damn it."  I growled.  "No comm but that transport still managed to call in support." "It has to be that wireless signal."  Felix pointed out, turning back to his own station to call up what the tesla who spotted the signal, had on his monitor.  He pulled up a sample of the signal, expanding it with swipes of his fingers. "I don't see recognizeable patterns, but I do see regularity.  Almost like a network, . . ."  His voice trailed off, an intense look of concentration appearing on his face.  Then his fingers were flying over his monitor, calling up subroutines and control boxes. "Cordova!  Prep a data spike.  Let's see if we can jump this wireless signal." "Yes sir!"  The tesla who had initially identified the signal replied began to work furiously at his station. "Fifty klicks and closing."  Called out the tesla monitoring the incoming flyers.  "I've got energy spikes; they're prepping weapons." - Ronin, stand by for emergency jump out. -  I sent.  - We have multiple bogeys incoming, sporting heavy fire power.  I want you all out of there before they pin you down. - - Copy that, C and C. -  Ronin replied, her calm and even tone revealing she was unruffled by the news. The final transport erupted with a flash of light, more velkin hitting the ground as the remaining hunters were scythed down by precision javelin bursts. - We are clear. -  Charge broadcast.  - All units, move to fall back positions and stand by for immediate jump out.  Ballistas, move to flank to give us some cover.  Abbas, Merkur, you get your people out of there.  Now! - "I have enemy flyers moving into ground attack positions."  Came the report.  "At current rate of speed, they'll be in position in three minutes and counting." - C and C, we have a visual on incoming bogeys. -  Ronin quietly noted.  - Captain Abbas' team has been jumped out to fall back position alpha.  Jumping Captain Merkur's team now. - Then the monitor was lighting up as the velkin flyers streaked into view, wing and fuselage mounted weapons firing in quick bursts at anything that moved on the ground.  A heart beat later the ballistas responded, pounding the lead with four simultaneous shots which knocked it from the sky, the flyer disintegrating in a brilliant flash of light. Immediately the ballistas split to target the next two in the v-shaped formation, two per flyer, the javelins adding their fire to the heavier beams.  One exploded almost immediately, the more precise javelin munition finding a weak spot where the power grid fed into the propulsion system, the energy pulse overloading the grid and ripping the flyer apart. The second took a little longer, absorbing considerable abuse before it staggered then tilted over to plough heavily into the ground, pieces cartwheeling in every direction.  A rain of javelin fire pounded it for a brief moment before it too exploded with a surge of light.  Then the rest of the flight was past, splitting up to reform and come around for a second pass.

- Wraiths are clear. - Ronin quietly reported.  - And jumped out to fall back position alpha.  Standing by to jump out Commander Charge's team. - "Two of the flyers have landed and are deploying hunters."  The tesla who was monitoring the flyers, reported.  "Sixteen are on the ground and advancing towards our flank." - Charge, you have ground troops on your six. -  I sent.  - You need to withdraw, now! - - Copy that, boss. -  Charge immediately fired back even as the screen lit up with ballista and javelin fire with the flyers making a second run on the remaining Risen positions.  Another flyer exploded and two more spun into the ground before they were again past the dug in ranged Transcended. - Time to leave, folks!  Ronin, commence jump out. -  The javelin commander sent.  A heart beat later: - We are clear, C and C. -  Ronin reported, the psyren's voice carrying just the hint of relief. - Going to standby to make sure we weren't tracked then will commence return jumps to base. - I grinned and gave Felix a slap the shoulder as the rest of the command tent erupted into cheers.  We did it!  We actually managed to successfully engage the velkin and accomplished what we set out to do.  And we gave them a bloody nose in the process! "Nice work, everybody.  Well done."  I said with a smile, turning to applaud the team Felix had put together to run the command center. As they were busy congratulating each other, Felix sat back with an even bigger smile stretching his thin face. "Not only did we fend off the velkin, Max, we've found a way into the velkin network!"  He said, pointing at several displays on his monitor.  "You know that wireless signal that Cordova found?  Well, further investigation yielded that while it was scrambled, it wasn't encrypted.  Probably because it was some sort of emergency communication.  Regardless, we were able to use a data spike to penetrate the signal and piggyback into the network.  The spike bypassed the firewall and embedded in their main database.  As soon as I bring my translation routine online, developed by a tesla who managed to penetrate the velkin network thirty years ago before it was firewalled, we'll be mining data.  At least, until they discover the spike and erase it." My smile broadened. "Well damn, Felix."  I exclaimed.  "That is good news!  Looks like this day was successful on a number of different levels." A handful of teslas were already swarming over the large pieces of equipment Twitch and her team managed to pull out of three of the transports before the emergency extraction.  I frowned as I stepped free of the command tent to where Felix had set up a research post to study the recovered technology. "You were supposed to retrieve useable pieces of tech, Twitch."  I bluntly pointed out as the wraith and a pair of her team appeared from the post's far side, talking in low voices about the material they managed to salvage. "Not pieces of junk!" "Hey, no fair, Max!"  Twitch protested before catching sight of the grin on my face.  "Ha!  You had me going there for a sec, big man."  She returned my grin with a delighted smile of her own before indicating the pieces of tech the teslas were examining. "Not bad for our first shot at it, hey?  A couple power plants, some comm arrays, and I think that is some sort of computer core."  She pointed at the last piece, which the teslas were currently examining, as she said that. "Not bad at all, Twitch."  I nodded as she came to a halt beside me, her fellow wraiths a pace or so away as they kept a respectful distance.  Huh; somebody must've told them I was a juggernaut. "I think we can call our campaign and engagement against the velkin a success." "I'd second that.  We operated like a well oiled machine out there."  She looked up at me, her eyes dancing, her smile suddenly mischievious. "I think we should do something.  You know, to celebrate." I chuckled at that, having not seen that smile. "Tempting, isn't it?  But we need to carry on, like this is old hat for us.  Something we're used to doing.  That way our people can see how we treat this like we've done it before and will do it again, and gain confidence from our confidence." Twitch sighed, a slight tinge of regret in her tone. "Damn it, Max.  I wish you didn't make such a good point.  But you have to promise me that we will celebrate a really big win against these alien assholes." "You got it."  I looked down at her.  "Music, dancing, the whole smash." "Or something a little more intimate."  She countered, her mischevious smile returning.  Finally catching sight of it, my eyebrow lifted in curiosity.  What was this, now?  First Kat, now Twitch? Before I could question her on it, though, she and the other wraiths were quickly striding away. "Perhaps we can talk about the details after my debrief, hey?"  She said with a grin over her shoulder and I chuckled as I watched them walk away, Twitch putting her namesake into her walk enough that it caught my eye.  I immediately sighed. I was in so much trouble.

 

An Alternative Viewpoint

I was still pondering Twitch's comments later that night as I sat down in a work space I had cleared in the command tent to go over the various debriefs coming out of our impromptu battle with the enemy by lamplight.  Between the comments and the debriefs, I was so occupied I didn't notice the shifting on the edge of my vision until I felt a presence nearly right beside me. "An excellent first strike against the enemy."  A soft whisper said with a brush of cold against my cheek. Already undead, and a juggernaut besides, I felt no fear at the presence and its unexpected whisper.  However, I felt a little apprehension when I looked to the side I had heard the sound from and found myself staring at a filmy shift of what appeared to be glowing smoke. "Thanks."  I replied, eyes narrowed as I looked at the shifting mass of light and smoke.  "I hope to repeat today's success several more times." "A worthy desire."  The mist replied, continuing to shift in place. I had quickly become sensitive to the life force the Earth Mother used to summon her children back from the dead to fight against the velkin.  Yet the uneasily moving mass in front of me held no goa whatsoever.  So what exactly was it?  And what the hell did it want?  Despite myself, I felt my absolute density begin to climb with my unspoken questions. A change the apparition apparently could sense, and find amusing as a quiet sound that was almost laughter emanated from it. "You've nothing to fear from me, juggernaut."  It whispered, the laughter fading.  "I'm no threat.  Especially to one as formidable as you." "Perhaps not."  I conceded as my eyebrow lifted in bemusement.  "But I'll reserve judgement until I know exactly who and what you are, if you don't mind." Again the quiet laughter. "Not at all, Max."  The apparition replied.  "Although, considering my appearance, I would've thought you would've guessed that by now.  Not the who, perhaps, but certainly the what." I frowned as I watched the apparition become misty and almost fade to nothing, before returning to its former appearance. "You're not a ghost, are you?" Again the quiet laughter. "An interesting label, but applicable."  The apparition replied somewhat vaguely. "How do you exist?"  I asked, frankly confused about the nature of this floating cloud of mist.  "I sense no goa in you, no substance that suggests you once lived." "Ah, there's the rub, you see."  The apparition said, shifting to the right, forcing me to keep my eyes on it.  It passed through a table without pause before coming to a halt beside one of the active monitoring stations Felix had set up.  It seemed to watching the dance of data across the screen for a moment before it shifted again and I felt its attention, for the first time, squarely on me. "I never was alive.  And so couldn't be summoned back with the Earth Mother's life force." "You weren't alive?"  I frowned, my confusion growing. "No."  The apparition shifted to move through the monitoring station behind it, slowly going in a circle around me.  "None of us were." "So how did you, . . . wait a minute, there's more of you??"  I couldn't help taking a quick glance around. "We were once as numerous as the Living."  The apparition revealed, continuing its slow circling.  "But perhaps I'm starting this story near the end, when I should start at the beginning.  And the beginning is when humans finally possessed enough intelligence to be aware of themselves.  Once self awareness was born, so were we."

"So, what are you?"  I asked. The apparition paused and I could feel its attention back on me for a moment, before it continued its slow circling. "In simple terms, we're echoes.  Echoes of the living."  As I digested that, it went on.  "You see, the Earth Mother not only is a living thing but she has a mind as well, with memory and understanding.  And just as she remembers every living creature born on her, she remembers how they die.  Each living creature makes a death sound when they die, a psychic emanation from their soul that tells the Earth Mother that they have passed on."  "How loud that sound is, depends on how that creature dies.  If they pass in their sleep, it's a whisper.  If they are brutally murdered, it's a scream.  If that scream is loud enough, the memory of that sound echoes in her mind.  Since her mind is all around us, that psychic echo can manifest visually and physically in the environment." I frowned as I mulled that over.  It made a kind of sense, but not really. "So ghosts are echoes of the psychic scream a living being made when they were brutally killed?  Is that what you're saying?"  I asked, looking for a little clarity. "In a nutshell."  The apparition said, pausing once more to watch the dancing lights on the monitor. "And when that echo is fresh, still filled with the agony of an abrupt end, it has a tendency to act on that agony, on the pain that still reverberates through it and tries to impact the living world to express that pain."  The apparition resumed its slow circling.  "And so you have hauntings." "You don't sound like you're in pain."  I pointed out, eliciting more quiet laughter. "I've existed for a very long time.  The agony that created me has faded considerably."  It replied as it passed through a dormant work station, making lights dance over the interface for a moment with the temporary presence of energy. "Now I merely am.  With enough time, even that will fade and I will cease to be." I sighed and rubbed at my face, trying to absorb what the floating mist was trying to say.  So ghosts were the echoes of psychic death screams so powerful, they manifested in the physical world.  And since they are echoes, they retain some of the original's intelligence, memory, etc, like a copy of their psyche is imprinted at the moment of death into the echo.  'A psychic photocopy.'  I silently mused.  A photocopy filled with agony and death. Ironically, while it wasn't formed from goa, the ghost's existence still depended on the Earth Mother and her ability to feel the death throes of her children.  An alternative existence, but one that still required the Earth Mother to work. "Okay, so I think I understand how you exist, ghost.  Now I need to know why you are here."  I said. "Curiosity."  Was the unexpected answer. "That's it?  Curiosity?  You weren't drawn here because of all the goa, or the violence, or the upgrading?" Again the quiet laughter and the mist shifted through the desk in front of me, through me with a chill and back around. "I have had enough of most of that in my existence."  The whispering voice revealed.  "But what I haven't seen was such decisive action against an overwhelmingly superior foe.  It made me curious, something I haven't felt in millennia.  It drove me to find you, Max Niekro, Risen juggernaut.  To see what kind of man, . . or undead man, in this case, you are." I peered at the apparition for a moment, thoughts churning. "Okay, I can accept that."  I said finally.  "Does this mean you'll stick around for awhile, to watch us work?" "If you will allow me."  The mist whispered.  "But I will warn you, I am not the only 'echo' that is curious.  You may find many visitors to Fort Retribution in the near future.  Some more aggressive than me." I frowned at that.  I didn't mind the idea of having a mostly harmless mist floating about, watching things and floating through tables.  But something more aggressive than that? "I don't suppose they'll stay away even if I say it's not okay, will they." "No, they won't."  Again the quiet laughter.  I sighed. "Then I hope you and your friends enjoy the show."  I dryly stated.  "By the way, I'm curious.  Do you actually have a name?  If you're going to stick around and all, I can't just call you 'ghost' all the time.  I'd rather call you by name." "Name?"  The mist whispered, pausing in its wandering through the command tent.  "Yes, the creature that created me when he was poisoned by another who he thought was an ally, had a name." "Well, spit it out, Casper."  I urged. The mist regarded me for a moment.  Then: "The name is Hannibal.  Hannibal Barca, of Carthage."

 

Memory's Sting

I blinked in astonishment as I stared at the mist that had just named itself Hannibal.  Could I seriously be looking at the remnant of what many held as the greatest military tactician in human history?  Considering that we were ramping up our efforts against the velkin, could the timing of his arrival have been any more coincidentally good?  I didn't think so. "Exactly how much of your life do you remember, Hannibal?"  I carefully asked. "You mean, how much do I remember of his life.  I am an echo, a figment of the man who created me."  The ghost was swift to point out, coming to a complete halt to do so, its attention firmly fixed on me.  "Not the actual man."  Okay, not a remnant.  A psychic photocopy of him at the point of his death.  Still, one would think all those tactics and skill were buried in there somewhere. "Fair enough."  I said, holding my hands up mollifyingly.  "I just want to know how much of his life you remember.  Because Hannibal's skill and tactics are legendary, his battles against the Romans in ancient history required reading at many military academies and battle schools.  If we could tap into that, we might gain an advantage in our war against the velkin." The mist went silent at that, still not moving from where it had come to a halt to remind me that it was only an echo. "Your argument has merit, which in turn has done much to convince me to try and access those memories."  Hannibal finally said after a long pause.  "It will take some time, however.  Do not expect immediate results." I smiled. "No problem there.  I need to clear these debriefs from my desk anyway, and plan our next engagement.  Take your time."  And with that, I turned from the shifting ghost and to my stack of paperwork.  Nothing like crossing t's and dotting i's to put apprehension in its place. It took the better part of three hours to work through the debriefs and reports from the engagement with the velkin.  During which I pulled out a notepad and jotted down not a few suggestions and ideas I had for our next dust up. While I wasn't sure whether it was their innate arrogance in thinking themselves better than us and therefore above concern, or just plain luck, so far we weren't detecting any additional velkin activity thanks to our hit on their culling convoy.  As I looked at the couple of ideas that I was pursuing, I knew that would shortly change.  We were going to hurt them, and hurt them bad.  Then again, wasn't that the plan? Oddly enough, as it rolled past midnight and I leaned back in my chair to rub at my face in an attempt to stay focused, I found myself longing for a cold beer. "Ah, my kingdom for a beer!"  I tiredly cried at the ceiling. "It is ironic that the Risen are still cursed with remembering wants of the Living."  Hannibal whispered as he swept past me in a swirl of cold air.  He had been wandering the command tent the entire time I had been working on the debriefs. "The echoes aren't?"  I looked over at him, my expression one of curiosity. "When I was still fresh, I remembered."  The ghost confessed as he almost whimsically slid through several work stations, his ethereal form temporarily suffusing their circuits with just enough power to come to life for a brief moment.  His misty form danced with red, green and blue light, a perverse display that faded as he moved past the equipment. "The need to taste red meat, or drink good wine.  Desiring the touch of a woman or to feel the sunlight on my face."  The ghost paused in front of his favorite monitor and watched the data dance for a moment.

"It used to enrage me, those needs.  How perverse was the universe to create me and leave these wants in me with no means to satisfy them!  My anger would seethe for days, brought to the boiling point with each thing I found myself wanting.  And that anger gave me the power to physically interact with my surroundings.  I could knock things over, or move them across tables, even open doors."  He turned in place to regard me for a moment. "Over time, however, I came to realize that no matter how angry I got, no matter how furious and frustrated I would get from being unable to partake of the things I wanted, nothing would change.  I was a mere echo of a dying man.  I was only remembering his wants and needs." Abruptly the ghost resumed his movement through the tent, this time his course a little more erratic.  And he continued speaking: "That realization made my anger fade.  And with it, my ability to interact with my surroundings.  Until all that was left was what you see now; a floating cloud of dust, unable to do anything outside of making some display lights come on." My eyebrow lifted at hearing a definite note of sadness in the ghost's voice as he said those last words.  Fading he may be, but this ghost still had emotions, he still felt.  To have feelings, to be aware, yet slowly watching oneself fade away; that was very sad indeed. I was still watching him, my thoughts mulling that over, when I caught another motion out of the corner of my eye.  'Another ghost, maybe?'  I wondered as I turned towards it.  Hannibal had warned me more would be visiting.  And found instead a Transcended woman stepping in under the command tent's roof.  She flashed me a smile when she looked up and found my eyes on her, a question on my face. "Hello."  She said brightly, stepping forward with an extended hand, which I carefully took.  "My name is Jace." "Max."  I said, nodding and smiling as I recognized the name.   "I know you, Jace. You're the first Transcended we recovered from the shamblers."  I gave her hand a firm shake before letting it go. "Pleased to meet you." Jace laughed, a pleasant sound that oddly enough reminded me of the gentle sound of a babbling brook. "The pleasure is all mine, Max."  She said, tucking a strand of blonde hair behind her ear.  The rest, the color of wheaten gold, was pulled into a practical tail, topping a classically beautiful face, with high cheekbones, a pert nose and full, ripe lips, everything locked into mid-twenties flawlessness, as it was for the rest of us.  If her eyes weren't Transcended purple and black, I had the feeling they would be bright blue. "I just wanted to personally thank you for saving me from the shamblers."  Her smile faltered for a moment.  "I know I probably wouldn't have been aware of it, but the thought of spending the rest of existence as one of those, . . ." I smiled reassuringly as I put a comforting hand on her shoulder. "Troubling indeed.  But now something you don't have to worry about, Jace.  You are permenantly Transcended, with all our abilities and strengths, for as long as the Earth Mother needs you."  I gave her shoulder a squeeze as I said that.  In response her smile brightened and her hand lifted to cover mine on her shoulder, taking hold of it and squeezing back. "I know.  Thank you so much, Max, for that." I smiled and shrugged before carefully retrieving my hand. "Boost did most of the work, to tell you the truth.  I just provided the goa." "And the idea of upgrading shamblers."  She added, taking a step closer to put herself into my personal space.  "Without you, we would've been trapped."  She beamed brilliantly up at me and again I felt that strange twinge that told me I was suddenly the object of attention and affection.

"Something we just couldn't have."  I replied with a forced grin, taking a half step back to scoop up my debriefs as an excuse to put some space between her and I.  "Besides, recovering you folks helped us immensely."  I rolled the debriefs into a tube and took another half step back to assume a casual pose, arms folded across my chest. "We added several orders of magnitude to our numbers, Transcended and upgrades both with a broad range to skills and abilities that will definitely help us in the fight against the velkin.  So it pretty much was a win win for everybody." Again Jace stepped forward and into my personal space, this time reaching up to lay a hand on my arm. "Definitely a win for me, Max."  She said quietly, her smile now filled with emotion.  Then, before I could react, she caught my face with her other hand and in the same motion pulled me down and went up on her tiptoes to press warm lips against mine. To say I was shocked was an understatement.  Even though it was 300 years in the past, I still remembered being married for 50 years.  To have another woman's lips on mine felt,...wrong. And yet, it also felt right.  Right enough that my body, which was supposed to be dead, responded, leaning me into the kiss instead of pulling away.  Which was what my mind was telling it to do.  Okay, how was that possible?  Am I not basically a zombie?  How is it even physically possible for me to actually enjoy being kissed?  Or be stimulated by it? Regardless of how my mind was racing to find an answer, Jace didn't seem to have the same problem, her other hand coming up now to hold my face.  Her kiss deepened, her tongue moving confidently and needfully into my mouth.  And yet again I was surprised to find myself responding, deepening the kiss with my own tongue and mouth, making Jace moan low in her throat with pleasure. Hearing that sound enabled me to reimpose my will and, with a shiver, I broke the embrace and stepped back.  Where I stood, pulling calming breaths in to slow my racing heart down, my expression uncertain. "Did,... did I do something wrong?"  Jace asked, her voice throaty and her confusion obvious as she stared at me, eyes wide. "I suspect you did everything right."  Hannibal's quiet whisper rasped as the apparition floated past, earning him a hard look from me. "He's just having difficulty with a memory.  As all us undead do." "A memory?"  Jace's confusion only deepened, the blonde Transcended reclaiming my attention with a light hand on my arm and her presence once more in my personal space as she stepped close enough that I could feel her warmth penetrating my clothing. "I don't understand, Max.  What memory?" Again Hannibal answered for me, even as my mouth opened. "Memory of a 50 year marriage that ended 300 years ago." My head twisted towards the shifting apparition as he paused in front of his favorite monitor. "You know, Hannibal, if you weren't just a filmy cloud of nothing, . . ." I began with a growl.  Only to once more have Jace reclaim my full attention, her hand taking me by the jaw to turn my face towards her. This time understanding was on her face, instead of confusion. "Now I understand."  She said quietly, gently pressing herself against me.  "My memories nearly made me go insane when I was first brought back from being a shambler.  But Tovin helped me with some of those memories.  Memories of being a policewoman for 30 years, with a couple of boyfriends but no husband.  Of having no children, only my career.  Of feeling like I failed to have any sort of life.  Do you know what she told me, Max?"  I shook my head. "She said that woman died two hundred years ago.  And that the person I am now is somebody new; somebody with the chance to make a difference, to make a life for herself."  Her other hand came up to cradle my face as she pressed more firmly against me. "You'll drive yourself crazy if you cling to those memories, Max.  Like Tovin said, you are a new person now.  With a new existence, and a new chance at things.  You need to let go of the old so you can fully focus on the new."  She pressed more tightly against me. "Like me, warm and willing, in your arms." "I thought you just wanted to say thanks."  I said, fighting to ignore how nice it felt to have her against me.  "We're undead zombies, Jace.  How do you even know physical intimacy is possible?" Jace smiled, a brilliant thing that made my heart skip, though I seriously doubted it was pumping blood. "Who said anything about physical intimacy, Max?  I just wanted to kiss those sweet lips of yours.  Although, now that you mention it, it does sound like a very, very good idea.  And while we are undead, we're so not zombies."  Then her lips were reclaiming mine and I was doing my best to hold back the surge of desire that washed through me. After what seemed like an eternity, spent in the delicious swell of an amazing kiss, I finally summoned enough energy and resolve to once again break the embrace and take a half step back. "Whoa, we have to hold on here.  We haven't known each other more than a few minutes, . . ."  I began. "I waited for 200 years, Max."  Jace rasped, frustration flickering across her face.  "I'm done waiting.  If I see something that will help me live this new life better, I'm taking it.  And right now, that's you." I held up a forestalling hand before she could move back in, willing my heart to slow and my breathing to calm. "We don't even know what's going on here, Jace.  What's possible and what's not.  We're just rushing forward when we need to figure it out first." "I don't need to figure it out, Max."  She quickly replied, frustration growing in her mannerisms with each moment I continued to deny her. "I'm already willing to give it a try and see what happens.  If it doesn't work, then at least we tried.  If it does, then good for us."  She made a gesture at my lower body.  "It looks like some of you agrees with me in wanting to try, at least." "I can't."  I whispered, feeling hot blood flush my face.  Apparently my undead heart had betrayed me and was pumping blood after all, and now I was blushing. "I just can't." "Damn you and your stupid memories!"  Jace hissed, her hands abruptly balling into fists, her face a mask of anger.  "She's been dead for over 300 years!  You need to give her up!  But whatever."  She spun away from me and stalked out of the tent. "If you won't, I'm sure I can find one of my newly Transcended friends that will."  And then she was gone, leaving me to wearily slump against a nearby desk. "Well played."  Hannibal whispered as he floated past me.  "Such an opportunity to test the limits of your new body may never come again.  Not to mention, she was rather attractive." "Shut up."  I growled, feeling the reverberations of my own frustration ripple through me.  How the hell is this even happening? I can't feel!  I'm dead!

 

Packing Heat

I scrubbed roughly at my face, trying to push my thoughts and emotions back to a place where I wanted them to be.  Then I was almost savagely pushing away from the desk. "I got to get out of here.  Go for a run and clear my head."  I stated to no one in particular.  Which was good as the only other 'person' there was Hannibal's ghost.  Unfortunately he was paying attention. "And where do you propose to go, Max?"  Came the whispered question, the ghost almost insubstantial in the far end of the tent as he looked at a pair of equipment pods we had stored there. "You aren't exactly in the middle of secured territory." "Do you seriously think the velkin have the power to stop me, Casper?"  I fired back in reply.  "I can go wherever the hell I want."  The ground grumbled underfoot as my absolute density began to climb. "And I'm going right now!" Going from standing still to full speed in a single step, I left the camp far behind in the first handful of steps.  A step more and I felt the air around me abruptly compress in a concussion wave and the hollow 'boom' of the sound barrier being shattered echoed in my ears.  Ignoring it, I put down my head and ran.  And ran and ran and ran, . . . I wasn't sure how long I had been running, or in what direction.  I just knew that my brains were filled with chaos as I tried to sort out my feelings about my memories and how they conflicted with what I was feeling about Jace's kiss, and Twitch and Kat's interest in me.  'Abby!  Why do I have to choose between them and you?!'  I screamed into the silence of my mind. - You need to stop, my juggernaut. -  A quiet voice spoke into the echo of my silent scream.  A voice I had heard before.  It was the Earth Mother herself. - You need to stop right now! - Instantly my mind cleared as my heels dug in and I sent a spray of stone in every direction as I skidded to a stop.  The chaos of what happened with Jace was gone, every sense I had focused on the here and now.  And those retuned senses found me looking at a squad of velkin not ten metres away that were examining the ambush site we had created less than 24 hours previous. "Ah, damn."  I sighed as I watched no less than a full dozen armored heads turn towards me.  They were just as quick to raise their massive weapons.  Was that perfect timing or what?  Then instinct took over. I felt the juggernaut armor slam into place.  Then I was charging forward, energy blasts splashing off me as I headed right at them. As I had at the cull camp, I smashed through the first rank without pause, their armored bodies collapsing like matchstick castles all around me, rough screams announcing their pain as the velkin were throwin into rough heaps by the impact.  I barely felt hitting their armored bodies, my absolute density maxed and my armor working together to make me virtually invulnerable.  Legs were shattered, bodies crushed and arms destroyed as I spun in place with a spray of broken rock and dirt before I slammed into the remainder. Those went down like bowling pins, broken bodies cartwheeling in every direction.  Then a burst of speed put me through the transports they had arrived in, both craft exploding as I ripped through their power plants. Skidding to a halt, I looked back at the devastation, keeping my armor up as I quickly looked over the bodies.  My assault took less than ten seconds to unfold and I had destroyed the velkin company as thoroughly as if we had dropped a bomb in their midst.  Not bad, for a solo assault.  However, it would've been a different story If my team had been here.  Going by the splash damage alone, they could've taken some serious damage from the tree trunk-sized rifles that were now laying scattered all over the ambush site, haphazardly thrown onto the ground as I ran through their owners.

I found my eyes being drawn to the velkin rifles, my thoughts suddenly clear of any distractions as I considered the powerful weapons.  We would be needing two main things if non-ranged and non-juggernaut Risen were to have a chance against the velkin's superior tech.  Armor that was proof against their weapons.  And weapons that could penetrate their armor.  The slug throwers that appeared to be prevelant amongst the supplies and equipment taken from the human bases were virtually useless against the reinforced metal the velkin clothed themselves in. We already had samples of the armor back at the base.  Now,... now we just needed some of these damn guns to take a look at.  I looked around for something to carry them in for my run back to Fort Retribution.  Unfortunately, for the load and the distance, the best I could see was a piece of hull from one of the transports.  I would need to punch holes in it for hand holds then drag the bloody thing several hundred kilometres to camp.  'Damn, this is gonna suck!'  I darkly mused.  Then, with a sigh, I went to work. Thankfully my juggernaut capabilities made bending the metal to spec fairly easy.  I loaded up the rifles, strapped them in place with some plastic I found in the wrecks then took firm hold .  'I hope I don't lose any of this.'  I thought and, activating full speed, I churned across the countryside back in the direction I had come from. Even with dragging the makeshift travois behind me, I made excellent time, reaching Fort Retribution as the sun had reached the mid-morning point in the sky.  Ignoring the looks of curiosity thrown my way as I entered, I immediately angled for the makeshift outdoor lab Felix had set up.  The tesla commander had his entire team there, meticulously going over the salvaged tech from our first encounter. "Felix."  I called, coming to a halt just beyond the circle of transport pieces that marked the lab's outer edge. Pad in hand and furiously scribbling notes as two of his teslas were carefully opening the computer core they had recovered, Felix looked up at hearing his real name and quickly found me. "Max!  Hallo!  Where have you been?  We've been looking for you all morning." I shrugged and let go of the chunk of hull I was using to carry my recovered rifles. "Went for a run to clear my head."  I said with a sigh, earning a quizzical look from the lean Risen, who tucked his notepad into a pocket and began walking in my direction.. "While normally I would say that probably wasn't the best idea, with the velkin buzzing around following our attack on their convoy, they most likely don't possess the means to significantly hurt you."  Felix said.  "But you did have us wondering where you, . . ."  His voice trailed off when he spotted the chunk of hull and what it was carrying. "Whoa.  Where did you get those??"  He looked at me, eyes wide. "From the velkin company investigating the scene of our ambush."  I bluntly answered, looking back at the stack of a dozen or so rifles myself.  "My run put me almost right on top of them.  I took them out before they could do much about it."  I looked back over at him. "I have to admit it was more chance than anything." "Okay."  Felix hesitantly said, examining my expression for a long moment.  "I can accept that, however odd it sounds.  But what's with the hardware?" I shrugged again, looking back at the massive rifles. "I'm not sure what came over me.  Maybe it was the Earth Mother that guided me to the velkin so I could do this.  But I found myself thinking that while I could hurt these giant aliens, and our ranged javelin and ballista could as well, none of the rest of us can.  And what weapons we can scrounge from the human bases were ineffective against the velkin then, and will be now."

I paused to take a step around my impromptu cargo carrier to pick up one of the massive rifles, which was only possible with my juggernaut strength, as each were at least a 100 kilograms or so.  I made a show of looking it up and down as I continued speaking. "So I figured we could study their weapons, reverse engineer them to learn how to make something that hits harder, to break down their armor.  And how much power they use, so we can develop protection against it."  I made to toss the rifle over to Felix, who immediately waved me off with a look of alarm on his face.  So I propped it up butt down on the ground instead, the weapon almost half a metre over my head. "Think that's something your team can work on?" Felix quickly bobbed a nod, obviously excited about the possibilities. "We'll have that thing broken down in no time, Max!"  He assured me, stepping close to let his hands run over the black metal of the massive weapon.  My eyebrow lifted when I saw tiny energy tendrils reaching out from his skin to penetrate the metal.  Then he was reaching into his pocket for his note pad, which he immediately began to scribble things on. "Well, that was cool."  I said and he looked over at me. "What?  Oh, the dancing lightning from my finger tips."  Felix chuckled.  "That'd be one of the primary tesla abilities at work.  The energy allows me to 'see' into the mechanism without actually needing to take it apart."  He held up his note pad on which was a fresh, very detailed diagram of the velkin energy rifle, from power pack to emitter crystal. "Thankfully I have some skill in drawing, thanks to my research background.  That allows me to sketch out what I see, so others can work with it."  He dropped the note pad to add a couple details before tucking it back into his pocket.  "I should have a full schematic within the hour."  He reached out to give the big rifle a pat. "A model shortly after, then maybe something working after that.  I'll get you your tech, Max, have no fear." "I have nothing but confidence in the abilities of you and your team, Felix."  I retorted with a grin.  Then something occurred to me.  "But if you plan on constructing something, do you have enough equipment and supplies here to do so?" Felix's characteristic expression of thoughtful consideration appeared and he pulled out his note pad to look at his schematic for a moment. "If I recall the manifest we put together to list all of our supplies, I would say no."  He finally said after a long moment's worth of thought.  "I would need raw materials, a micro-forge, a spectrometer, an extruder, ..." I cut him off with a quick gesture. "Just make me a list, man, and we'll hit a couple nearby bases to gather the stuff together for you." The sun was starting to fall behind the mountains by the time my team stood at the weathered and broken down entrance to what an overhead sign called North American Defense Force Base Campton. "Abbas?"  I said and the upgrade captain stepped forward, his eyes keen as he took a look at the sign above the weathered and battered gate. "Did your company draw supplies from Campton before your attack on the cull convoy?" "No sir."  Abbas quickly replied, looking over at me.  "We took supplies from NAD Force Base Cooperstown on the banks of the Missouri River, to the southeast." I nodded then slowly stepped forward to take a closer look at the gate itself.  Outside of being weathered and unmaintained for 50 years, it still looked fairly sturdy.  And quite locked. A juggernaut shield formed around my clenched fist as I willed its absolute density to max.  Then I was chopping through the weathered metal as if it were not even there, shattering the lock and ripping a good chunk of the gate apart.  A push on one leaf and the gate swung open. "Open sesame."  I muttered under my breath then, looking over my shoulder at my team, I nodded then stepped inside. We quickly moved through the entry area, complete with abandoned guard posts and monitoring stations and onto the base itself.  We then relied on Abbas and his experience with Cooperstown to locate the supplies depot, the armory and other locations that hopefully held the materials on Felix's list. "Okay, Abbas, take Ronin and your team to the supplies depot here."  I tapped on the map we had created using our satellite network.  Notations were penned in to identify the buildings, which Abbas had confirmed once we were on site. "You should find the micro-forge and the raw materials that Jolt needs there."  As the upgrade captain and his team jogged off in that direction, I then turned to my next team. "Merkur, take Freya and hit the quartermasters.  You should find the additional equipment pods with the gear we need to cover the additions to Fort Retribution the Upgrade Initiative has made." "Yes, sir."  The female upgrade officer said with a nod before she, the psyren Freya and her team jogged off. "And what are we retrieving, sir?"  That from one of Felix's teslas, a young black woman named Tonya. "Data."  I replied, pointing at the base's massive command post.  "I'm hoping we have data, images, scans, whatever, from the initial attack on our forces.  So we can see how their ships move, if any of our equipment was effective, so on and so forth."  I looked back over at her and the other tesla. "So I hope you two are up to cracking some heavy encryption because I'm sure it's strapped in tight, whatever we find!"  I then looked over at the psyren that accompanied us. "Keep your peepers on, Jazz.  I want to know when the other teams are starting to transport materials to the muster points.  And if we suddenly get company."  I glanced around at the massive, and except for us, completely abandoned base. "Just in case the velkin are watching." "Of course, sir."  Jazz quietly answered, hidden as all psyren were, in her heavy robes as she floated nearly a foot off the ground. "Kay, let's move out."  And then we were lightly jogging towards the command post.

 

Chapter 5: The Eastern Front

With a flare of discharge and a ripple of telekinetic force, Jazz blew through the final doors blocking our access to the base's server farm, buried deep within a hardened plasticrete EMP shelter in the control post's basement.  Watching our rear in full juggernaut armor and density, I nodded in satisfaction with the psyren's success in opening the heavy, double reinforced portal. "Double time, teslas."  I commanded in a voice loud enough to be heard the length of the corridor.  "Find me that computer core and get me that data packet!" "Yes, sir!"  Tonya and her comrade quickly darted forward, hands glowing with miniature lightning dancing underneath the skin in anticipation of accessing the long silent military hardware. "Jazz?" "Still clear, sir."  Came the psyren's quiet reply, reaching my ears with the same even pitch I would've heard if she had been standing right beside me, instead of ten metres away. "The other two teams have found what we are looking for and are prepping to begin the transfers.  Tovin at the muster point reports ready and standing by." Again I nodded in satisfaction before looking over at my four person fire team that I had brought in with us, three javelins and a ballista.  The javelins all held goa-forged crossbows at the ready, the ballista some sort of shoulder mounted cannon. "Stay frosty, you guys.  If the velkin sniff us out, they could drop ordnance and bury us before we have the chance to react."  Four taut nods confirmed they heard me, two javelins facing the darkened space where the bunker door had been, the other javelin and the ballista facing the stairwell we had just come down. It was as I focused on taking my own advice that a telepathic message via broadband was pushed into my mind. - All teams, please be advised. -  Ronin's quiet yet confident voice whispered into the depths of my mind. - I have detected a new set of signals, moving along the western perimeter fence.  So far I have been unable to identify them, however, they don't appear to have detected us. - I pulled out my copy of the base map and located the supply depot where Abbas, Ronin and the supply team had been dispatched.  It was in the northern part of the base, nearly two kilometres from our present location.  I let my finger track to the western fence, marked by a thin line in the satellite image.  And I grimaced when I saw the gate we had breached to gain access, was on that fence. Add to that was the fact that Ronin, a skilled and accomplished psyren who had already seen battle in her short time as a Transcended, had yet to identify the signals despite them being well within her telepathic scanning range, and it spelled trouble. - Can anybody get eyes onto these new signals? -  I sent, piggybacking on Ronin's signal which I felt still present in my mind. - I might be able to, sir. -  Abbas sent.  - Brin, Avar, what do you see? -  He continued, naming two of his own javelins, one an upgrade, the other new Transcended. - Moving into position now, sir. -  A taut female voice reported.  That would be Brin, the upgrade.  She participated in the scavenger hunt ambush, a good, dependable soldier who was making the most of her new abilities. - Roof top parking garage, within twenty metres of the perimeter fence. -  There was a pause, then: - Using night vision binoculars to scan the fence line.  And we've got movement on approach, perhaps ten, maybe fifteen discernable, . . . - The voice dropped.  Frowning, I impatiently waited, Ronin's broadband still active in my mind. - What the hell are those?? - Avar, originally Scandanavian, abruptly blurted onto the broadband, his slightly accented mental voice filled with fear.  And I watched the javelin close to me, and the ballista across the corridor suddenly tense.

"We're detecting javelin fire."  The javelin hissed, her eyes wide as she turned to stare hard at me, fear and uncertainty in her eyes.  Then: - We need immediate evac. -  Brin nearly screamed onto the broadband.  - We are under attack by unknown creatures and javelin fire is having no effect.  Evac, evac us now! - - Get them out of there, Ronin! - I barked, surging to my feet and charging towards the staircase. "Jazz!  Stay here and make sure our teslas locate that data!  Ndoku, Tsunami, you're with me.  You other two, watch Jazz's back!" The space between the parking garage and the fence flared with brilliant green and blue slashes of light as Avar and Brin fired almost continuously at whatever was at the fence.  At the fence, moving up the outside of the parking garage and nearly right on top of them - What the hell, Ronin! -  I snarled, barely repressing the need to go full juggernaut for fear of leaving my javelin and ballista in the dust.  Still, we ran hard for the parking garage, a good two, maybe three hundred metres distant. - I said get them out of there!! - - I,...I can't, Max. -  For the first time I heard uncertainty in the psyren's voice.  - Something is blocking the teleportal from opening.  I can't get a lock! - - They're in the garage. -  Brin screamed. - They're on our level!! - Suddenly Tsunami, the ballista was skidding to a halt, bringing his shoulder mounted cannon up. "There!"  He barked, pointing at the fence closest to us. I too slid to a stop on the dry, cracked pavement underfoot, twisting to look in the direction the ballista was point at.  And felt my heart lurch in my chest at what I was seeing. It looked like a millipede, all smooth, rounded black metal armor glinting dully in the fading light and hundreds of dancing legs.  Except this one was nearly a metre tall and at least ten long. "Is that what's attacking Brin and Avar?"  Ndoku hissed, bringing her goa-forged crossbow up to bear as she stepped to my side. "Maybe."  I conceded.  "Hopefully it hasn't, . . ." With loose stones flying and dust spraying, the metal bug used its multiple legs to stop and turn in a tight half circle before it charged towards us. "Noticed us."  I finished lamely. "Light it up!"  Tsunami snarled and his cannon fired, hammering the metal creation with a continuous blast right in the center of what looked like its rounded head.  At the same time Ndoku began loosing smaller bolts, each darting forward to hammer into the oncoming intruder.  And we all watched as the focused goa slid off the metal shell like water off a duck. "Ah, damn."  The ballista stammered, his blast fading as he let his cannon drop, astonishment on his face. "Let's see it shed this."  I hissed and bolted forward. The air itself shuddered when I hit it at full speed.  And, for the briefest of moments, its momentum, weight and churning legs let it resist my assault.  Then I was driving the big metal bug backwards, slamming hard into a guard post several metres behind it.  Of reinforced concrete, plastic clading and metal, the post exploded into a thousand fragments as we drove through it, offering no resistance at all to our path. The metal bug squeaked when I took hold of its head, metal squealing in protest as my fingers bit into it to find purchase.  Then I was flipping it over and driving it with every bit of force I could muster into the ground.  Shattered paving and stone flew everywhere as the bug's shell somehow withstood the impact to gouge a long, trailing crater out of the rock as I continued forward, my legs churning.

Letting go of it for a moment, its myriad legs feebly moving in a vain attempt to right itself, I jumped up and slammed the full weight of my densified body into its head section.  Again metal squealed as it distorted, sparks flew and the bug spasmodically jerked before it stopped moving all together. Breathing heavily, I stared down at it for a moment, eyes wide.  That damn thing took everything I had and more, before I was able to take it out.  Just what the hell was it?? A distant scream from the parking garage recaptured my attention.  Spinning hard on my heel, I went full juggernaut, going four steps before a sonic boom announced my breaking the sound barrier.  Four more steps and I was slamming into a bug trying to climb up the side of the garage, its feet equipped with sharp, metal tips that easily found purchase in the weathered concrete. The impact was enough to knock it free and, legs windmilling, it squeaked as we flew through the air before slamming into a second one, also attempting to climb the outside wall.  The three of us went heavily into the ground, the second bug under the first, both driven in hard by my hyper dense body. Yet, despite the force of impact that left a good sized crater in its wake, the bottom bug still thrashed weakly to indicate it had somehow survived the pounding.  And the top bug was clawing at me in an attempt to pull me off. It got a smash in the head for its efforts, more sparks flying as my densified elbow collapsed in the side of its metal dome.  Then I rolled to the side and, with a strong kick, knocked the one bug off the other before the bug on the ground also got smashed, this time with a knee to the side of what looked like a head.  Sparks again flew and it ceased its weak thrashing. Knowing I had little to no time to stand there and admire my work, I turned and lept over the concrete divider that marked the garage's first level.  Finding the ramps, I quickly raced to the top level. Firing steadily at no less than three of the big metal bugs, Brin was backed into a corner, screaming wildly when I came off the last ramp and onto the level where she and Avar were making their stand. A quick look found Avar already down, missing an arm and a leg and a good chunk of his head.  Dark blood was pooled around his still twitching body.  As a Transcended, he would possess enough goa to stay animated even with such normally fatal injuries.  But until I dealt with the creatures threatening Brin, he would have to wait. I twisted hard enough to rip concrete out of the ground underfoot before darting in to hammer into two of the metal bugs, pushing them through the level's outer wall and into space.  I halted just short of the edge and let them drop.  I hoped that would be enough to deter them, but I doubted it. Another hard twist then two more steps had me ploughing into the last one threatening Brin, hitting the bug hard enough that its metal carapace whined in protest before it began to cave.  Taking hold of it in mid step, I flipped it around to bury it into the concrete with a powerful downward thrust.  As it feebly attempted to roll itself out of the two foot deep crater I embedded it into, I took hold of the bug's head and gave it a hard wrench.  I nodded in satisfaction as that sent sparks flying and the metal monster jerked into abrupt stillness. "Brin!" I barked, pulling my utility vest off then yanking off my jacket.  "Get the hell out of here before more of those things get up here."  A pair of steps put me beside the stricken Avar.  I knelt and began gathering his broken body up into my jacket. "Yes,...yes, sir."  The upgrade stammered before turning to run down the ramp. Putting Brin out of my mind for a moment, I concentrated on getting Avar wrapped up and ready for transport.  And so I didn't hear the scrabble of multiple legs on concrete until it was already too late.

The telltale whisper of metal scraping on concrete was already echoing in my ears when I finished tying Avar up in my jacket and began to turn towards the sound.  Just in time to get a bug's round head in the chest, the impact knocking me flying five or six metres through the air.  Hitting the ground, I immediately scrambled to my feet and was thus somewhat prepared for the bug's second attack, following close on the heels of the first. This time, instead of headbutting me, it tried to swarm over me, using its momentum to knock me off my feet before running roughshod over top, slashing at my face and body with its pointed legs.  So strong was the creature that, coupled with the incredible hardness of its metal carapace, I actually felt those leg tips scratching at my body and face despite hyper density.  Those same legs were the ones that could make holes in concrete to use as toeholds, and which dismembered Avar. "Get off!"  I growled, kicking out with my feet to flip my attacker over onto it's back. Unfortunately its rounded shell allowed the creature to simply roll all the way over onto its feet.  Where I promptly used a pair of clenched fists to crush the front part of its head, resulting in the now familiar spray of sparks and cessation of motion. "Man, where is a king size can of Raid when you need one?"  I gave the bug a kick. Additional scrapping from multiple legs made me twist back around.  Where I found myself facing a full half dozen of the black metal millipedes. "You've got to be kidding me."  I growled.  That was too many, even for me.  So I chose the next best plan: retreat! Turning to my left, two steps got me to the bundled up Avar, who I scooped off the ground.  I then turned and ran hard for the level's edge, hearing the bugs churn into motion behind me.  Reaching the edge in a handful of running steps, I didn't hesitate, leaping the concrete barrier and out into space. I hung in the air for a brief moment then I was dropping, slamming into the ground a heart beat later with bone-jarring force, my hyper density sinking me nearly up to my knees into what was solid rock.  Kicking my way free, I began to run to where Brin had joined Ndoku and Tsunami, all three now firing steadily at the bugs that were now in pursuit. - Ronin, can you lock onto Brin, Ndoku and Tsunami? -  I asked as I extended my shield over Avar, as I carried him in my arms. - Barely, and the interference that prevented me from pulling Brin and Avar out, is encroaching. -  Ronin tersely reported, her concern clear in her mental voice. - Don't wait, jump them out, now! - I commanded and watched as the two javelins and the ballista winked out of sight. - Jazz, have the teslas finished their download? - Before I got an answer, a bug slammed into me from the right with enough force to make me stagger.  Regaining my footing with a growl, I freed my right hand to swing down and smash in its head, instantly stopping it in its tracks.  It fell back, it's place filled with three more.  'Damn it, these bastards are fast!'  I grimly thought. - Jazz? - - Finished now, sir. -  The psyren quickly answered.  - And jumped out, along with the two javelins escorting them. - - And the supply and quartermaster teams have also finished their equipment and materials run. -  Freya reported, her voice significantly calmer than either Ronin's or Jazz. - Jumping them out now. - A bug slammed into me from the left, nearly toppling me over.  Grimacing, I used my body to hit it back, the impact making it squeak and nearly flip over.  Then another was on my other side, and I was sandwiched even as I turned towards the base's open gate. - Let me know when you're all clear! -  I sent then smoothly hopped over the bug on the right as it sinuously tried to pin me between it and its comrade, causing the two to crash against each other with even more sparks flying and the tortured shriek of metal against metal. - Clear. -  Ronin sent, then Freya: - Clear. -  And finally Jazz: - All clear, sir.  But I can't get a lock on you. - - Don't worry about me. -  I hopped over another bug coming in hard from my right, my booted feet dragging across the top of its carapace as I went over it. - I'll get out on my own.  I just need to, ... - The blast from above came so close, I could feel its heat.  Then one of the bugs pursuing me squealed as the beam cut through its armor and pinned it roughly to the ground.  The others instantly broke off pursuit and scattered in all directions, even as more beams reached down out of the sky. Two more bugs were immediately pinned, the beams doing something to their insides as they thrashed for a moment then were still, smoke oozing out of the new gashes in their heavy armor.  Others just barely managed to avoid getting hit, twisting to the side at the last moment to let the beam slash a smoking gouge into the ground, or bounce off a side, leaving a smouldering groove in the dark metal carapace. I skidded to a halt and followed the beams upward and out of sight.  Damn, were the velkin firing on those things from orbit??  It was the only thing I could think of as happening.  I could only hope they couldn't see me.  Then I was turning hard and going full bore out the broken gate, a sonic boom announcing my breach of the sound barrier shortly afterwards. Time to get the hell out of Dodge!

 

Somebody Call for an Exterminator?

Boost and a number of his summoners looked up from recharging a handful of upgrades as I skidded to a halt just under the edge of the field hospital tent.  It was full night by this time, and they were working by the bright light of several stand lamps. "Boost!"  I cried.  Their curious eyes found me soaked in Avar's blood, the javelin's crippled body in my arms still wrapped in my bloody jacket. "Got a man down here!" "Put him right here, boss."  The summoner pulled a wheeled operating table around towards me and I deposited Avar's still twitching body on it even as the other summoners began pulling on clean medical smocks with some urgency. "Holy shit, what the hell happened??"  Boost exclaimed in astonishment as I unwrapped Avar's mangled body and he got his first look at the injured Transcended. "We got hit at Campton."  I rasped, stepping back as the other summoners swarmed around the badly injured Transcended, hands already glowing. "Velkin?"  He asked and I shook my head. "At least, I don't think they were.  Some kind of giant robotic millipede, metre high, ten long.  Armored up the ass."  I looked over at him. "Ballista blasts couldn't even put a dent in 'em." Boost blinked in surprise at that. "What?  Not even ballista, . . .?"  He shook his head.  "And you?  You could take them, right?" I jerked a nod and he sighed with relief. "But I wasn't running them over, brother."  I rasped.  "They took shots from me that would've completely smashed out velkin heavy transports.  And I couldn't take on more than two at a time.  More than that and they were running me over." "What?"  Boost stammered, my revelation and his exclamation eliciting a couple of alarmed looks from the other summoners, who looked up and over at me from their frantic work on Avar. I glanced at them then took a step back, indicating that Boost come with me.  When he was close enough, I lowered my voice so that only he could hear me. "At first, I thought it was some sort of robotic hunter-killer left behind by the velkin when they cleared the base of its soldiers.  But at the end of our encounter and frantic withdrawal from these things, the velkin fired from orbit to take some of these things out.  From orbit, Boost, with their big guns.  That's what it took to kill these things.  Our enemy doesn't appear to like them either, using whatever means necessary to take them out." "So, what are we going to do, boss?" I frowned and let a short sigh snort out my nostrils. "I dunno, man.  I really don't know."  I looked at the summoners as they were just stepping back from a pale Avar, who was now sitting up, his head, arm and leg restored.  Thank goodness the man was already undead, or he would've had no chance. "It makes me wish we had Risen from the time of the attack, who may have some experience with the velkin when they hit the ground.  And if they brought something with them when they did."  My frown deepened. "If Tate were still alive, he could've helped us there.  He was killed in the velkin landing, summoned back three months later in the first Risen wave to be gathered by the Earth Mother.  He might've seen these bugs land." Boost scrubbed at his face in frustration. "So what you're telling me is that there's a good chance that not only do we have velkin to worry about, we have these giant robotic millipedes too?"  He wanted to know.

"A very good chance."  I grimly confirmed. "That's frickin' awesome."  Boost sighed, then looked over at Avar.  Seeing a chance to change the subject, he raised his voice slightly. "And how are you feeling now, soldier?" "Not bad."  The Transcended javelin said, sounding tired as he straightened up a little to slowly rotate his new arm in its socket.  He looked at me. "Thanks to you, sir," he said with a nod of acknowledgement.  "You pulled me out back there, and saved my life." "I would thank the Earth Mother for making you a Transcended, Avar," I quickly replied with a grin. "That alone made it possible to save you, with the damage you took."  My grin faded.  "What exactly happened back there?  How did you go down?" "Those, . . . things noticed us almost as soon as we put eyes on them, sir."  Avar said, shaking his head as he recalled the frantic moments of the attack. "Like they felt us looking at them.  They pulled off the fence line and charged the garage.  Before Brin or I could react, they were halfway up the outside wall and we were firing in a vain attempt to keep them back.  That's when Brin called for evac.  We watched our javelin bolts just bounce off that armor like we were throwing water balloons at them."  He looked up, his expression troubled. "Then they were over the top and on us.  One ran me over, its legs like razors as it cut me to pieces, the others going right at Brin.  I was down before I could even react.  I don't remember much after that, or what happened to my partner." "Don't worry, soldier," I said as reassuringly as I could.  "Brin's fine.  After I retrieved you, we withdrew to Retribution without taking any other casualties." "Thank the Earth Mother for that!"  Avar said with a sigh of relief.  Then Boost was moving in to check his team's work. "Looks like a full reconstitution," he said after a moment's examination, looking up at his team with a smile. "Good work, all."  Then he was looking back at Avar.  "Now, these are new welds, your rebuilt limbs sporting new tissue.  I would advise you wait until they're fully charged before you engage any of your abilities to make sure the welds and rebuilds are stable." "Yes, sir.  Thank you, sir."  Avar hopped off the table and accepted a new uniform tunic from one of the other summoners before he looked over at me. "And thanks again, sir." I nodded and Avar slipped out of the tent, heading back to his quarters for some well-earned rest. "While I know you don't need rest, Max, you might want to clean up a bit."  Boost suggested, looking back at me. "You've got most of Avar's misfortune all over you, there." I chuckled as I looked down at my blood soaked tunic. "I do seem a bit untidy, don't I."  I grinned.  "I'll go grab a change of uniform and see if there are personal hygiene kits in the equipment pods."  Since Risen weren't alive, their bodies didn't support the bacterial and fungal growth on their skin that produced most bad body odor.  Nor did they sweat, or shed skin.  So, as long as external factors didn't soil them, they would never need to shower, shave or clean up again.  Handy, in terms of convenience.  But it also meant no showers were available to hose off blood and other external sources of filth. Hence the need to find a personal hygiene kit, which should have enough soap and cleaning implements to remove most of what I was currently soaked in.

"Then I'll go and find Felix, to see if he's made anything out of that data we retrieved from Campton." I was just toweling off by lamp light when I heard a scratch on the wall of my tent close to the entrance.  Already with a clean pair of underwear and pants taking care of any modesty issues, I continued to dry my hair as I called out: "Come!" "Hey boss."  Kat greeted me as she stepped into my tent.  Where she immediately came to a halt, eyes wide. "Whoa.  You didn't say you were half naked.  You should've told me you were cleaning up; I would've come by earlier, when you were completely naked." "Nice."  I chuckled, my thoughts too consumed by what happened at Campton to get uptight about Kat's interested gaze and suggestive comments.  "Think you can stop staring at me long enough to tell me why you're here?" "I doubt it."  Kat purred, moving closer to me with a couple swaying steps. "Kat!" "Oh, all right."  She said, an actual pout on her face, which I glimpsed when I half turned to toss the towel onto a chair I had against the tent wall. "I heard you encountered some sort of wildlife at the Campton base." "Not exactly."  I grabbed a tee shirt and turned towards her as I began pulling it over my head. "Daaaaaamn."  She whispered, her voice abruptly hoarse.  "Six pack and all greek god! I didn't think you could, Max, but you do look better from the front." "Focus."  I rasped, pulling the tee shirt down in time to see her expression of raw desire as she ran her eyes over my body. "Hello?  My eyes are up here."  I deadpanned and she immediately looked up at me, a hint of a blush nearly hidden by her warm brown skin.  Along with a look of chagrin at getting caught oggling. "That's better.  And wipe your chin; you're drooling."  I stepped past her to grab a new jacket and utility vest, having lost my last vest during the bug attack at Campton. "Let's head over to Felix's shop so I can see what data we managed to crack out of Campton's server.  And on the way over, you can tell me what you're thinking of with these newest discoveries of ours." Felix, Tonya and a handful of other teslas were slowly working their way through the data dump by lamp light when Kat and I stepped under the edge of the command post's roof, a thoughtful expression on my face.  Looking up at our entrance, Felix smiled. "Ah, there you are, Max.  We've been expecting you."  He turned his attention back to the computer stations they were working on to gesture at the screens where streams of data were unfolding. "Tonya and Istrid managed nearly a full core download before those,...bugs attacked.  Everything from surveillance satellite imagery, to deep scan, to monitoring the landing from several different view points."  He looked back over at me, an excited smile on his lean face. "Max, we got the whole smash!  NADF must've kept the cameras rolling through the entire velkin invasion." I grinned, caught up in Felix's enthusiasm. "Outstanding!"  I reached out and gave him a comradely slap on the shoulder, before extending a hand to Tonya and the other tesla who had penetrated Campton's server, Istrid, giving each a firm handshake of thanks. "Very good work."  Then my grin disappeared as I looked back over at Felix.  "Now, I need you to comb through that data and find me hard info on the velkin.  Anything the humans did that hurt or outmaneuvered them in some way.  I need the chinks in their armor, Felix and I need them yesterday."

If he was put off by my determined request, Felix didn't show it.  Instead his smile only grew. "You got it, Max."  The tesla commander said with a nod to his team.  "We're going to sift through every kilobyte, starting immediately.  We'll have something definite for you within a few hours." My smile returned, somewhat diminished by my own resolution. "Excellent.  Thanks, Felix."  Again I reached out, this time laying my hand on his shoulder. "One more request, and I'll leave you to your work."  I gently pulled him away from his team so he could join Kat and I. "Now, thanks to our encounter with these unknowns at Campton, we've got a new player on the field.  I don't know what they are, or where they come from.  I just know the velkin don't like them either.  Whether they attacked us due to programming, or animal need, that I also don't know.  Kat thinks if they're animal, she can somehow get through to them.  Talk to them, find out what they want.  If they're not, however, I might need a tesla or two to figure out what makes them tick.  And I'd prefer one of them to be you." Felix didn't hesitate, to his credit. "Of course, of course."  He nodded, returning my gaze unflinchingly.  "Anything you need, Max.  If they are robotic, I wouldn't mind taking a look at them myself.  Crack their programming and we might find ourselves a powerful weapon to use against our primary enemy." "By Max's report, they sound more animal than anything."  Kat interjected, looking from me to Felix. "Hunting behaviour, pursuit, pack mentality; it could go either way." "Bots mimicing animals then."  I shrugged.  "Either way, it's going to be hard to pin one down to find out.  But find out we will.  Since we have a bit of time before your team finishes data mining on that download, Felix, I want you, Kat, to gather me a handful of animus.  We're going back to Campton, . . ." "Before you do that, sirs, I think I have something you might want to see."  Tonya interjected from where the teslas were working on the data. She pointed to the flat screen in front of us after we had gathered behind her. "This is a live feed, from a satellite over northern Africa."  Dominating the screen was an image of one of the massive velkin ships in orbit, a spindle-shaped craft the size of a city, all weapon emplacements and jagged edges.  When she saw that she had our undivided attention, she tapped the touch surface and the image zoomed in to a section of the hull she had hi-lighted. There, backdropped behind the dull gray of the hull, were several familiar long, black shapes.  As they came into focus, we watched as they carefully moved towards one of the weapon emplacements nearby, inching their way closer and closer.  Until, with a final rush, they swarmed what appeared to be a massive gun, ripping apart the housing to chop the weapon into pieces.  A heart beat later a surge of energy rippled over the entire hull and, stunned by the pulse overwhelming whatever mechanism made them tick, the shapes fell off. Drifting in space, they curled into a tight coil, slowly moving away from the ship.  Tonya then tapped the screen again to zoom out and we watched several streaks of light appear as smaller objects fell away from the fleet element we were looking at to enter the atmosphere. "If I was to go strictly on this video alone, I would suggest our newest visitors seem to be some sort of parasite, or 5th column, sabotaging the velkin ships in orbit."  The tesla thoughtfully stated, pausing to look back at us.  "They're only on the surface because they're falling out of orbit after the velkin dislodge them." Felix tugged thoughtfully on his lower lip, arms folded. "If 5th column, why would the velkin be working against themselves?  If a parasite, where did it come from?"  He looked at Tonya. "Regardless, excellent work, Tonya."  As she nodded and turned back to her screen, Felix looked at me and Kat. "Either way, looks like we have confirmation that the bugs aren't working for the velkin." "It'd be nice to know who they are working for."  Kat pointed out.  "If they're animal in any shape or form, I might be able to access their minds and find that out." I nodded in agreement. "Go assemble a team and meet back here in fifteen."  I instructed and, with a nod, Kat was stepping out of the tent and into the darkness beyond. "Are you sure you want to do this now?"  Felix asked as soon as Kat was out of earshot. "I mean, if half the reports that came in on these things are true, they were most difficult to deal with.  And that was in the light of day.  Night might be that much worse." "If they're animals, they might have a sleep cycle."  I countered.  "Which means we could find them somnolent and tractable."  I shrugged. "It's worth a shot, anyway, to see if we can get these bastard bugs sorted out." "True."  Felix conceded. "Now, before I go, any updates on how your reverse engineering of the velkin tech is going?" Felix nodded and drew a flat sheet of hard plastic from inside his jacket, as wide as the space between his outstretched little finger and thumb and that, plus half again long.  A few taps on its face and I watched as it lit up with text and information.  'Huh, a portable tablet.'  I thought.  Then I was leaning forward with interest as several schematics began flashing across the screen. "We've managed to build schematics on the rifle, the data core, the wireless networking array and a power cell."  The tesla exclaimed, illustrating each by selecting a thumbnail of the schematic and tapping it to expand to fill most of the screen.  He then would hold the tablet so I could see them. "With the mini-forge and extruder now going full bore, I should have mock ups done within the hour, and working models two or three hours after that." "Hot damn, Felix, you're a frickin' miracle worker!"  I exclaimed with a grin.  The thin Transcended smiled in return. "Save calling me that until after we test the models."  He said.  "Disassembling the velkin tech turned out to be much easier than I originally thought.  Then again, it is our purpose as teslas." I gave Felix a slap on the shoulder. "Either way, excellent work, my friend.  Pass on my thanks to your engineering team.  Hopefully you'll have something for us by the time we return from our bug hunting trip to Campton." Felix grimaced at that. "Hopefully you return, Max."  He rasped, eliciting a chuckle at his dry statement. "We will."  I assured him. "Be back shortly!" 


 

Bug Hunt

"Okay, this place is way creepier at night."  Kat rasped, a warm presence just behind my left shoulder.  As an animus, she could easily see in the dark.  Yet she, and the other four animus she brought with her, chose to stick close to me, one of the guys on the team that couldn't see in the dark. I glanced over my shoulder at her before returning my gaze to the front, peering hard through the gloom.  Unfortunately she wasn't wrong.  This place was significantly creepier in the dark.  While I could see better in the dark than a human, I had nowhere near the ability the animus had.  All I could see was stark grays and blacks, the buildings indistinct masses all around us.  A glance up at a moonless sky made me grimace.  No help there, either.  Nothing to dispel the gloom.  Or the feeling that the bugs were out in the abandoned base somewhere in front of us, just waiting. "Jacks?"  I whispered and the tesla I had named, a lean fellow with a pair of night vision binoculars lifted to his eyes, looked over at me and shook his head.  Nothing visible. - Kalypso? -  And one of three psyrens on the team I had brought, silently floated forward to telepathically scan the seemingly empty buildings in front of us. - I have several signals, unmoving and unresponsive by the western fence line and the parking garage, where the brief indicated you first encountered them, sir. -  Was her report a moment later. - Those signals could be power cells that haven't yet been exhausted by the creature's terminated state.  They are weak and intermittent. - I slowly nodded, digesting that information.  If these things were bots of some kind, a failing power cell would certainly be in the realm of possibility.  Then her next words into my mind recaptured my full attention: - And I have several signals moving along the northern fence line.  I cannot tell exact numbers or configuration, as they seem to have a scattering field accompanying them. - - Okay, everybody, that's our quarry. -  I hopped onto the broadband to say.  - We're going to follow our encounter scenario and move close enough for the animus to make a scan.  Hurricane, you and Quake stay frosty.  Focusing both your ballista blasts on one bug may be enough to turn them, if they charge. - The addressed ballista, one on either side of our small group, both nodded in silent acknowledgement, their cannons already summoned and charged. - Kalypso, Magda, Aubrey, I need the three of you to monitor the level of interference we're getting.  If we starting losing teleportal lock, you jump us out immediately. - - Yes, sir. -  The three psyrens harmonically chorused into my mind. "Kat, you five stay close.  As soon as you pick up anything, you let me know."  I whispered over my shoulder. "You got it, big man."  She replied, moving just a little closer at that.  For the briefest of moments I felt her fingers first lightly go across the small of my back, then on to my arm before they made their way into my left hand.  Where, with the slightest caress against the tips of my own fingers, she lightly yet insistently interwove her digits with mine.  Yeah, she was worried and not a little scared. Not that I could blame her.  The last time we met, those bugs gave us all that we could handle, plus a bit.  Animus were light assault, relying on co-opting local wildlife to do their fighting for them.  If we came under attack, there was little they could do against the raw power of these creatures. With that in mind, I silently applauded their courage.  They had all volunteered for this assignment despite knowing they could very well get cut to shreds.  And I quietly vowed I would do everything in my power to make sure that didn't happen.

- Move out. -  I broadcast and my small team began to move silently and carefully deeper into the abandoned base. Mission specs had us advancing to one of the fallen bugs so that Jacks, our tesla could examine it.  Then we would carefully move to intercept any active groups that were moving anywhere within the base perimeter, hopefully getting close enough for Kat and her animus comrades to get a reading without triggering their engage mechanism. Forming the points of a triangle, the psyrens floated around us, constantly scanning to keep aware of not only where the bugs were, but if anything was in the buildings that surrounded us as well.  The ballista kept their cannons ready, both veterans of the scavenger ambush so they would only fire if they truly needed to.  Which was good; I didn't fancy one of them accidentally discharging their weapon and taking one or more of our heads off in the close quarters we were keeping as we swept forward. Through the debris of the destroyed guard post I had obliterated on my way out we carefully went, approaching the first of the 'dead' bugs that lay unmoving on the battered ground.  As soon as we were within five metres, I broadcast: - Hold your positions.  Jacks, move in. - As the rest of us stopped and those that were on foot lowered ourselves into ready crouches, the tesla quickly moved forward, his hands already shimmering with barely concealed lightning.  It didn't take him long to traverse the intervening space, intent on the unmoving shape of the downed creature. When he was close, I looked over at Hurricane and the female ballista nodded in acknowledgement before she carefully took aim at the bug's bulk just beyond the wiry tesla.  Thus Jacks was covered as he inched over the final few steps to carefully lay his hands on the creature's black carapace. - Damn it! -  He immediately hissed onto the broadband. - The armor is too think for a quick sweep.  I'm going to ramp up the joules on my scan, to see if I can penetrate through to the internals. - - Copy that. -  I replied, looking over at Quake, my male ballista.  - Quake, take point.  If anything comes down that fence line looking for trouble, light it up. - - Copy that, boss. -  A broad shouldered fellow that more than earned his call sign, the big ballista slowly eased to our left, cannon at the ready. - Kalypso? - - Signals are steady on the north fence line, doubling back to make another run along it. -  The psyren reported after a quick telepathic scan. - They seem fixated on something over there. -  Magda noted in the now familiar quiet voice of her comrades. - Like there's something outside the fence they can't reach.  But they don't possess the means, or the intelligence to find a way to breach the fence to get to it. - - Kat, we close enough? -  I looked over my shoulder as added emphasis for my question.  And got a silent shake of the head, plus: - I'm sensing nothing, Max. - - You can communicate with recently deceased animals as well, right? - - Or not so recently deceased. -  That from one of the other female animus.  - As long as there is a goa trace, no matter how old, we can establish a link - I nodded.  Cool. - Can you sense the bug that Jacks is trying to scan, then? - - I've got nothing. - - Nope, dead as a stone. - - Nothing here! -  The other three animus quickly replied and I frowned.  Well, that didn't bode well for the theory that they were animals of some kind.  Unless, whatever gave them their life, had nothing to do with goa.  Without knowing whether goa was a universal life force, all bets were off.

 - Commander, I'm through! -  Jacks abruptly reported and all eyes swung back to his indistinct shape where he was crouching over the unmoving bug.  It was dark enough that we could see his scanning tendrils flickering with bright blue light as they danced over the black metal. - Commencing my scan.  The metal carapace is extremely dense, approaching metal core levels.  This will take time, as I have to expend considerable power just to penetrate the shell. - - Copy that, Jacks. -  I replied, glancing back at Kat when her fingers abruptly tightened between mine. "Just another few seconds, Kat."  I softly whispered, flashing her a reassuring smile.  "We'll let Jacks get his scan then move out." Kat jerked a quick nod in response and her fingers loosened slightly. "Good girl."  Then I was swinging my head back around as Quake, on point, tightly hissed. "Movement!" Immediately I brought up my own pair of night vision binoculars, aiming them in the direction Quake was pointing.  And found myself relaxing a little to see several head of deer standing just on the other side of the fence, cautiously grazing. "Kat?" "They haven't seen anything that's, for them, out of the ordinary and don't seem to be bothered by the bugs.  Although, they have seen alot of them." "Oh?  Close by?" Kat nodded, eyes half closed as she communed with the deer.  As did the other animus, all five concentrating on sifting through the animals' memories, looking for anything useful. "Usually through a fence." Through a fence??  Oddly enough that made me think about something Kat had said before we left Fort Retribution.  Something about the bugs showing hunting behaviour, like a predator would.  Frowning, I decided to pursue it a little further. "Can you find out where they were last?" "North fence."  Was Kat's quick answer.  North fence? - I've got rapid movement away from the north fence. -  Kalypso abruptly announced into our minds, her mental voice carrying a significant amount of alarm.  I found out why a heart beat later. - And two additional groups of signals vectoring across the base towards our current location! - I looked at the deer and it all came together. "Shit."  I growled.  "They're hunting the deer!"  I popped up. "Jacks!  Hurry it up; we're about to have company." They came on fast.  The ones on the fence immediately came south, cutting through the intervening space in a direct line for the deer on the other side.  And the other two groups, initially outside of our scanning range, were swiftly doing the same. - The rest of you shift back to the building. -  I tautly sent on the broadband.  - They are keying on the deer.  No use getting in their way.  I'll stay behind to cover Jacks. - "I'm not leaving you."  Kat husked with quiet determination even as the rest of the team began to move towards the nearby building, moving northeast, away from where the tesla was frantically attempting to complete his scan. I half turned, meaning to make it an order.  Only to stop when I saw the expression on her face, a mixture of fear, apprehension and resolution. "Okay."  I rasped, before taking a quick look in the direction Kalypso said the bugs were approaching from.

"But I need you to stay very close and move when I move.  Or my ability to protect will get compromised." Kat snorted softly. "I don't think you'll have to worry about that, Max."  She husked.  "I've no plans to wander." "Good."  I glanced back at her.  "Let's move over to where Jacks is." At her nod, we carefully eased forward, Kalypso's telepathic map of the base now in a heads up style display in our field of vision so I could see how quickly the bugs were approaching.  Damn, but they were moving fast, visibly covering distance that would take a running man twice, or three times the amount of time to cover. "Jacks."  I rasped, sliding in beside the tesla to crouch, looking in all directions. "How's it going?" "Just about there, sir."  The tesla visibly relaxed when we appeared to take positions on either side of him. "It's definitely mechanical, but on a level of complexity I've never seen before." He shook his head in amazement. "It's orders of magnitude more complex than even I expected.  I'm seeing patterns here that I can only describe as, . . . . organic." "Organic?"  Kat rasped with a frown.  "Like a living thing?" Jacks looked at her and nodded. "Exactly.  Wherever this thing came from, it wasn't built."  He looked at me. "It was grown." "Groovy."  I rasped with a grimace.  "Living machines."  I pushed the thought aside for a moment. "You have a schematic?" Jacks nodded, pulling out of his utility vest one of the tablets I had seen Felix used.  Blue electrical tendrils danced over the clear slab of plastic and crystal for a moment then he handed it to me. "And now, sir, so do you." I looked at the tablet for a moment then jerked a nod, slipping it into my vest. "Good work.  Now get ready.  They're almost right on top of us!" Even as I spoke, we began to hear the hissing of multiple metal feet churning over hardened and weathered ground, growing quickly louder as they approached.  I turned towards the sound, my density climbing and juggernaut shields slipping into place.  On Jacks' other side, Kat had summoned a goa-forged pistol and was grimly pointing it towards the growing sound. "What's your range, Kat?" "For sensing animals?  Five hundred metres, give or take."  She replied and again I grimaced. "They are well within that.  Do you have anything?" "Nothing."  She rasped. "I'm ruling out animal, then.  We've got our data, you can't communicate with them.  It's time to go." - Kalypso, do you have a lock on us? -  And I frowned when I was greeted by dead silence on the broadband. "That's so not good."  Kat rasped, Jacks nodding in agreement.  Then we were crouching close to the dead bug as, with whispers of parted air and dark rushing motion, its living comrades were swarming past us and heading straight at the fence. Extending my shield over both Kat and Jacks, I stayed low and silently thanked providence that the bugs were more interested in the deer than us.  At least, for now, . . . And then the rush was over and the bugs were piled up against the fence, pacing back and forth with the unconcerned deer just on the other side.  All three of us stared at them for a moment before I slowly turned to look back in the direction they had come.  It was then that I noticed the heads up display had disappeared. "Think it's the scattering field that's isolated us?"  Jacks quietly asked, his eyes following mine, his night vision binoculars scanning the gloom in front of us. "Preventing us from telepathically contacting Kalypso and the other psyrens?" "It's possible."  I conceded.  "I'm more worried about the rest of the bugs that were supposedly charging across the base at this very spot." "Yeah, I don't see a thing."  Jacks let the binoculars drop to look at Kat and me, the animus moving up to once again crouch right beside me, her hand finding mine in the dark.  I gave her hand a quick squeeze and flashed her a hopefully reassuring smile before I fished out my own pair of night vision goggles and began scanning the darkness in the direction of the building the team was supposed to withdraw to.  Just where the hell were these other bugs?? As if in answer to my silent question, a scream split the air, coming from the building the team had retreated to. "Aw, damn."  Kat husked, her hand suddenly clenching mine like a vice. Now I knew.

 

Backed Into a Corner

The main entrance doors blew apart with a good kick, pieces flying everywhere.  Then I advanced inside, Kat beside me and Jacks in my shadow, the animus holding her pistol in a two handed grip as we scanned the small lobby. - Kalypso?  Aubrey?  Magda!  Anybody on broadband?? -  I sent as I tried to pry into every shadowy corner with my eyes.  Damn it!  How did this thing go sideways in such a frickin' hurry?  With that thought churning through my mind, I carefully continued to advance into the lobby. With a staircase on the left, a hallway directly in front of us and a couple closed doors to the right, we had some options in terms of which way to go.   The question was: where was the team? A splash of dark blood on the staircase wall was, ironically, a good place to start.  As far as I knew, the bugs didn't bleed.  Which meant Risen, and injured ones at that. "You see that?"  Jacks was grim as he pointed to the blood. "Yeah."  I rasped, my expression tight.  "Somebody's been hit."  As the only person guaranteed to get out of this, I was tempted to tell both of them to stay put and let me check the rest of the building.  Yet, without knowing how badly the building was compromised, or how beat up the team was, leaving them in the lobby may turn them into sitting ducks, with little to defend themselves with.  Kat's pea shooter, goa-powered or not, was useless against armor that could turn aside a ballista shot.  And Jacks was completely unarmed.  One look over at the tesla yielded it was a deficit he was well aware of. "Damn."  The lean Transcended growled.  "I'd give a week's worth of goa for a gun.  Hell, I'd even take one of those old slug throwers the humans used.  Just so I wouldn't feel so useless." I almost laughed at that.  I couldn't blame him; I'd feel much the same in his shoes.  Yet, I didn't have the heart to tell Jacks it took a shot from one of the velkin battle cruisers in orbit to actually kill one of the bugs.  Might as well stay unarmed, for all the good a slug thrower would do. Then I was focusing on the task at hand as my booted foot touched the bottom stair and I began my ascent, Kat on my heels and Jacks a step behind her.  Carefully I eased upwards, the stairwell in almost total darkness forcing me to keep the night vision binoculars, now dialed to near objects only, up to my eyes.  With my absolute density maxed, the concrete and metal steps groaned with the strain as I stepped on them, making me move even slower to avoid giving ourselves away. So it was nearly a full five minutes by the time we reached the second floor.  There, in the stairwell and on the walls of the hallway extending away from it, more blood was smeared.  Some in great swaths, like a bleeding body fell against the wall and was dragged.  Other smears were smaller, like a bloody hand reached out to brace against the wall when strength failed before they moved on. My jaw tightened when I saw that, carefully stepping into the hallway.  That meant we had injured team members, perhaps critically.  Only the fact that they were Risen Transcended were they still moving.  Humans would've been dead, after losing that kind of blood. Unfortunately it also meant bugs were in the building. "Our team is taking fire, but I'm not seeing any bug marks."  Jacks pointed out in a hoarse whisper, scanning the hallway with his night vision binoculars. "Nor do I hear that scrabbling sound that comes with their legs moving over concrete, like we heard outside." I looked over at Kat. "You sense the other animus?" Kat gave a small nod, her expression a mix of abject terror and gritty determination.

"But only two of them.  The other two I can't reach." Jacks looked over at her, a frown on his face. "What does that mean?  They're,...dead?"  He quietly asked. "Not necessarily."  I answered after a quick look at the troubled animus commander. "From what I understand, animus use something like telepathy to communicate.  It isn't active if they've been knocked unconscious."  I turned to look right at Kat. "Unconscious, Kat.  We're Risen, remember?  If these things couldn't kill Avar, they're not going to kill us." The animus pulled a long breath in through her nostrils then let it whoosh shakily out before jerking another nod. "Just unconscious."  She repeated.  I gave her a quick smile and a nod of my own before turning back to the hallway.  Raising the night vision binoculars back to my eyes, we renewed our advance. Halfway down, with more blood smeared on both walls, we found a massive burn that cut through the inner wall.  Letting my fingers trail over the seared and melted edge of the burn, I frowned.  Well, at least one of the ballista was still on their feet.  I pulled out my fingers and looked at the ceiling, then the outer wall. Unfortunately, now that the screaming had stopped, we had no idea how stood the rest of the team.  The blood said somebody was hurt, and badly.  As long as they maintained a goa trace, we'd be able to retrieve them.  In the meantime, however, the bugs were hunting them in the battered hallways of this building.  We had to find them, take out enough of the bugs to get the scattering field to drop, then get the psyrens to jump us the hell out of here. If the psyrens were in any shape to jump us out, that is. Jacks had continued forward when I had stopped to examine the burn scar left behind by a ballista shot.  Night vision gear up to his eyes, he eased around the corner at the hallway's far end to take a look.  Only to pull quickly back, the night vision gear dropping away from his face. "Found Quake."  He rasped in a low voice. Joining him, I grimaced to find Quake, his top half at least, laying in a pool of blood and fluid in a corner near a door leading to another flight of stairs.  Of his legs, there was no sign. "Damn it."  I hissed, moving forward to check the downed Risen for goa levels.  Low, but enough to recover him.  I pulled out a trace tag and stuck it to the collar of his uniform jacket.  It'd be enough for a psyren to locate him and jump him out, once this current shit storm settled. That done, I gave him a quick look over in the hopes of figuring out what did him in.  Other than being torn in half, of course.  It was that ragged edge I visited first.  If it were bugs, the edges would've been sharp, the multiple legs razor sharp and easily shearing through Risen flesh.  Avar was testament to their effectiveness. Yet this edge was uneven and twisted, as if something took hold of the two halves, twisted and pulled, like a party sound maker.  I frowned as I stood.  Now, just what the hell had the power to take a powerful Transcended like Quake and tear him apart like that?? Then Kat was pulling me out of my musing with a low revelation. "One of the unconscious animus has regained consciousness."  She hoarsely whispered, visibly working to not stare at Quake's unmoving torso as she stepped close to me. "One floor up, fairly close to the staircase. Again I led the way, easing up the staircase with Kat tight on my six and Jacks bringing up the rear.  More blood marked the walls on the way up and, close to the top, we found Quake's legs, mangled and twisted at odd angles like whatever tore them from his torse, continued to work them over in frustration on the way after the remainder of the team.

Stepping over them, I looked back up at the top of the stairs with the night vision, following a broad patch of blood across the wall at about chest height that seemed to point towards a door just off to the side.  Holding up a clenched fist to indicate the other two should hold their position, I motioned to my eyes then indicated the door.  A quick nod of understanding from both and I was slowly reaching for the door's handle. A twist then I was pulling it open.  And frowning as two energy blasts from a goa-forged pistol caromed off my chest to detonate harmlessly against the wall The gun was in the shaking hand of one of the female animus, held awkwardly in an obvious off hand.  Not that she had a choice; she was missing her other arm, barely moving where she sat with her back against a wall. "Deb!"  Kat swung quickly around the door frame and into the room, dropping to her knees beside the stricken animus. "Hold your fire!  It's us!" The gun, however, didn't drop. "We aren't who we say we are."  Deb stammered, pain lacing every word.  The gun tracked off me to Jacks, who had stuck his head in the door.  Only a quick duck back let him avoid taking a shot in the face.  She fired a couple more into the space he left behind before she once again targeted me, firing a handful of shots that sprayed harmlessly off my shielded body. "None of us are."  Then she was putting her weapon into her mouth and pulling the trigger.  There was a bright flare of discharge and the back of her head exploded to spray blood and brains across the wall behind her. "Deb!"  Kat shrieked as her fellow animus fell limply into her arms, her weapon vaporizing without her will to hold it together. "What the hell?!"  Jacks reappeared in the door at hearing Kat's scream.  "Why are you, . . holy shit!  Is she, is she dead?"  He stammered, his expression on of unadulterated shock. "No."  I grated, my mind churning as I stared at the dead animus in Kat's arms, Kat sobbing with fear and confusion.  Just what the fuck was going on here?? "She's got enough goa still to be revived."  Then I winced as something jagged pushed into my mind.  Something jagged and alien. Kat felt it too, whimpering as she clamped her bloody hands to her head, letting Deb roll limply to the side. "Get it out."  She moaned, ignoring her friend's unmoving body.  "Get it out of my head!" From somewhere above us, I heard a ballista discharge and more screaming.  Then Jacks grunted, as if something hit him.  I looked over my shoulder and watched as a hand emerged from the stunned tesla's chest, awash in his dark blood and holding his still beating heart. "I, uh, I, . ."  He managed to say before that same hand was pulling him back into the darkness and out of sight.  There was a strangled coughing sound, the wet sounds of bones being shattered and flesh ripped, then his legs flopped back into the room, as broken and mangled as Quake's had been. "Sonuvabitch."  I whispered, the pain inside my skull momentarily forgotten as I stared at the tesla's broken bottom half, so shattered as to barely resemble legs and a pelvis. Then the door was being occupied by something else. Covered in Jacks' blood, it was just a little taller than I was, humanoid and powerfully built.  It appeared to be made out of some silvery metal, with black armor completely covering its face and skull, chest and back, upper and lower arms, and its upper and lower legs, boot-like over its feet, like some futuristic knight in full plate.  The face was completely covered, no holes for eyes or mouth, and its resemblance to a human was only rudimentary.  No ears were visible on the sides of its head, nor did it have anything that proclaimed it male or female.  Just a big body, covered mostly in black metal armor. Then the lower part of the face plate split, like a mouth opening, to reveal jagged metal teeth, covered with more blood and gore.  It had been feeding, . . . "Juggernaut!"  It whispered in a tortured, alien voice, each syllable scrapping roughly against my senses. I didn't bother wondering where it learnt enough English to name me.  I just nodded, thankful that this thing already knew what was about to kill it. The floor began to buckle as I coiled in readiness to attack. "No, Max."  Kat hoarsely whispered.  "Please, don't leave me here alone!" I half turned, to tell her it was okay.  Before I could speak, however, another black armored form exploded out of the wall to my left and smashed into me, carrying me through the wall to the right and momentarily into the hallway beyond.  I caught a glimpse through the resulting hole of wild energy blasts splashing off the first creature as it advanced on Kat, its mouth agape and the animus screaming wildly.  Then the second creature's momentum was taking us both through the next wall and we catapulted into empty space.

 

Chapter 6: Unexpected Allies

I grunted as the thing bit down on my shoulder, feeling its metal teeth cut through my clothing and push into my skin.  Only absolute density kept them from going deeper.  The amount of force that took for me to even feel that was nearly beyond my comprehension.  Then I had other things to worry about as we dropped out of the sky and onto the packed earth.  Or rather, into the packed earth, as between the impact and my density, we sunk nearly two feet into the ground. Feeling the thing land on top of me, I managed to get my legs between my body and it and quickly kicked out, flipping it up and off.  I then snapped back to my feet with a whip of my legs and spun to face it.  Just in time to have it put its head in the center of my chest in a move that oddly reminded me of the battering ram style head butt one of the mechanical millipedes had used on me during our first excursion onto the base. This time, however, I was braced.  And I grinned in tight satisfaction when it hit me and bounced back half a step, sporting a new dent in its head.  Not that I was going to let it off there.  I stepped in quick with a fast left, right combo, rocking its head back and leaving it with two more dents.  Then it surprised me by getting an arm up to block my next swing, a heavy haymaker aimed at dropping it.  'So you can learn how to defend yourself.'  I mused darkly.  It didn't matter; such a capability wasn't going to save it.  Not after what it had done to my team. I feinted an upper cut with my left and when it bit on the fake, I used my juggernaut speed to skip around it instead, to loop an arm under it's upraised right from behind, my left snaking into a choke hold.  It squeaked when I cinched in the hold, a sound very similar to the one the millipedes had made when I hurt them, my fingers biting into the black armored face.  Then sparks were spraying out of its ruptured neck when I used the hold to wrench its head hard to the side, ripping it from its place. Abruptly without life, the creature fell away me, limply hitting the ground where it lay unmoving.  I looked at it for a moment.  'So much for that.'  I grimly thought.  Then I was turning and sprinting hard back into the building. This time I didn't bother with the front door, blasting through the side wall instead.  I blew through a couple more walls before I found a staircase leading upward.  Where I was met by two more of the man things.  Their mouths opening to emit hoarse snarls, they charged. I met the first one at nearly full speed, a shoulder into the middle of its chest crumpling armor as I buried it a foot into a nearby concrete stanchion.  Then I was forced to take a step back and duck as the second swung wildly for my head, reflexes and instinct making me bend and drop my head out of the way of the awkward attack.  It got driven through a couple more walls for its trouble when I abruptly shifted into reverse to catch it coming at me from behind.  I left it sparking and smoking on the ground outside before I darted back in. I managed to reach the stairwell untouched and swiftly went up two flights before I spotted a familiar hallway.  I twisted in mid step and streaked down its length, past the hole I had made in the outer wall when the first man thing had driven me through it, and took a hard left into the space at the top of the flight of stairs Jacks, Kat and I had ascended our first time into the building. Two hard steps, then I was reaching in to pull the second man thing that had attacked us off a broken Kat, the animus missing most of her head, neck and shoulder from the thing consuming her flesh.  It got the broken neck treatment too, the thing squeaking before I very nearly removed its head from the force of my twisting its head hard to the right. Throwing the abruptly limp body to the side, I knelt beside Kat, my heart thudding painfully in my chest. "Aw, Kat."  I husked, tenderly touching what was left of her face.  Her goa levels were low, but recoverable.  My only fear was that she'd remember being devoured.  My jaw rippled with tension as I thought about that.  Whatever these damn things were, they were going to pay and pay in blood for what they were doing to my team.

A tracer on both Kat and Deb, then I was turning to charge up the flight of stairs to the next level.  There I found more carnage, with two more animus dead and in various states of dismemberment in the stairwell, both bodies showing signs of being gnawed upon.  I grimly tagged the bodies and kept going.  I found Aubry in the hallway, just around the corner, again missing a good part of her head. My jaw rippled with tension yet again at seeing that.  It seemed these man things were targeting heads.  Why? I tagged Aubry's unmoving form and, standing, took a look down the shadow-filled corridor and saw motion at the far end.  My stomach twisted when a form pulled back from what it was doing and I saw it was one of the man things.  I didn't need better light to see the gore dripping from its jagged toothed mouth, or to know what it was gnawing on.  And rage boiled through me. A step had me at full speed, two and I was barreling into three of the man things, all busy gobbling down pieces of my team.  Two I knocked together, then grabbed the third, twisting off its head with a squeal and spraying sparks.  Then I was staggered as one of the two I had tangled up, returned to smash a double fist against the side of my head.  While it didn't actually hurt me, the shear percussive force was enough to push me back.  Then I was snapping my arms up to block a quick series of strikes. I frowned as I blocked the last one.  That swing certainly didn't resemble the clumsy attempts I was seeing from the first couple of creatures I faced.  Then I was forced out of my thoughts by the second creature joining the attack, both with their bloody, and gibbet filled maws threateningly open as they moved in. This time it took every bit of my hand to hand combat skills to keep those armored fists off me, moving quickly back and forth to block viper-quick strikes and thunderous punches.  The one on the right over compensated for one of my counterattacks, giving me the opportunity to dent its metallic face with a hammer blow flush on. As it took a step back to steady itself, I leaned back out of the way of a hard swing from the other one, sliding in to hook my arm around its head.  Before I could twist it off, it shrugged out of my hold, spun around and smashed me in the side of the head with its blow given momentum from its spin.  I took the shot with teeth grit, braced enough that it was the creature's hand that was dented instead of the side of my head.  Then it was squealing as I stepped in to deliver several hard body shots, each leaving a massive dent behind in the creature's dense armor. A final looping haymaker and the creature dropped to its knees, where I finished it off with a hard two-handed twist of its head. "So this is where you are."  A soft whisper sounded from behind me. "Damn it, Hannibal, what the hell are you doing here?"  Then I was being driven back by a flurry of rapid strikes from the man thing I had temporarily stunned. "I wanted to see what you and your team of fleshies were doing, Max."  The echo shifted into view as it swung around behind the man thing attacking me. "And it would appear you're getting yourself into a lot of trouble." "Save it, Casper."  I growled, blocking another overhead smash aimed at knocking me to my knees. "I'm a bit busy here.  We'll talk after I wipe the rest of these bastards out." Hannibal hung silently for a moment as he watched me fend off the man thing's attack.  Then he was sweeping forward, looking like he was going to hit the thing in the back.  Instead of striking the silver and black creature, however, my eyes widened as I watched his filmy substance be absorbed instead. Instantly the man thing stopped attacking, taking a hesitant step back. "Well, if this isn't the most interesting sensation."  Hannibal's voice, metallic and rough but recognizably his, issued from the creature's jagged mouth.

I slowly straightened, mind whirling. "You,...you were able to possess that thing?"  I rasped querulously and the man thing turned its head to direct its eyeless face at me even as the jagged toothed mouth closed. "It would appear so."  Hannibal replied, his voice oddly unmuffled by the mouth being closed.  The Hannibal-possessed thing then looked down as it slowly lifted its hands to look at them. "Fascinating."  He said quietly. As much as I wanted to investigate how Hannibal had managed to possess the man thing, I simply didn't have the time.  I needed to rescue the rest of my team. "One less I need to kill."  I snarled in reply as I tagged the two bodies the man things had been eating.  They included the last animus, and Kalypso. I stood with a sigh.  That left only Hurricane and Magda, our last psyren.  While it'd be annoying if I found Hurricane down, it would be a long run back to Retribution if Magda was also down.  Not to mention, retrieval of the team would have to wait. - Magda, you there? -  I cautiously sent onto the broadband.  And immediately winced in pain as my head filled with jagged shards. "I wouldn't do that, if I were you."  Hannibal stepped forward to help me back to my feet after I had fallen to a knee from the pain. "These things seem to have a psionic scrambling capability.  I felt it kick on as soon as you tried mentally speaking with your psyrens.  And while I was able to immediately turn it off, I could feel others propagating that signal from above us."  The featureless face twisted and tilted as if Hannibal could somehow see through the ceiling to the floor above us. "I'm counting four of the creatures and two still active Risen." "You can see them?"  I wanted to know. "Well, to be perfectly truthful, seeing is a relative term."  Hannibal dropped his attention back to me even as a series of silver characters appeared on his left breast. "More like scanning them, similar to the optical and full spectrum scanners some of your machines have.  Speaking of optics, you should now be seeing my name on my left breast, in the cunic cursive used by the Carthagians when I was still alive.  It'll set me apart from the other creatures." "Nice."  I rasped.  "You have sufficient control to modify that thing's structure?" Hannibal nodded. "I just managed to somehow purge the last of its consciousness from the circuitry.  Which, I might add, are incredibly complex and organic.  Like it was, . . ." "Grown."  I finished for him with a grimace.  "Strangely enough, that's how Jacks described the millipedes."  Then I was dismissing it to focus on the task at hand. "Can your scanners tell me where the nearest staircase to the next floor is?  Or am I going to need to run back to the one I used to get up here?" Hannibal silently pointed to a nearby door. "Cool."  Then I was darting forward to jerk the door open, beyond which I found a fire escape.  I didn't hesitate to fly up it, grim and ready for anything.  And I was only slightly surprised to hear Hannibal's heavy footsteps behind me as the echo-possessed creature followed. I reached the top to find the door already opening from the other side, three man things filling the resulting space.  Growling low in my throat, I barreled into them, knocking all three back before they could react.  One I immediately ploughed into the concrete wall across from the door, leaving it buried a half foot in, before I snapped out with a whistling crescent kick to knock the other two back. 

With how quickly they were learning to fight hand to hand, I could no longer afford to try to merely run them over.  Now I actually had to beat each one to frickin' death.  I couldn't say that disappointed me. One hit the deck, sporting a dent in its face plate.  The second staggered then, regaining it's footing, braced to go on the attack.  Only to have Hannibal barrel into it.  He quickly flipped the surprised creature around to take a strong hold around its head. "You sure you still remember how to do that, Casper?"  I asked, keeping my eye on the first creature, which was just climbing back onto its feet. "It's been a very long time." Sparks flew and the creature dropped limply out of Hannibal's armored hands. "Some things you never forget, my friend."  He said, looking over his shoulder at me.  "My original wasn't counted as the best warrior and strategist of his era for nothing.  An era where generals led their men into battle." "I hear that."  I grimly said, stepping past him to take hold of the third man thing, pushing it back against the wall before launching a torrent of juggernaut-fast blows to the chest and torso, keeping it off balance and unable to return fire.  Then a lashing savate upper cut sent sparks flying in every direction as it very nearly took the creature's head clean off. I was forced from watching the man thing fall to the floor to looking down the corridor when a ballista blast lit up the darkness.  Lashing from an open doorway, the beam momentarily pinned the fourth and final man thing against the wall some twenty metres down the hallway.  Then the beam dropped and, looking little worse for wear, the man thing straightened and prepared to advance. "I don't fuckin' think so."  I snarled and went full juggernaut. Two steps and I was slamming into the final creature.  Spinning to throw it up against the wall, I snapped out a quick toe kick across its head to keep it off balance, then moved in to land several hard strikes against its body.  A head butt dented in its face, then I was taking it by the top of its head, turning and pulling its head down over my shoulder.  More sparks flew as my shoulder shattered its neck and I dropped the suddenly body-less head onto the ground as the rest of it dropped behind me. "Hurricane?  I need you to hold your fire."  I cautiously called out. "M-Max?"  The ballista stammered. I peaked around the corner and found the ballista propped up against a wall, her cannon aimed at the doorway.  Like Deb a couple floors down, she was missing an arm.  Beside her, unmoving on the floor was an unconscious Magda. "Hurricane."  I said again, carefully stepping into the door.  "That looks bad; can you move?" Fighting off tears of relief, she jerked a nod. "And Magda?" "Just a hit on the head, I think."  The ballista husked.  "We were bull rushed and shoved into this room by four of those things, and she hit her head.  But then three suddenly left." "Yeah, we dealt with those."  I said as I knelt beside her to check her injured arm.  As I expected, it had been bitten off, the broken stump showing jagged teeth marks.  I then moved to Magda, pulling back her deep cowl to reveal a young, pretty redhead with a sprinkling of freckles over the bridge of her nose.  Her hair was long and thick, but thankfully pulled into a tidy bun at the top of her head.  That let me move my hands cautiously over her head, looking for where she was injured. Sure enough, she was sporting a large lump on the right side, reason enough for her to be unconscious.  Thankfully my probing of the lump and pushing a little bit of goa into it made her stir. "What, . . .?"  She began groggily. "Stay as still as you can, Magda."  I quietly instructed.  "You've hit your head.  I've given you a shot of goa from my own stores to speed your recovery.  But you won't be 100% for a minute or two." Bright green eyes looked at me for a long moment before she closed them, a look of serenity appearing on her face. "Okay."  She whispered.  "I noticed a great deal of pain any time I tried to use the broadband to communicate with everybody else.  Do you know what that was, sir?" "Some sort of dampening field that those man things were emitting every time somebody tried to use telepathy." "And will it affect our teleportals?" I turned to speak out the door. "Well?  How about it, Hannibal?  You're now our expert on these things.  Will that dampening field affect teleportals?" Choosing to stay out of sight out in the hallway to avoid spooking the two survivors, the echo was quick to reply. "No.  The scattering field was the mechanism they used to defeat teleportals.  The dampening field was specific to halting telepathic communication." I nodded and returned my attention to the fallen psyren. "Do you feel strong enough to form teleportals, Magda?" Her eyes opening, Magda again favored me with a quick look before she accepted my hand and carefully sat up. "I believe so, sir."  She said, using her own slender fingers to probe at the swelling on her head.  I could see that it was already significantly smaller. "Good.  The rest of our team has been tracer tagged so I want you to run a low level sensory sweep to identify them then teleport them out to the fall back point." "There,...there are more survivors, sir?"  That was from a grimacing Hurricane.  I looked over at her and shook my head. "You two are it.  But we're Risen, and we're Transcended.  As long as our heads aren't removed, and sufficient goa remains in the body, we can be recovered from almost any state of disarray.  So the tracer tags will allow us to retrieve the remains of the rest of the team and we'll recover them back at Retribution." Magda nodded her understanding and a distant look appeared on her pretty face.  A heart beat later she refocused on me. "All tracers have been identified and the remains of the team have been jumped to the fall back point, sir."  She quietly reported. I nodded. "Well done.  Now, get Hurricane out of here."  And the injured ballista winked out of sight. "I wouldn't mind a lift as well."  Hannibal said, finally stepping around the corner. Seeing him, Magda's eyes narrowed for a moment before she looked over at me.  Catching the look, I smiled. "Long story.  Short version: he's with us.  Jump him out along with any downed humanoid creatures you can scan in the building.  I would like Jolt and his teslas to take a look at them." Magda's eyes didn't leave me as Hannibal winked out of sight.  I returned her look with a smile and a nod. "Excellent.  Now, let's you and I get out of this hell hole, hey?  Way too much death and destruction here for a ordinary zombie joe like me!"

 

Dr. Frankenstein, I Presume

Boost and his summoners were already well at work by the time Magda and I snapped into Fort Retribution close to the field hospital.  White smocks were everywhere as his team frantically worked to put my fallen and decimated team back together. "Just what the hell happened back there?"  The beleaguered summoner commander said upon catching sight of us.  Magda, who had stayed close, her cowl down and her feet on the ground, rated a double take and a frown before he returned his gaze to me. "Everybody's been cut to pieces.  And most of them look like something was actually eating them!  Like, what the hell!!" "No kidding."  I said tiredly.  Out of the corner of my eye, I saw Hannibal standing discretely in the shadows, careful not to reveal himself until the situation had stabilized somewhat.  I flashed him a quick thumb's up to silently applaud his decision before I continued talking with Boost. "Along with our robotic millipedes, who may just be living machines, we encountered another type of humanoid creature."  I frowned as pieces of what I observed and noticed during those frantic minutes at Campton started coming together into a picture that was frankly alarming. "Who just may be related to the millipedes in some fashion.  They were aggressive and violent, hunting my team down in a building we took shelter in from a millipede rush.  And when they caught one of us, they consumed parts of them, seeming to target the head." Boost frowned as he tried to digest what I had just told him. "The,...head?" It was Magda, however, that put it all together. "We watched the man things get better every time they ate one of our heads."  She quietly pointed out. "Faster, more decisive, using more advanced combat techniques and planned behavior."  Those green eyes took me in for a long moment before she returned to Boost. "Like they were absorbing our skills and the training our summoning gave us from the brain tissue they consumed." "It's true."  I admitted, my own expression thoughtful as I considering how the psyren had put things together.  "When I took out the first one, it fought like it didn't even know what its hands were for."  I glanced at Magda then back at Boost. "With the last couple though, I was forced to use what hand to hand combat skills I learned when I was a soldier in the living world.  And that was just to keep them off me.  They went from lumbering and awkward, to vicious and fast.  A couple blows, well timed and spaced, even managed to unbalance me.  And I was full juggernaut at the time." Boost let a long sigh ease free before he scrubbed at his face with his hand. "As if we don't have enough to worry about."  He sighed then looked at me.  "I'd suggest not returning to Campton any time soon, boss.  I mean, your quick thinking retrieved your team, but some of them came awful close to having their heads removed." "I have zero reason to now, Boost."  My lips pursed thoughtfully.  "Do your best with my guys, hey?  I know I sent them to you in bags, but I need them back on their feet as quickly as possible.  Especially if we suddenly are fighting this war on two separate fronts."  I looked back at Magda.  "Speaking of people I need on their feet, you should probably get yourself checked out, Magda.  Just to make sure that bump on your head is okay." Again those emerald orbs regarded me for a long moment. "I don't think that's required, sir."  She finally said, eliciting a smile from me. "I know you don't, Magda.  But you'll be getting checked out anyway."  The smile vanished.

"Both to make sure your head is fine.  And to keep you from where I'm going next, to check on Jolt's progress." Her eyes tightened for a moment as she debated resisting my command.  Then she was bowing her head. "Yes, sir."  She quietly replied and, with a nod to her, and a slap on Boost's shoulder, I quickly stepped past them, intent on getting to the teslas' test facility.  A gesture to the quietly waiting Hannibal and he waiting until I was striding past where he had been waiting in the shadows, away from the arc lamps illuminating the hospital tent, before joining me. "Learn anything more from your time in that body?"  I asked as he matched me stride for stride, the two of us weaving between the tents on our way to the teslas' rather expansive test area. "Outside of it being highly responsive to my direction, and adaptable to nearly anything it comes up against, nothing yet."  Hannibal replied.  "Interesting what the psyren said though.  The man things were learning by consuming Risen brains, absorbing their memories.  And thereby their learned skills and abilities." "Interesting?"  I glanced over at the black and silver creature Hannibal had become.  "More like disturbing, Casper.  Seriously disturbing."  I frowned.  "Although it does make you wonder how well the velkin would handle those man things." "From what I've seen during your one encounter with the aliens, and from this recent battle with the man things, I'd say not very well."  Hannibal thoughtfully noted.  "However, I'll have more definite information for you by morning.  I'm going to spend a couple hours examining this new form, if you don't mind.  And I think I've discovered some kind of long term memory that wasn't wiped when I pushed the creature's essence out.  If I can somehow access it, it may give us some the answers we need.  That is, if it's not encrypted and in some alien language." I nodded. "Sounds like a plan.  Before you disappear to wherever you go, to do that, hang on while I see what Felix makes of those bodies we sent him."  My hand dipped into my utility vest and I pulled out the tablet Jacks had downloaded the millipede schematic onto.  I held it up. "I want him to see this as well, and perhaps get your input on it." "Ah, my dear Maxwell!"  Felix smiled as yet again I found him in the main space outside of the command tent where the teslas were collecting all their tech finds. "It seems every time I turn around, you have some new piece of hardware for my people to take a look at.  Why is that, I wonder?"  He squatted down beside one of the man things that I had Magda deposit in an uneven heap on the edge of the outside compound.  The tesla commander had already brought over a couple of his brightest lamps to shine on them. A thin finger reached out to give it a poke before he turned to once again look at me, then over at Hannibal. "Here's a dead one.  But despite appearances, I'm guessing that's not a live one."  He said, indicating Hannibal with a gesture. I looked over at Hannibal, a slight smile twisting my lips. "No, not exactly.  That's Hannibal in there, Felix." The thin Risen frowned. "As in that ghost that was fascinated with the computer cores in the command center?" "The very one, commander."  Hannibal bowed deeply.  "Hannibal Barca, at your service." An eyebrow lifted on Felix's face at he stared at the bowing humanoid.  I chuckled when I caught sight of the expression stepping forward with the tablet.

"Oh, it gets better, Felix."  I handed him the tablet.  As he stood, activating it to start scrolling through the images there, I continued. "You'll find on there the results of the scan Jacks managed to complete on one of the millipedes before we got swarmed." "Fascinating!"  Felix breathed in response, eyes wide as he paused on this image or that, expanding it with a swipe of his fingers. "The level of complexity is mind boggling!" "Just so."  I agreed.  "And I think those things are related to those things."  I pointed at the man things. "Just from his short time inside, Hannibal has indicated the humanoids are equally complex.  I'm thinking they may just be derived from the same tech." Felix let his eyes track from the broken humanoids on the ground to where Hannibal stood nearby. "And how, exactly, did our echo friend find himself inside one of those things?"  He asked with a thoughtful frown. Hannibal looked up from where he had been staring at the unmoving forms on the ground. "Allow me to answer, if you would, Max."  At my nod, he turned his featureless face to Felix. "Max was under attack by a number of these humanoid creatures.  I approached one with the intent to pass through and hopefully interrupt some of its electronic operations, as I've observed my passage through your computers will do." "Ah, so that's you doing that."  Felix wryly noted. "Indeed, sir.  If it caused you trouble, I apologize.  But returning to my narrative, I discovered that instead of passing through, I found myself stuck inside, my presence pushing out whatever entity was giving the creature life before." Felix's upraised eyebrow returned at that. "Stuck inside?  How is that possible?  You're basically a loose collection of random energy particles.  There's no way you could adhere to any physical surface unless, ..."  Felix's voice trailed off as he was lost in thought for a moment. I frowned. "Unless?"  I prompted, having no patience after the night I had just lived through.  I wasn't willing to wait for the tesla to examine the possibilities from every angle, as was his habit. "Unless that surface was somehow tuned to that wavelength of energy."  Felix finished, eyes wide as he considered his own words. "Or constructed to hold that energy, like a battery, or storage container." "So what you're saying is these things have some sort of container inside made specifically to hold psychic energy."  I said. "Without going into the particulars of wave science and particle physics to explain the exact properties of such a thing, yes."  Felix answered, considering Hannibal with his customary thoughtfulness. I slowly nodded, possibilities chasing each other through my mind.  While others, like Felix, would certainly spend their time considering the ramifications of mechanical creatures built to store psychic energy, along with the philosophical debate that would surely rage along side them, I couldn't care less as to the why or the how.  As a soldier I cared about only one thing: How do I use these things to kill velkin? If I could rip through velkin with ease as a juggernaut, and these things gave me trouble, how much trouble could they give the velkin?  And could we control their capabilities by finding other willing echoes to inhabit the shells we had gathered? "I can tell by that expression you're planning something."  Felix noted, his observation pulling me back out of my thoughts. I looked at him for a moment before nodding. "But I want to see where it's going in my head first."  I said.  "In the meantime, we are still a go on the op against the transport hub.  So I still need those reverse engineered weapons and transport tech from the velkin tech samples we got.  Make that your first priority.  You indicated you had samples ready to demonstrate?"  At Felix's confirming nod, I continued. "Then we'll check that out at first light.  Only after you get us some data on the shell's particulars, Hannibal, do I want you, Felix to scan these things, get us schematics and put the two together to see what we can do with it." "Then I am off to find a quiet spot to do just that."  Hannibal said with a nod.  "By your leave?"  And at my own acknowledging nod, he strode off into the darkness. "I hope breathing life into that thing doesn't come back to bite us."  Felix said, joining me in watching Hannibal walk out of sight. "Literally."  I said in a low voice.  "Long story."  I added at Felix's questioning look.  "I already feel like Frankenstein by letting Hannibal keep that thing alive.  And you know how well that story turned out."  Felix joined me in chuckling lightly.  He then gave me a comradely slap on the shoulder. "Go and see about your team, Max.  I heard they came in ragged and torn.  Boost is probably patching them up right now.  And I'll get those samples ready for testing in a couple hours." "Thanks, Felix."  I said with a smile.  "See you in a couple hours!" I watched Boost and his team of summoners work just long enough to insure all of the team I had taken into Campton was put back together and sent to get some rest to recharge their goa levels.  Then I made my way back to my own tent with the intention of hammering out a battle plan for the attack on the transportation hub and a report on the man things at Campton. "Max!"  A female voice said as I stepped into my tent, its owner popping up from where they were seated at my small desk. "Jace?"  I frowned as I peered through the gloom at the shape. "Is that you?" Then my arms were filled with shivering and crying woman. "When I heard your team took massive casualties, I was so afraid you were one of them!"  She sobbed into my chest as I slowly and carefully put my arms around her even as she clung to me.  Oddly enough I found a part of brain wondering how a zombie could cry.  It's not like we drunk water to provide the necessary materials.  Yet, my tunic was getting wet from her tears. "I'm a juggernaut, Jace."  I replied, awkwardly patting her head in an attempt to comfort her.  I may be dead, but I still understood feelings.  And she seemed truly stricken by fear that I was hurt.  Which puzzled me, since we really didn't part amicably. "There isn't much that can hurt me." Her response to that was to cling to me even harder, forcing me to continue holding her.  It seemed forever before her sobs began to slowly abate, her tears soaking through my tunic to my skin. "Are,...are you okay, Jace?"  I quietly asked and her grip eased as she leaned away from me.  Thinking she wanted to talk, I too let my arms loosen.  Only to find her lips pressed tightly against mine, her kiss filled with hunger and need.  Caught by surprise by her kiss's ferocity, I surprised myself further by responding to it. Now time seemed to fly as I drank deeply from her soft, velvety lips, her toned, athletic body formed to mine as I held her close, her arms now around my neck.  Then she was just as suddenly drawing away, but not far. "We may be dead."  She breathed, her eyes wide as she drank in the vision of my face close to hers.  An arm looped around my neck, and a fist balled up in the collar of my tunic helped hold me there, though, as my body surged with sensations I thought I'd never feel again, I wasn't planning on going anywhere. "But you will feel alive in my arms!"  And then she was dragging me back towards the tumble of equipment and clothing duffels occupying the back of my tent.

 

Truths Revealed

I stared at the ceiling of my tent as morning's first light began seeping in through the tied closed door at the far end.  Beneath me, serving as a rough bed, the duffels with my clothing and gear had been flattened as much as possible.  Over top of me was a couple blankets pulled from stores, more for privacy than as proof against a cold I couldn't feel. And beside me, sleeping off the goa-burning intimacy we had just engaged in, was Jace, her blonde hair tousled as she cuddled close to my side, her arm and leg thrown possessively over my body. What the hell just happened?? I let a long sigh ease free of my nostrils.  It was, of course, rhetorical of me to ask such a question.  I knew exactly what had happened.  And it felt like I had somehow failed.  'I'm so sorry, Abby!'  I cried into the depths of my mind.  I couldn't get past the feeling that I had broken my wedding vows, that I had cheated on my wife of 50 years.  And yet, a small voice kept reminding me: 'Till Death do you part.'  There was no denying I was dead, or the fact that I remembered her dying first.  I should be absolved of any failure.  So why did I feel so damn guilty?  I let a sigh ease out my nostrils.  Never mind the guilt and the subsequent attempts at justification; I was still trying to wrap my brain around the how. We were zombies.  Creatures brought to back to life by the power of goa, the very life force of the planet.  And yet, it was only a semblance of life, not true life.  We did not eat, or sleep.  We did not perspire, or shed tears.  We felt, but distantly.  And we certainly didn't make love. I looked over at Jace, her face serene with satisfaction.  At least, we didn't until last night. Just then her eyes opened, and Jace focused on me, her smile growing as she did. "Hey, baby."  She throatily greeted me, reaching up with her hand to tenderly caress my face. "Hey."  I pasted on a smile.  "You feeling okay?" "Yeah.  At least I think so."  Her hand dropped back down onto my chest, where it moved down over my torso, caressing and touching.  Then her hand took a grip on my ribcage and she smoothly slung herself over my body, straddling me and settling into place with a careful twitch of her hips.  From her new vantage point, her smile was mischievous as she felt me respond to her closeness. "I know parts of me feel spectacular."  she said with a sexy wiggle of her hips.  Then she abruptly grew serious. "And you, Max?  Are your memories still troubling you? With my eyes filled with her athletic nakedness, it was somewhat difficult to refocus my thoughts enough to answer Jace's question.  It was legitimate; my memories had abruptly ended her last attempt to get to know me intimately. Finding her eyes with mine, I sighed. "To tell you the truth, Jace, I don't know."  I quietly admitted even as I felt my body continue to respond to hers.  The beautiful javelin didn't take her eyes off me as she shifted to make the most of our bodies in mutual response, reaching out to tenderly touch my cheek. "I've got so many things going through my mind right now.  Memories, guilt, questions about how zombies can even have sex." "Sounds a little busy in there."  Jace replied, her voice becoming throaty as her arousal continued to grow. "I think you need more distraction, babe."  And she leaned in to kiss me deeply. It was a distraction that was enough to put a smile on my face even a couple hours later as I walked towards the tesla zone, as I had taken to calling the teslas' outdoor lab area.  With a mid morning sun hanging in a late spring sky, with only a smattering of clouds to get in the way, it was a bright, shiny day.  And, thanks to Jace and despite my thoughts, I was feeling pretty good.

"Ah, there you are."  Felix said with a smile of his own as he spotted me approaching.  He waved at a handful of teslas working on the edge of the compound.  In response they picked up a small crate, a pair of them carrying it over to where Felix had set up a target. "Considering how keen you were on this project, I suspected you would've been here significantly sooner." I chuckled as I joined him beside the target, a simple piece of stone carved into the rough shape of a torso. "I ran into a bit of a distraction last night."  I said with a smile.  "One that caught me a little off guard." "She must've been some distraction, then."  Felix deadpanned and chuckled when I threw him a look. "I'd have to be blind not to see the looks some of our ladies throw you, Max.  Starting with Kat and Twitch when we first met you.  Considering how much smoulder those two and a handful of others have been throwing you, I'm surprised you hadn't been distracted before, my friend." I frowned. "So, you don't have any questions as to how it could happen, us being zombies and all?" Felix didn't answer right away, letting his two teslas put up a small camp table before leaving the crate on it.  He then reached in and started pulling out parts that he quickly put together in economical, practiced motions.  It didn't take him long before a human-sized version of the velkin rifle was assembled. Pushing in a cylindrical power cell, he pressed a stud near where the power cell went into the stock and I heard a hum emanating from the weapon as it started powering up.  Once that was done, he finally turned to me, the rifle braced against a shoulder. "I think of it this way, my friend." He began, his customary look of thoughtfulness on his face.  "We are animated by life force, not death force.  It makes sense it would stir some of the things necessary for life back to the surface, as well as making those things possible.  After all, it's replaced food and rest as necessary for cellular regeneration.  So it will repair, replace and supplement whatever living activities you engage in as necessary." He then turned smoothly to bring the rifle to bear on the distant target.  The muzzle end flared and a discrete packet of energy streaked across the intervening space to slam into the target, completely obliterating it. As I nodded in appreciation, he turned back to me, the rifle once again parked against his shoulder. "Original tested at 10 gigajoules at point of discharge, comprised of hyper-energized plasma quanta, kept coherent by pulse-generated magnetic envelopes.  I've maintained the pulse frequency but ramped up the packet energy to 1 terajoule for optimum penetration through all velkin armor types."  At that point, he handed the rifle to me.  I carefully turned it over in my hands, nodding once more in appreciation at how light it was, especially compared to the massive originals. "Power cell, along with the emitter, pulse generator and all the particulars have been reverse engineered from velkin originals, all crafted from materials obtainable here, on Earth.  The cell is rechargeable and holds sufficient energy to keep the rifle working continuously for 8 hours, or 24 hours on stand by."  He paused long enough to reach back into the box and begin assembling another device. I took the opportunity to squeeze off a couple shots myself at more targets the teslas put up shortly after Felix blew the first one apart.  Light weight, easy to target and fire, with considerable hitting power; I was really starting to like this gun.  I actually grinned when I blew the final target into gravel before turning back to Felix.

"Felix, I have to say, you and your team outdid yourself.  This rifle is top notch." Felix grinned at the praise before holding up the next device he had assembled. "Then you'll really like this: a scaled back version, built snub nose style, with two thirds the hitting power, but much more portable for covert and recon ops."  He paused to put the shorter rifle down and draw a hand gun out of the box, slamming a power cell into it.  In one smooth motion, he turned and fired several shots into a fresh target, punching holes through the stone before the third shot ripped it apart. He then held it up, muzzle end emitting a thin streamer of vapor. "And a handgun, rated at 250 gigajoules using the same universal battery, giving it an operational limit of 12 hours of continuous use, 48 hours stand by." "Outstanding, Felix!"  I said with the grin, exchanging the rifle for first the snub nose, then the pistol, taking a moment to examine each. "And these are fully functional?" Felix nodded, wearing a look of satisfaction of his own. "Mission ready.  I don't have a mass production line set up, but we'll be able to equip the entire command with tailored weapons in a couple days.  Assuming, of course, that the javelins and ballistas don't want them." "Likely not.  Your production schedule sounds solid.  Dedicate whatever resources you need to building our armory to full supply.  After, we'll slow things down a bit, but I wouldn't mind building sufficient stock for replacements or if we get reinforced." "I wouldn't mind a weapon or two, as well."  Hannibal added as he approached, moving effortlessly. "Looks like you've settled in nicely."  I commented as Felix handed the echo the long rifle.  "You're moving better than I've seen you do so before." The black and silver creature nodded.  Then I watched as the black plate split down the middle and the two halves slid to the side to reveal a human face, albeit completely in silver.  The mouth opened: "I've certainly taken command of this complex mechanism in all its intricacies."  Hannibal confirmed, the silver face moving almost as well as a human face would. "However, beyond it's remarkable capacity for adaptation, it isn't equipped with any sort of weapon system."  He hefted the rifle, turning to sight along its barrel at the distant targets.  Then, a quick squeeze and one of the targets disappeared in a spray of gravel. "Not as handy as a good spear, but it'll do."  He turned with a smile towards Felix and myself. "You can wrap this one, I'll take it as is." "We'll make sure you're equipped, Hannibal."  I rasped as Felix stepped forward to relieve the echo of his working model. "In the meantime, did you learn anything from that memory cache you discovered?" Hannibal turned his eyes from Felix and the rifle, to me. "I have, indeed.  They are called the K'ethik and I can confirm they are a race of living machines." "The K'ethik?"  Having disassembled the rifle to replace it in the crate, Felix rejoined us with a data tablet.  His fingers danced across the clear plastic to enter in the name.  Hannibal looked at him and jerked a nod. "K'ethik."  Hannibal spelt it out.  "Unfortunately, outside of that, I've little information.  The cache only held the routines the autonomous unit needed to carry out its ongoing mission of sabotage.  Apparently, after discovering the K'ethik weren't edible in any fashion, the velkin withdrew from the machine home world to plan their next conquest." "Us."  I supplied and again Hannibal nodded. "The autonomous units were sent en masse into the midst of the velkin fleet in the hopes of destroying them with low risk before they could leave the system.  When they saw that wasn't possible, the autonomous commanders on the home world instructed the sabotage units to stay with the fleet and harry them until they were all destroyed.  It was basically a suicide mission, but the autonomous units agreed for a chance to strike back at the invaders of their home." Hannibal paused to frown. "That's all I have, though.  The autonomous units chose the millipede body type as it gave the velkin the most trouble.  They further adapted to the humanoid forms to deal with us, after the first encounter with you, Max." "Awesome."  I rasped, grimly.  "Nice to know I'm the reason they made those frickin' things.  Just how did they do that, by the way?" Hannibal opened his mouth to answer.  Only to fail to get the chance as the air split with a scream of pure agony.  A scream I had heard before. "The vampires."  I hissed.

 

Trojan Horse

I barely held off going full juggernaut in the handful of steps between the tesla zone and the edge of the vampire camp.  I did, however drop my shield into place and ramped my absolute density to max.  A good thing I did; "I repeat, put her down!"  Charge snarled, his own weapon primed and ready, a brace of ballistas around him all aiming at what looked like, for lack of a better term, a giant vampire. He was huge, nearly three metres tall, his proportions elongated and swollen as if his growth was rapid and unnatural.  With a hunched over back, limbs uneven and crooked, his clothing torn in its inability to hold in his increase in size, he truly looked the part of a monster.  And, in his hands, was a female vampire, screaming in agony as wrist-thick tendrils sucked out her life force from their places on her rapidly thinning body. "Charge!"  I barked as I skidded to a halt just behind the ballistas.  "Aim for the tendrils!" "Copy that."  The javelin commander rasped.  Then: "You heard the boss.  Cut those tendrils!" With snarls of discharge, the ballista bolts streaked out to slash through the thickened cords holding the grotesque's face to the female vampire's body.  And, as they did when I cut through Finlay's tendrils seemingly forever ago, the energy siphons disrupted with flares of goa and sound.  Unlike Finlay, however, this thing didn't seem all that perturbed by it, barely hesitating in extending more. "Hit it in the mouth."  Charge growled.  "In the mouth!  Before it can latch on again!"  He put action to word himself, firing his goa-forged weapon repeatedly to send bolt after slashing bolt into the giant vampire's open mouth.  It was quickly joined by stabbing ballista bolts, the blasts powering into the creature's mouth and face. That staggered it.  It made a sound that was more like a gurgling roar than a scream as the javelin and ballista fire slammed into its mouth.  Then it was dropping the now unconscious vampire and stumbling back.  Which was my cue. Two steps and I was slamming into it at full speed, driving it back a good 20 metres before a sweeping swing shattered one of its legs.  Pulling back enough to let it begin falling, I then surged forward again to take hold of its body and, with every bit of power I could muster, I slammed it into the ground.  The impact send concussive shivers rippling outward as I pushed it nearly three feet deep before relenting.  I then hopped back to reset before dropping a knee onto its head. Reinforced by stolen goa, the giant had managed to stay more or less intact during its forceful reburial, moving weakly as I lept back.  But no amount of stolen life force could reinforce its skull enough to keep back the full power of my juggernaut intent.  With a wet sound, the skull exploded on impact, sending brains, pieces of bone and dark blood in every direction. Still it twitched.  And I knew it would do so unless I removed the head.  I quickly came down again, this time on the thing's throat, smashing it to pulp. "Charge!  I need one of your ballistas!"  I yelled from where I had put the giant into the ground. Charge jogged up, three of his ballistas in tow.  As soon as they were close enough, I pointed at the ruined neck. "I need that cut clean." Nodding, Charge motioned his team forward even as he slowly turned in a circle, his weapon raised.  The javelin looked like he was ready to fire at shadows. For good reason; there were dead vampires everywhere, their emaciated bodies showing signs of extreme violence as well as the telltale marks left behind by life-draining tendrils.  Not to mention, while it was early morning, with a bright sun shining out of a clear spring sky, a low fog seemed to cloak the vampire camp, some strange power working to keep it hidden from the rest of Fort Retribution.

I stepped close to a grim Charge even as we heard more screams from deeper in the fog in front of us. "I didn't know vampires had the ability to coalesce fog."  I rasped, looking around at the heavy, cold and dank stuff that swirled uneasily around us. "Me neither."  Charge admitted.  "That's definitely psyren territory.  But then again, who knows how this one got so big by merely feeding on its fellow vampires."  His eyes flicked towards the downed giant, which the ballistas were relieving of its head with narrow beam blasts. I frowned.  Charge was right: stealing goa would've improved strength and speed only.  It shouldn't have made the vampire grow like that, especially in such a grotesquely disproportionate manner.  Whatever affected this one, might have given it abilities beyond those granted by its template.  Including the creation of a fog bank to hide a preemptive attack. A shifting of the fog deeper into the vampire camp caught my attention.  Seeing my eyes shift, Charge followed my gaze and together we watched as another malformed monstrosity slowly lumbered out of the fog, its eyes glowing with stolen goa. "Light it up!"  Charge barked and the ballistas, having finished with the creature I had slammed into the ground, repositioned and opened fire. The air crackled as a trio of ballista blasts cut through the fog to hammer into the advancing creature's body.  Remarkably, other than a slight pause, the blasts didn't stop it. "Damn."  I hissed, already preparing to launch forward to take this one out like I did the last. "Charge!  We need to purge this ugly little puss hole.  I'm calling in reinforcements." "Copy that."  Charge grated as he opened fire with his own weapon, his lighter javelin bursts splashing almost harmlessly off the giant's face. - Tovin. - - Already on it, Max. -  The psyren instantly replied.  - As soon as I felt some of the vampires start to die, and others distort, I sent a general muster.  You should have troopers arriving right about,...now." The air around the giant abruptly lit up as eight or nine more ballista beams lashed through the space overhead to slam into the beast.  They were quickly followed by a hail of javelin fire, the foggy air glowing green and blow with the discharging bolts. - Nicely done.  Now, I need you to get on the horn with Finlay.  Find out if he knows anything about this kind of thing happening to vampires.  Whether it's happened in the past or not, and if there's a cure. - - I am talking to him right now. - - Good.  Keep me informed.  Max out. -  Then I was focusing my efforts on the firefight in front of me. And I was quickly dismayed to see the second giant was still standing despite the torrent of fire being launched against it.  Before I could surge forward to smash the creature to the ground, a bright flash of light streaked over my shoulder at a speed just beyond my ability to follow to slam into the giant's head.  Which instantly exploded into a thousand bloody fragments.  Bereft of will and drive, the body took a staggered step forward on momentum alone then toppled noisily to the ground. Eyebrow raised in curiosity, I looked over my shoulder.  And I found Hannibal standing there, dressed in fatigues, Felix's working rifle model in his black armored hands. "Consider Jolt's weapon field tested."  The echo deadpanned. "Well-timed, Casper."  I said with a grin.  Then I was grimly serious. 

"I need you support the units moving into the vampire camp.  If we run into more of those monsters, Jolt's rifle might just be the only thing we have that hits hard enough to stop them!" "Copy that."  The echo said, the long dead warrior choosing to use more modern military parlance.  He then moved past me to join the ballista and javelin units who were advancing into the fog.  I didn't hesitate long to follow. - Tovin, I'm going to need two or three of your psyrens to scan ahead of my skirmishers.- I sent as I jogged forward. - Something's pulled in a fog around the vampire camp and visibility is poor.  I'd like to keep ambushes down to a minimum, if I can help it. - - They are on their way, Max. -  Tovin's quiet, reassuring voice replied into my mind. A hand lightly caressed my buttock then Jace was stepping by in full battle garb, her goa-forged weapon held at the ready.  She looked over her shoulder to flash me a quick smile then was joining the javelins advancing into the fog.  I grinned at that.  She obviously felt a connection after last night, if that touch and her look were any indicators.  Thinking about that sobered me quickly.  While it had been most enjoyable, I still wasn't sure where the budding relationship between Jace and I was going.  Or if I wanted it at all. A presence suddenly appeared at my side, the displaced air momentarily pushing the fog back.  I glance to my right yielded a psyren silently keeping pace, her booted feet a foot off the ground. "I believe you requested some back up, commander?"  A quiet voice issued from the heavy cowl hiding her face and my grin returned at hearing a familiar voice. "Magda!"  I exclaimed.  "Good to have you along." Another arrival displaced more fog and I found two more psyrens floating on the other side. "Hope you don't mind if we tag along as well, sir."  Ronin's quiet, confident voice made its way out from another cowl. "Not at all, Ronin."  I nodded in greeting before becoming grim once more.  "I need you three to sweep the camp in front of us.  We've got vampires that are friendlies that might be unconscious or badly injured and others that are hiding.  Then we have these things."  I gestured at what was left of the second giant on the ground as we moved past it. "And things that might have been vampires a short time ago, but are being transformed into those things.  Regardless, I need our people to know what's in there." "Copy that, sir."  Ronin led the way forward, the psyrens making a small V formation as they sped up to join up with the forward units.  And then, with a billowing wave of cold and clammy fog, we were in the vampire camp proper. Eyes narrowed, I kept my full capabilities ready as I stepped over the fallen vampires.  These ones had the same kind of injuries as the ones we saw on the perimeter: the signs of a violent confrontation, then siphon marks. - We've made contact. -  Charge reported over the broadband. - Several smaller creatures, moving fast and hard from all sides.  More vulnerable to ballista and javelin fire, though. - In confirmation of Charge's words, I watched the fog light up with multiple discharges.  Screams rang out, followed by more fire. - Keep tight, damn it! -  The javelin commander returned, his voice suddenly taut.  - Don't let them pick you off. - - Ronin to Commander Boost.  Please have a medical team standing by.  We are taking casualties.  I am jumping the most badly injured directly to the medical tent! -

I paused as I saw motion out of the corner of my eye.  Slowing, I kept my juggernaut shield up tight as I carefully advanced towards what looked like a crawling figure.  Moving closer, I saw it was another female vampire, badly injured with siphon marks all over her. "Help."  She husked to no one in particular, her voice weak and filled with pain. "Please, can someone help me." I knelt beside her. "I've got you."  I said gently as, with a gasp, she collapsed into my arms.  A hand along her face and goa flowed freely into her.  I watched with satisfaction as the worst of her injuries began to close. "Can you tell me what happened here, soldier?" The vampire looked around with sightless eyes for a moment, her body taking a moment to adjust to the additional life force.  Then her eyes were clearing and she found me. "You're Max Niekro, the juggernaut."  She said and I nodded. "I am.  We've come into your camp because we found some giant creatures that resembled vampires attacking your people.  What the hell happened?" She rapidly blinked as if trying to clear tears, horror and pain rippling across her face. "They,...they wouldn't purge."  She finally managed to stammer.  "Korhol and the others.  Said the alien life force made them strong, powerful.  The rest of us could see them change, become different, but we couldn't do anything about it.  They became twisted, violent towards their own kind, isolating us from the liches and the rest of the camp.  And then,... and then they started feeding on us." At that point she broke down, her dry sobs making her frail feeling body shudder.  I could only stare at her, trying to absorb what she had told me. Tate had mentioned purging after absorbing too much alien life force in the attack that saw him killed and me captured shortly after my summoning.  From what I gathered, while it momentarily enhanced their abilities, like stolen goa would, the alien life force was ultimately incompatible with earth-made systems.  Too much, and it was like acid, breaking down cell walls and rupturing tissues until, like Tate, you internally bled to death. However, perhaps the constant exposure to those same energies had given these vampires a slight resistance to its toxic effect.  That resistance enabled them to hold on to it longer, let it enhance their abilities a bit longer. I glanced around me at the ruin that was the vampire camp, catching sight of another firefight as the javelin fire teams came under attack yet again.  This time I saw what was attacking them. Slightly larger than a regular vampire, these things looked stretched out, clothes torn by their change in size.  Faces elongated, with an almost feral expression on them, they moved far faster and hit considerably harder than I had seen before.  But, as I saw one take a javelin bolt to the head, the blast ripping its head apart and spinning it around, as Charge had observed they were more vulnerable to our firepower than those monstrosities. As abruptly as it started, the javelin and ballista fire abated. - We are clear. -  Charge announced over the broadband.  - Requesting psyren final sweep and burn for the bodies. - - Acknowledged, Commander Charge. -  Ronin quietly announced.  - Final sweep is commencing, pyrokinetic burn incoming for neutralized aggressors. - Cradling the now unconscious vampire in my arms, I stood as gouts of fire appeared, burning away the fog and letting the morning sun reveal the devastation the vampire camp had become.  It didn't take me long to find a summoner team, Boost acting on Ronin's request to send teams to deal with the wounded. Turning the vampire over to the summoners, their hands already glowing with healing goa, I began to look for Charge.  At the same time, I wanted to know what Finlay had to say how the vampires' meltdown. - Tovin, can you give me a report on what Finlay said about this whole,...'corruption' thing? -  I sent over the broadband even as I spotted Charge with a loose group of javelins and ballistas grouped around him, going through a quick debrief.  He waved a greeting when I caught his eye. - I could, Max, but I believe he wants to tell you that himself.  He's been jumped in by another team's psyren and he's awaiting you at the command tent. - I frowned.  Not entirely unexpected; I knew Finlay would show back up sooner versus later.  Of course, with all the resistance he gave us at the Earth Shrine, I had hoped later would've been the case.  Far later, ... "Nice work, Charge."  I said, drawing up beside the javelin commander.  He grinned as I clapped a hand on his shoulder. "Thanks, boss.  We took some casualties, but nothing the summoners couldn't sort out."  His grin faded. "But seriously what the hell!  Vampires growing into monsters?  Is this something we should get used to?" I grimaced. "I hope not.  Finlay's jumped in from the Earth Shrine to talk about it.  Maybe he'll have some answers for us."  I took a quick look around.  "Don't forget to get me a head count, Charge.  I want to make sure all these suck heads are accounted for.  If some of the corrupted vampires got away, we could have issues down the road." Charge quickly nodded. "I'll put somebody on that right now, boss."  A gesture sent a javelin team jogging off. "Mind if I join you for this conversation with Finlay?  I'd kinda like to hear what the liaison has to say for himself." I nodded and together we began to walk back to the command tent as more bodies flared with flame all around us.  Risen don't fight Risen.  But what do you do about the ones that have been corrupted?

 

Chapter 7: Earth Seer, Redux

Finlay looked up from the reports he was perusing as Charge and I stepped into the command tent.  He was flanked by two female Risen, borderline Transcended with their skin tone and vitality.  Unlike Transcended females, however, who were usually athletic in build and fitness, these were built like Playboy models, all curves and sexuality.  I found it amusing that, while they were escorting Finlay, they both perked up considerably seeing Charge and I walk in. "Ah, well, if it isn't the juggernaut and his javelin friend."  The vampire said with a hint of acid in his tone.  A few days between the beating I gave him and now had obviously returned some of his vinegar. "Nice of you to join me."  He paused to indicate the command tent.  "Quite the little setup you got going here.  Who'd you beat into putting it up for you?" Charge's goa-forged weapon appeared with a hum and he had it half raised to his shoulder before I put a hand on his arm to halt him. "You'll have to forgive my javelin friend, Finlay."  I said with a flat smile as a look of consternation pasted itself on Finlay's face, his eyes wide as he looked from Charge, to his weapon then to me. "We just spent the better part of an hour cleaning out a nest of corrupted vampires.  His team took some casualties.  So he isn't in the most giving of moods.  Especially when it comes to your kind." "Corrupted vampires??"  Finlay sputtered.  "I thought Tovin was kidding!  What the hell happened?" I frowned at his response, which seemed genuine. "You've never heard of such a thing before?"  I asked and Finlay immediately shook his head. "No!  Should I?" "Maybe.  According to a vampire I rescued in the camp, beat to hell and covered with siphon marks, a handful of your fellow suck heads decided to hang on to their stolen velkin life force.  They apparently thought it gave them strength and power.  They then went crazy and started to feed on their fellow vampires." Finlay's consternation became disbelief. "No vampire in their right mind would do that."  He insisted.  "We all know how corrosive alien life force is to our systems.  If you don't immediately purge, or try to absorb too much, your tissues explode and you bleed to death internally." "Yet these ones seemed to have built up a resistance, allowing them to hold onto the stolen life force longer and longer before they were forced to purge."  I pointed out.  "And when they reached the point of no return, their tissues didn't rupture.  They changed." Finlay's expression of disbelief deepened. "This, I have to see."  He said, throwing the stack of reports he'd been looking at onto a nearby desk before stomping past me, his escort in tow.  Both of which flashed Charge and I brilliant smiles, winks and air kisses as they went by. I threw Charge a quick questioning look. "Succubi."  He said, catching my look and expression.  "A step above a vampire and below a Transcended.  Part of a small group of Risen called Demonics, mimicking skill sets found in mythological creatures of demon descent."  Both our eyes turned to find the succubi and discovered them looking over their shoulders at us even as their back ends twitched saucily. "Infiltrators, mostly.  Used to gather information from the surviving humans. "  The javelin continued to explain without taking his eyes off the seductive creatures as they swayed away from us.  "I've heard they have a thing for Transcended though, since we usually have goa to spare and they are similar to vampires in their need to steal goa to activate their abilities."

While it was a bit of a challenge to take my eyes off such perfectly formed behinds, I did so to throw another look over at Charge. "And what exactly can they do?"  Charge sighed, and looked away from the succubi to shrug. "I haven't heard much about the other classes, as they are few and far between.  But succubi apparently are empaths, and can modify emotions as well as skim surface thoughts.  They also use pheromone bombs to control larger groups, although those usually are targeted at males.  There's another class specific for use against females, the Incubi, but they're fairly rare." I snorted. "Sounds more like they're used to control humans and the odd, susceptible Risen.  Kind of useless in our war against the velkin." Charge nodded. "I don't disagree with you there, boss.  I'm thinking that's the main reason the Demonics exist in such low numbers." "So why the arm candy?" The javelin shrugged again. "Maybe to remind us who's in charge?  After all, he was running the show until you came along and seriously put him in his place a few days' ago."  Damn, had this place only been in operation for a few days?  With everything that had gone into those few days, it felt like forever! "Maybe he's showing us that he still has power enough to call in succubi to be his personal lapdogs.  Supposedly they are vulnerable to Risen with powerful wills.  And Finlay has a strong one."  Abruptly he chuckled. "Then again, so do you, boss.  That stupid suck head might just lose his toys to you, if he's not careful." I sighed.  That was a distraction I could do without.  There was too much to do, and too much at stake to become engrossed in something so trivial, when compared against the big picture. "C'mon.  Let's go make sure Finlay doesn't get himself lost on the way to the medical tent." As it turned out, my hope the vampire would get lost went unrealized.  He was staring at the first of the monster vampires we had downed, when we arrived a minute or two layer.  The giant corpse, minus its head, was laying on a sheet of plastic outside the medical tent's main entrance, a swarm of summoners around it.  The expression on his face was, for lack of a better term, troubled.  His escort was standing a couple metres away, doing their best not to look at the large body. "Puts a new spin on the situation, doesn't it."  I said as I stepped to Finlay's side.  The vampire mutely nodded, obviously struggling with some thoughts. Charge looked at the pensive vampire for a moment, then gave me a quick slap on the shoulder. "I'm going to check in on my guys that went down in that firefight, boss.  And see if we got that head count for you." "Sounds good, Charge."  I said with a nod.  "Catch you in a bit." Finlay took that opportunity to look over at me. "You said there were survivors?" The female vampire that I had rescued, looked up as Finlay and I approached.  Me, she flashed a quick smile.  For him, though, she had a look that bordered on fear.  The vampire liaison glanced over at me, his expression still troubled plus a bit confused. "What,...what is he doing here?"  She stammered, looking from Finlay to me. "This is Finlay.  He's our liaison with the Earth Seer."  I said, motioning to Finlay to stop where he was for a moment.

"He has a few questions about what happened in your camp." "Okay.  As long as you stay here, sir, I'll answer them.  Otherwise, I want him to leave." I looked over at Finlay and watched him absorb that, his troubled and confused expression deepening.  Then I looked back to her. "That's do-able.  Finlay, ask your questions." Nodding, Finlay clasped his hands behind his back and forced a calm expression on his thin, pale face. "Commander Niekro here told me that some of your company were refusing to purge the alien life force after battle."  He hesitantly began.  "Is this true?" The female vampire quickly nodded. "They said it gave them power, strength beyond what normal goa could give them."  She said. "I just wanted to follow protocols.  That foul stuff was bitter, and it made me sick to my stomach to siphon." "As it does most of us, soldier."  Finlay's lips pursed thoughtfully.  "But these ones didn't.  How long was it before you started seeing them change?  And what changed first?" The female thought about that for a moment. "A week, maybe.  They would hold on to it for an extra hour longer each time, just a bit.  After about a week, I started noticing things.  Paranoia, bursts of anger, and babbling; like something was affecting their brains.  The last big absorb was in the battle for the culling convoy a few days ago.  Most of our men and a few of our women soaked up as much as they could then retreated." "Retreated?"  It was my turn to frown.  "Is that why your company was so decimated?  Because most of the vampires actually left the battlefield?" "Yes, sir."  She confirmed with a nod.  "Me and a handful stayed to try to help the liches press the attack, but there were just too many aliens for us to deal with.  We took a beating then ran for it.  We made it back to the fall back point, purged, and found the rest of the vampires here, already."  She glanced at Finlay, then back at me. "By that time they were already changing.  Some were taller, others had longer limbs than normal, others were,...talking in the alien language.  Korhol talked with your animus, agreed to let you stay, then withdrew everybody back to our own camp.  I overheard them planning on how they would finish the change, then attack the rest of the camp to feed on the liches and your team, sir." She paused, as if considering whether she had said too much. "But then you and the summoner discovered the upgrade protocols and Korhol decided against the attack, since you were now too strong.  It wasn't long after that the physical changes became more radical and they started turning their hunger on those of us that didn't try to keep the alien energy." "Blessed Earth Mother."  Finlay quietly swore, shaking his head.  I looked over at him and saw him genuinely disturbed. "We should've caught this almost immediately.  Instead, a whole cohort of vampires turn traitor and attack first their own kind, then other Risen."  He twitched and, if he could become more pale, he would've. "The Earth Mother is less than pleased." "And she'll be even more unhappy to learn we've got another problem."  Charge said, rejoining us just in time to overhear Finlay's last words. "At least three of those partially corrupted vampires managed to scamper off into the wilderness.  I've got a pair of animus teams trying to track them down, but it looks like they were moving pretty fast.  They might be out of range by now."

- Tovin, we've got a trio of corrupted vampires that have escaped our cull.  Can you track them? - There was a pause.  Then: - Sorry, Max.  Whatever has twisted their systems into those monstrosities, is also preventing a telepathic lock. -  The psyren commander reported. - I can sense them out there, but I can't get an exact location. - I frowned as my thoughts churned. - Felix, do we have any satellites overhead? - - Checking now, Max. -  The tesla commander answered, Tovin's broadband instantly transmitting to him as soon as I thought of the lean Risen tech expert. - Two.  A weather satellite, with limited ground visibility.  And a telecom satellite, with no ground visibility.  Everything else is out of range for another hour or so. - - Can you pull up any standard spectrum images from around the camp in the last hour?  We have three vampires that have gone missing.  I've got animus tracking them, but they're having trouble picking up the scent.  Likely due to the change in their biochemistry, thanks to the corruption. - - Makes sense.  From what Boost was telling me, they have large scale changes on the molecular level.  That'll alter their entire profile.  Give me maybe ten minutes or so, Max, and I'll see if I can mine anything out of the weather satellite's download. - - Thanks, Felix. - "If Jolt is successful in finding them, or if the animus locate them, the result will be the same."  Charge pointed out. "We'll have to jump in a team of javelins or ballistas to finish taking them out.  The animus will be too lightly armed to drop them themselves." I nodded in acknowledgement and agreement.  Charge would know, having been on the front lines dealing with both the fully changed and the partially changed vampires during the cleansing of their camp.  And from what I saw of the partially changed vampires, with their speed and strength, I was inclined to agree with him.  Then I sighed. Of course all this would have to happen now.  So much was going sideways at the same time, if felt like we'd never get traction to go forward.  Yet we also couldn't just throw up our hands and give up.  Some excellent resources and assets were coming available to us.  If we didn't take advantage of them to hurt the velkin as much as we could, right now, we'd be fools. Without access to my thoughts, Finlay had been doing some hard thinking of his own. "Thank you for answering my questions."  He quietly said to the female survivor, who looked at me quickly and nodded after I quickly nodded myself to say it was okay.  He then looked over at me. "I just want to talk to a couple more to corroborate then I'll be returning to the Earth Shrine to consult with the Seer. I also wouldn't mind a copy of Boost's report detailing his examination of these corrupted giant vampires.  The Seer will want to see those as well, even though the Earth Mother has been keenly watching this situation unfold.  She, of course, commends you on your quick action and decisive resolving of the situation." A slight smile touched my lips.  It must be killing the usually acidic liaison to extend such praise. "Charge and I will pass the Earth Mother's commendation on to our people."  I said, a look over at the javelin commander enough to get Charge's confirming nod. "And I'll see that you talk to a couple more survivors, as well as get your hands on that report.  I imagine Boost is just about finished it now." "Thank you, commander."  Any trace of his earlier viperish attitude was now completely gone.  It made me curious as to why. "You're welcome.  A quick question before we continue: what do you think the Earth Mother's reaction to this corruption issue will be, Finlay?" The liaison didn't hesitate. "She'll want to insure it doesn't happen again."  He said, with a glance at the survivor, who warily watched him. "So she'll pull all vampires out of front line service.  No more vampire only companies, and definitely no more feeding on the aliens.  If she could, she would decommission the lot of us, sending us all back into the ground." My eyebrow lifted at that, even as Charge whistled in astonishment.  Decommission?  That was pretty serious indeed.  No wonder he looked severely crestfallen.  Then my eyes narrowed as something occurred to me. "I might have a workaround on that decommissioning thing." It was Finlay's turn to raise an eyebrow in curiosity.  Seeing that, I pressed on. "The Upgrade Initiative.  If the Earth Mother wants her vampires to be something else, the Upgrade Initiative might be able to make that happen.  It's already had great success with liches, temporarily imposing Transcended templates on them to give them a much broader range of capability and skill." "I,...I would like to try that."  The survivor piped up to say.  I looked over at her and smiled, nodding at seeing the serious expression on her face. "Anything to get away from the horror I just experienced."  She added, a tentative smile touching her lips as well. "We've got our first vampire test subject."  Charge said with an enthusiastic grin.  It made sense he would be all for converting the vampires.  The javelins and ballistas had benefited the greatest from the initiative that saw dozens of liches converted to javelins. "I'll grab Boost and we'll set it up."  I turned back to Finlay, who had lost a little of his crestfallen look and was now considerably more thoughtful. "What say you, liaison?  Think the Earth Mother will go for the initiative converting willing vampires into Upgrades?" "Considering how pleased she is with your efforts here, I've little doubt she'll support it."  A slight smile touched his lips. "Wouldn't it be ironic if I decided to upgrade and found myself a juggernaut, like you." I chuckled lightly. "You know, it really would."  I agreed before sobering.  "Seriously though, we could use more juggernauts.  Do any of the other Transcended teams the Earth Mother assigned to North American have juggernauts?" I couldn't help the feeling of disappointment I had when I saw the vampire shake his head. "Juggernauts use considerable amounts of goa to summon."  He explained.  "After my encounter with you last week, she took me aside and explained that she reserves only the most capable and skilled of her remembered children to be summoned as such.  That way, they can make the greatest impact possible."  He glanced around at the medical tent. "Like you've done here, raising Fort Retribution out of the dust, starting the Upgrade Initiative, and turning hundreds of shamblers into second generation Transcended.  Not to mention, actually winning an engagement against the aliens." One more look around then he was turning to me.  "And I think I will leave you to it. Your work here is confirmation of what the Earth Mother told me. You are an exceptional individual, Max. And I wish you all the luck in your continued efforts." He extended his hand, which I carefully took. After giving it a shake, he nodded then turned away to go and find the other survivors to continue his investigation.  "Man, he must be real shook up by what happened here, to be extending an olive branch to you like that." Charge mused, the two of us watching Finlay stop by the examination table another one of the vampire survivors was occupying, a pair of summoners working on recovering her health.  I silently nodded. Shook up, indeed.  "We have a little momentum coming out of cleansing that corrupt nest, Charge. Let's not lose it." I turned to him.  "Mind rounding up our original team? Time for a war council so I can let everybody in on what I'm thinking!"

 

A Time for War

I looked up as the last members of our team, Twitch and Kat joined us.  Still looking a little tired from her ordeal in Campton, Kat nevertheless flashed me a brilliant smile when she found my eyes on her.  She quickly stepped forward to find a place beside me where I was leaning up against one of the tables set up in the command tent.  Copying how I sat against the table on my right, her fingers found my hand as she leaned in to whisper: "Thank you so much for getting me out there, Max." "Of course, Kat."  I replied just as quietly with a smile.  "I would never leave you in a place like that." Her fingers squeezed my hand at that, as the wattage on her smile went up. "I know you wouldn't.  I just wanted to thank you anyway."  Her smile became sensual.  "And if you are available later, I want to thank you properly."  She then leaned back in and left a lingering kiss on my cheek. Twitch clearing her throat brought my attention back to the meeting.  A quick glance at her yielded she wasn't too thrilled about the attention Kat was directing towards me. "Right.  Thanks for coming in, guys.  I just wanted to hold an impromptu war council in the wake of the vampire nest being cleaned out to see where everybody's at.  And to let you guys know what's going through my head." I looked to my left. "Felix, want to start us off?  What's going on with the teslas?" The tesla commander quickly drew a data tablet from his utility vest and with a couple quick taps, brought up some information. "Well, Max, everybody, the teslas have been working on a number of projects.  First of those was the reverse engineering of the tech our scavengers retrieved in an operation three days' ago.  From that tech, we've managed to derive several weapons and power systems.  We are still working on armor derivatives." He paused to check the tablet. "Second project is the penetration and translation of the velkin data network.  We have accomplished the penetration, however we're still developing a translation algorithm that will crack their encryption.  Third, the activation of the planet's satellite network.  We've done that, tapped into the data streams and we're currently analyzing the data we've downloaded.  I'll have a report on that within the week." Another check of the tablet: "Finally, we're working on analyzing the living K'ethik machine samples obtained from Campton, both insect form and humanoid form.  We've finished the schematics and are currently looking to crack the behavioral programming.  Unfortunately, as living machines, they incorporated a low level, random flux quantum field as a driving force.  A soul, if you will.  And once they were terminated, this quantum field dissipated, taking with it a measure of the programming the machine received during its development."  He paused to look around at the rest of us. "Hopefully we'll be able to work with Hannibal, the echo that took possession of one of the K'ethik humanoid forms and work some of that out.  And that's where the teslas are." "Thanks, Felix."  I said with an acknowledging nod.  "And excellent work, by the way.  Hopefully we'll be distributing those weapons and power systems to those Transcended that can use them, specifically the wraith and animus groups.  And I have an idea I'll be sharing with you all shortly about Hannibal and the humanoid form K'ethik."  I then turned to our summoner. "Boost?" The summoner smiled before standing from his chair. "Well, while we don't have projects we're working on, like the teslas, my summoners and I have been pretty busy."  He said with a nod.

"First, between Max and I, we discovered the upgrade protocols and began the Upgrade Initiative, where we imposed Transcended templates on lower level Risen as a method of temporarily increasing their functional capabilities.  We then upgraded the surviving liches from a failed attack against a culling convoy.  Subsequently we discovered that we could use the upgrade protocols on shamblers to permanently convert the majority of them to second generation Transcended, thus increasing our overall complement by orders of magnitude." Boost paused and took a quick look around at the attentive faces. "Using the summoners that I was able to gather from the ranks of the upgrades and the second gens, I then set up a field hospital where we run routine upgrade goa recharges, triage and treatment of injuries and standard physicals to make sure template integrity is being maintained.  I think that's about it." As Boost nodded to me and retook his seat, I shook my head and chuckled. "And you said you didn't have projects you were working on, Boost.  Those sounded like projects to me."  As the others quietly laughed, I went on.  "Excellent work, as well, my friend.  You and your summoners indeed have been busy.  Made more so by our recent activities against the velkin and the K'ethik.  Hopefully we can keep that to a minimum in the future."  I then looked over at Tovin. "And how are the psyrens faring, Tovin?" Silently floating, as always, her hands tucked into her sleeves, the psyren commander paused thoughtfully. "While I didn't receive any psyrens from the initial upgrade of the liches, I did receive several from the creation of the second gen Transcended, many of which have already received combat experience.  We are currently doing ongoing training to make sure all of my people are aware of our operational requirements and parameters.  They are, of course, available to any other teams requiring their services on an as needed basis."  She succinctly reported before falling silent. "Most outstanding.  Thank you, Tovin.  Your team has been invaluable in our efforts so far.  And we'll be leaning on them heavily in the days and weeks to come."  I then switched my attention to Twitch. "And how about your wraiths, Twitch?" The diminutive Transcended flashed me a bright smile before she began her report from where she was standing close to where she had stepped into the tent. "Well, Max, we actually got a handful of wraiths from the initial lich upgrade and I battle tested them during the scavenger hunt.  I also received a couple dozen from the creation of the second gens.  Together we've been training and running drills, looking for opportunities to further test our capabilities and contribute to the over all effort." "You'll be getting that shortly, Twitch."  I assured her with a smile.  I then turned to Kat. "And how about the animus, Kat?" She smiled at me, then stood so she could address the group. "Like Twitch, the animus got a handful of scouts out of the upgrade, some of which saw limited action during the scavenger hunt.  We got more out of the second gen process and we've also been training, waiting for our opportunity.  Outside of that, though, nothing much." I nodded. "And like Twitch, I have something in store for your people, Kat.  Now that Felix has completed working models of the weapons, we'll quickly be equipping both the wraiths and the animus so both groups will pack a significantly stronger punch." "My people will like that."  Kat said with a grin, Twitch echoing the sentiment. "I thought you might."  I smiled then turned to my javelin commander.  "Last but not least, Charge."

The javelin smiled as he stood. "Well, my group has been working hard, actually."  He said. "See?  I knew that."  I replied with a grin.  "Definitely not least."  Charge chuckled. "No, definitely not.  The upgrade saw mostly javelins being produced, which I immediately began working with.  Then the creation of the second gens saw not only more javelins but a handful of the harder hitting ballistas being produced as well.  Many saw action in the scavenger hunt, and more in engagements at Campton and the vampire camp.  With our scouting group not yet possessing weaponry, the bulk of the ground fighting has fallen to my group and our solitary juggernaut."  Charge returned his attention to me. "Speak of which, think you and Boost could come up with a way of creating more juggernauts, boss?  Since Finlay basically told us the Earth Mother wasn't summoning any more.  I think it'd make a great one-two punch for juggernauts to go in and soften up a hard target and let us bring it down from range."  He looked over at Boost. "Unless there are other heavy assault Transcended out there we could source." Boost's expression went blank as he turned his attention inward to the database his summoner template had given him.  A moment later, he shook his head. "Considering the size advantage the velkin have over us, the Earth Mother apparently didn't see fit to create that many heavy assault templates.  Other than the juggernaut template, all I see in the database is something called a viper.  It lacks the density control a juggernaut has, no increased speed or strength.  But it has shielding, improved reflexes and the capability to summon goa-forged weapons for close quarters combat." "Transcended?"  I asked and Boost nodded.  "Let's add it to the next round to see if we can get at least one.  Perhaps as an upgrade, in case they aren't as useful as we would like."  Then I was turning back to Charge. "Now, something I got from Finlay in that conversation you and I had with him, Charge, was the possibility of other juggernauts on other continents.  He said no when you asked him if any juggernauts were amongst the Transcended teams the Earth Mother had assigned North America.  We should see if we can establish contact with other teams on other continents to get a hold of additional juggernauts for any large ground scale attack we plan." "Contacting them isn't the problem, Max."  Tovin quietly pointed out.  "It's getting them here.  South America wouldn't be that difficult.  A team of psyrens would just need to jump down there and get them.  But anything off the continent wouldn't be possible.  There are no points in either ocean that stand close enough to shore that we could use them as a half way point.  And we simply don't have the range to jump the entire ocean in one teleport." I frowned, then looked over at Felix. "Think the human bases would still have transports capable of flying?" "Perhaps."  Felix conceded.  "But after 50 years of neglect, it would take some time to get them working.  And there is now the possibility that the K'ethik occupy more than one of those bases, as they seem to be drawn to technology."  He quickly consulted his tablet. "A more viable alternative would be to use our knowledge of velkin tech and build our own transports here.  We only need a handful, which we then could use as platforms for the psyrens to jump over large numbers from Europe, Africa or Australasia." I slowly nodded as I considered that. "You know, I think you could be on to something there, Felix.  How quickly do you think you could get one up and running?"

"Considering we've already duplicated their power sources and computer cores, it'll be a simple matter of designing and building an airframe that we can install those components in.  With the micro forge here, and a good supply of raw materials,..."  He paused to do some quick calculations on the tablet. "Sometime tomorrow, I believe." I grinned. "Sounds like you've already been working on this, Felix."  And I watched the tesla grin.  "Okay, you've got your next project.  Let's say midday tomorrow for your first test drive."  I looked at the rest of the team. "As for the rest of us, this is what I'm thinking: I still want to destroy that transport hub.  That is goal number one.  But I want hard intel on it first, instead of just satellite imagery.  So, until we can crack into their network, we go with our next best option: wraith insertion." I paused to reach behind me and grab two briefs that I had previously prepared.  I then handed one to Twitch, the other to Kat. "As of now, I'm initiating Operation Ninja.  Twitch, Kat, take the briefs with the mission specs and source me out a viable battle plan for presentation this evening.  Basically I want the animus to use full resource capability and establish a perimeter and suppress anything coming and going.  The wraiths will then penetrate the base, get me hard numbers on garrison strength, positioning, communications and weaponry before planting a data spike for the teslas in one of the velkin computer terminals." Leaving my two recon and covert commanders nodding as they began flipping through the briefs, I went on. "I also want to leverage the K'ethik tech by seeing if Hannibal can scare up some more willing echos to inhabit the samples we brought back from Campton.  That'll be the Ghost in the Machine Project.  Felix, I want you and Charge on that one." "You got it, boss."  Charge said, even as Felix nodded.  "Of course, Max.  It'll be an interesting challenge!" "Good."  I said.  "If we can get Hannibal and some other echoes on board, we can leverage their assault capabilities directly against the velkin.  And that'll be vital if Boost can't source us some additional heavy assault Transcended."  I looked over at a frowning Boost.  "You and I are on that one, bud.  That'll be the Heavy Assault Transcended, or HAT Project." The summoner, seeing that I was adding myself to his effort, immediately grinned in relief. "Most excellent, boss."  He said with a nod. "Speaking of hats, Charge, you get to wear two.  In addition to working with Felix on the Ghost Project, I need you to source me out a battle plan for a ground assault on the transport hub.  And get your troops running drills.  As of now, I am initiating Operation Bullrush, with the stated goal of using the intel gathered by Twitch and Kat to launch a ground attack against the hub in seven days."  I handed the javelin commander the last of my prepared briefs. This time Charge's grin was fierce as he took it and nodded enthusiastically. "Now that's what I'm talking about, boss.  Hitting the velkin right in the frickin' mouth!" I couldn't help but grin myself at the javelin's enthusiasm. "Just so."   I looked over at the silently hovering psyren.  "And you'll get to wear two hats as well, Tovin.  First, I want you to oversee a project to get our hands on a live velkin."  As the team looked at me in surprise, I went on to explain. "We're having trouble with their language.  I need to capture a velkin  hunter alive so we can scan their brain and make a map of their language.  We'll then pass that data on to Felix, so he can finish cracking the velkin network.  Borrow a handful of Twitch's wraiths for the penetration.  If you can source me out a plan for that by this evening as well, that'd be great." "And the second thing, Max?"  The psyren quietly asked even as I got the sense from her that she was pleased to be involved in such a complicated project. "Reach out to the psyrens on the other continents.  I want to know how we stand world wide, and I would rather we use a network we develop ourselves, instead of going through our vampire friend.  For some odd reason, I just don't trust him." That elicited several smiles and a quiet chuckle from Twitch. "You'll then work with Felix on his moving platform concept, with velkin-tech transports and skipping over the oceans.  Capabilities, ranges, capacities; we need all that data to figure out just how many platforms we need, and where they need to be placed for maximum efficacy.  Then, as a back up plan, I want you to work with the succubi Finlay brought with him on this visit of his." "The succubi?"  Charge asked with a frown.  "But I thought you said you felt Demonics were useless against the velkin." "That, I did, Charge."  I said with a nod.  "But I don't intend on using them against the velkin.  You said yourself they were infiltrators, meant to slip into human populations for intelligence gathering and behavior modification.  While we don't need intel from our human friends, we do need to modify their behavior.  You see, I got the chance to talk to one before Twitch pulled me out of that cull camp.  And while they are intelligent, brave and resourceful, they are also resigned to their fate as an all-you-can-eat alien buffet." I paused to quickly glance around at my team. "While we may no longer be human, I'll be damned if I sit back and let them get wiped out just because some alien has bred them into thinking they're cattle.  Not to mention, if we can get them on our side, we have a ready made pool of soldiers." I looked back at Tovin. "So you're going to educate our little mind warp friends as to how to convince the humans that fighting the velkin is not only worth their time and effort, but is the only reason for survival.  Once you're convinced the succubi understand their objectives and are sufficiently prepared to carry out their mission, we'll insert them and get them to work." Again I got the feeling from Tovin that she was pleased with this assignment as well. "This, I can do, Max."  She replied, sounding almost eager.  "I am contacting Finlay even as we speak, to get his permission to use the succubi." "Excellent."  I smiled tightly as I looked once more at my team mates. "Well, guys, this is it.  It's time we got this war kicked into overdrive.  I'll let you go, since we've all got alot to do in a very short period of time.  And I want you to get to it!"

 

Enter the Ninja

I frowned thoughtfully as I looked through the list of templates Boost had sketched out for me.  Beside them sat Twitch and Kat's approved battle plan, and beside that, Charge's.  My people were ready to go.  Now, all I needed was buy in from Hannibal and we could get this show on the road. "And here are our mostly unwilling subjects."  Boost rasped, joining me at the desk we had set up in the medical tent, gesturing over his shoulder as he did. Looking past him, I saw a handful of shambers being herded along by a psyren foursome, the psionics working to both keep the shamblers in a group, and to keep them relatively calm. "How far out did the sweeps have to go to round these up?"  I wanted to know, considering we had exhausted the shambler supply around both cull camps that we could easily reach. "About six jumps to the south, where the velkin have another cull cluster set up."  Boost said with a frown. "We're gobbling up psyren assets just to get these things in here."  He looked at me, still frowning. "Jolt seriously needs to get those transports off the ground.  That'll give us both the range and the resources to continue bringing in shamblers to upgrade." I nodded, standing and leaving the list and the briefs on a table behind me. "I just hope these ones will take either a juggernaut or a viper template.  We haven't had much success in getting either of those." Boost nodded, turning to watch as the psyrens carefully pushed the shamblers into the holding pen. "Could be a matter of goa, boss.  Just like Finlay said.  We simply can't get enough in one spot to make the template work."  He looked over his shoulder. "Even with you acting as a battery." Again I nodded.  It made sense, unfortunately.  If we were to use the amount of goa that I needed to become a juggernaut, to create another, I would be completely drained.  Unless, . . . "Remember how I powered up to replace the goa Finlay stole from me, before I handed out that attitude adjustment?" "Yeah."  Boost carefully replied, still looking over his shoulder at me.  His expression changed from resigned to thoughtful. "Maybe if I deliberately pulled in all the goa I could hold, we might actually get a template to stick." Boost's thoughtful look deepened. "Maybe.  I don't know if I could channel that much though, in making the template work."  Abruptly he shrugged. "Only one way to find out though, boss."  He began walking towards the shamblers, with me on his heels. We halted just outside the containment area.  Boost loosened up, a move I copied, stretching my body as if I was about to engage in some serious physical activity.  Then, at a nod from him to let me know he was ready, I focused my will and mentally called for the goa, like I did after the ambush on Tate and I. The first arm-thick tendril reached up from the ground with a snarl of discharge and I grunted as it slammed into me, filling me with a surge of energy.  The next two quickly followed, the rush of goa into my body quickly reaching the point of bursting. "That's it."  I managed to gasp, every gram of will bent to holding myself together.  I had gone to max absolute density, my shield up tight to help me hold more.  And now my vision was blurring from the howling of the energy raging inside me.

"I'm topped out!" Seeing the halo of green-blue light surrounding me as the tendrils disappeared with a final howl, Boost swallowed noisily, his expression nervous.  Then he was abruptly turning to the psyrens to jerk a nod, rubbing his hands together as he gathered himself. I took a staggering half step towards him. "Don't channel."  I grunted, teeth grit against the forces inside me trying to rip me into a thousand pieces. "Just get the template ready.  When you're good to go,..."  I paused to regather myself.  It took a few seconds to steady myself. "I'll touch the shambler."  I managed to finish. Again Boost jerked an acknowledging nod, his nervousness fading just a bit.  He then looked at the shambler one of the psyrens had cut from the group and guided towards us. "Going big right off the hop, boss."  He informed me with a glance in my direction. "If we can get a juggernaut on the first pass, we'll be ahead of the game." By this point, I could no longer speak.  So I just nodded, my face darkening from my efforts to keep from exploding. The shambler came to a halt, twitching and fidgeting as the psyren's compulsion held it in place.  Boost's hands began to glow as he then stepped forward, expression intent.  At the same time, I approached from the other side, barely able to concentrate enough to move and keep all that goa inside at the same time. The summoner then reached out, hesitated long enough to look over at me and nod, before he put out his hands to lay them on the broken creature's back and shoulder.  At the same time, I reached out with a trembling hand to take hold of the shambler's other arm.  Then I was groaning out loud as the accumulated goa in my body poured out in a rush, the shambler swallowed up in a cloud of blue-green light. Out it poured, like a burst dam, the goa leaving me faster than it had entered.  Then, as abruptly as it had began, the exodus was over and I was falling to a knee, exhausted.  And in doing so, my hands fell away from the shambler and to the ground where I was forced to use them to hold myself up. "Holy,...shit."  I grunted, my head ringing.  "Boost.  Tell me that worked, man."  I managed to gasp as I worked on steadying myself. When the summoner didn't answer, I frowned.  What the hell! "Boost?"  I began, slowly swinging my head up.  Where I found a hand held out to me.  I stared at it for a moment, then followed it up to its owner. She was maybe 5'10", long, brunette hair still damp from its sudden reappearance and exotically gorgeous with a hint of olive to her skin.  A military issue blanket hid everything else, except the naked arm she extend. "Hello."  I rasped, grimacing as I took her hand and let her pull me to my feet. "Hello."  She quietly answered with just a hint of an accent, not letting go of my hand as her Transcended eyes studied me carefully. "I'm Max." "Jen."  She replied with an easy smile of greeting.  Then she was forced to let go of my hand as we were both surrounded by summoners, their glowing hands making the pain fade into the background. "It worked!"  Boost exulted as he bustled around first the woman, then me. "Holy frickin' hell, Max, it worked!  She's a juggernaut!" I felt a smile touch my lips at the news.  Thank goodness for that; I was glad nearly re-killing myself had actually accomplished what we had set out to do.

- You have done well, my juggernaut. -  The Earth Mother's voice whispered inside my mind and I instantly felt all my pain and exhaustion disappear. - You have indeed discovered the key to creating more of your kind.  Just know this, my child: none will stand greater than you.  They will look up to you, for guidance and direction.  Lead them well. -  And then her presence was gone, leaving me blinking in astonishment.  All around me the summoners that had been working on restoring me took a puzzled step back. "How,...how did you do that, Max?"  Boost asked, his expression confused as he waved his hands over me. "You're completely restored without our help." I looked over at him and drew in a deep breath, even though technically I didn't need to as Risen no longer needed to breath to stay alive. "I just had a visitor, who told me we had discovered the key to making juggernauts."  I revealed and Boost's eyes flew wide as he realized who I was talking about. "I just hope making more doesn't kill me!" ***** It was maybe three hours later that, finally exhausted beyond my capability to compensate for, we finished our efforts to create more heavy assault Transcended.  I sagged in the chair I found in the medical tent, my eyes resisting my efforts to focus them as I looked at the final tally Boost handed me. Five juggernauts and twelve vipers; it was almost beyond comprehension what we had managed to accomplish.  I let the numbers swirl around in my mind for a moment as I pondered that. "Am I catching you at a bad time?"  Hannibal asked, a smile on his metallic face as he peered into the tent.  I shook my head and waved him over.  Still dressed in fatigues, he had added a utility vest, gloves, and a camouflage bandanna around his head, giving him an almost human appearance.  Slipping inside, he stepped over to where I had taken temporary shelter. "You look a little worse for wear, my friend."  He commented drily, coming to a halt a pace away. "Unusual, considering what you are." "Tell me about it."  I rasped, then forced myself to sit up.  "Now, you're probably wondering why I asked to talk to you." "The question did indeed cross my mind."  Hannibal nodded.  "Although, so did several possible reasons.  And out of those, the one that makes the most sense is that you want me to see if I can get additional echoes to join me in inhabiting K'ethik shells to help with your efforts against the velkin." I smiled thinly and nodded. "That's fairly astute of you, Casper."  My smile vanished.  "Yes, I want to see if you can get a handful of your fellow echoes convinced to help us out.  Even a squad of K'ethik humanoid shells in battle would be formidable." Hannibal slowly nodded, his expression thoughtful. "I'm fairly certain I can convince a number of those I am aware of, to join me.  But we need shells to inhabit.  At last count, I'm in the only one that's intact." I grimaced as I carefully drew myself to my feet. "I've been thinking about that.  Let's go and take a look at the samples the teslas are working on." As tired and hurting as I was, it took twice as long as it normally would've to make my way over to the tesla compound.  Evening was quickly descending as well, which meant the stand lights were up and on, throwing their artificial brilliance over the outdoor examination area.  That's where Felix had left the K'ethik shells, both the insect forms and the remaining humanoid forms.

We paused by the humanoid forms, Hannibal kneeling to probe at the torn neck of the one closest to him.  Most of them had died when I managed to break those necks, twisting hard enough to disrupt the conduits running from the core into the sensory cluster contained in the head.  While most of the creature's functions, including its central processor, remained in the body core and should've been safe from that kind of death, Felix had found the traces of a massive feedback surge.  Caused by the head being wrenched around like it was, the surge was enough to rebound into the core CPU and overload it, causing death. "Now here's my question to you, Hannibal: what sort of repair protocols do the humanoid shells contain?" The ghost turned to look at me. "Do you mean, do the shells have the capacity to repair the kind of damage we're looking at here?"  He asked and I nodded.  He turned his attention back to the damaged shell and went silent, almost absently poking the ruined neck. Just when I was starting to think he had somehow shut down, he spoke. "I've just found a set of rather advanced repair protocols in the cache memory, actually.  They, of course, require the shell's occupant to activate which would explain how these ones failed to do so, as you managed to kill them."  He again looked back at me. "However, I'm not sure an echo can inhabit a damaged shell and initiate the repair protocols without having full control.  It might need an external repair first to sort out the majority of the damage before an echo could come in, assume control and finish the repairs internally." "Is this something you can investigate?"  I asked and he quickly nodded. "I have a couple ideas already, just based on what I'm seeing for the repair process."  He further explained. "I'll let you know in a couple hours what I've got." I smiled. "Sounds good.  I'll leave you to it, then." It was as I turned and began to laboriously head back to the medical tent, that a shout from inside the command tent captured my attention. "Max!"  It was Felix.  I looked over at the tent and saw him poke his head into sight. "Twitch and Kat have reached the transport hub and are beginning their insertion!" I frowned as I looked at the screen in front of me. "What are we looking at, Felix?"  I wanted to know. The tesla commander grinned from where he was sitting close to the monitor, fingers dancing across a pair of keyboards. "As it turns out, one of Tovin's psyrens, Magda, I believe, has the ability to not only generate a telepathic broadband signal linking several individuals telepathically together at the same time.  She apparently also possesses the ability to use her telepathy to see and hear what a telepathic target is seeing and hearing." "What??"  I leaned closer, suddenly intent on the images moving across the screen.  Felix bobbed an excited nod. "Exactly!  Now we have real time imagery from the battlefield.  All I needed to do was adapt one of the communication interfaces that utilized multiband transmission and reception with a sensor that could pick up telepathic energy and we're getting images directly from the eyes and ears of someone on the battlefield.  In this case, Twitch herself." I looked over at Felix. "I didn't know we had sensors that could pick up telepathic energy."  I said and he smiled.

"Shortly before the velkin invasion, telepathy and other psionic abilities were under full scale investigation as legitimate sensory vectors.  Those investigations were able to prove that telepathy was the ability to detect the specific electromagnetic patterns generated by the brain, and interpret those patterns into speech and imagery."  "That was only possible after they created a sensor that was sensitive enough to detect those electromagnetic patterns as well.  I used one of those at Tovin's suggestion, to create a telepathic communication link.  Which we're now using to utilize this new eyes and ears capability Magda has, to bring us these images.  It's like having video and sound directly as it happens, from the viewpoint of the person being tapped." My eyebrow lifted and I nodded, an appreciative look on my face.  The things that happen when you're dead and asleep in the cold dirt, hey?  Then I was focusing my attention on what was happening on the screen. - C and C, we are approaching the perimeter. -  Kat's calm voice advised us.  - Animus are prepped to deploy for suppression and observation. - Nodding from where he sat in front of the big monitor, Felix twisted to look at a pair of smaller monitors that were showing satellite imagery.  One showed the entire transport hub, the other focused on the eastern perimeter - Acknowledged, Kat. -  Felix's voice spoke into my mind.  - We have eyes on your location.  The perimeter is clear and you are green for deploy. - - Copy that, C and C.  We are deploying. - The view slid to the side to show Kat and several animus, equipped with the standard version of the velkin rifles, weapons up and held ready in both gloved hands.  With their bodies in ready crouches, the animus started to fan out.  Kat used taut directions to show her people where she wanted them, each animus moving carefully in full gear. The animus commander looked intent.  As well she should; this was the first op where her scouting corp had primary responsibility.  Twitch held station long enough for the animus to finish their deploy then, when Kat gave her the thumbs up, she was returning her attention to the heavy fence lining the transport hub's perimeter. - C and C, this is Twitch. -  Twitch's voice, filled with determination and confidence, came onto the broadband and out through the speakers Felix had set up to carry sound. - Animus are deployed.  Wraiths are moving into position. - - Acknowledged, Twitch.  We are standing by. - The wraiths eased forward, also moving in low crouches, the snub-nosed versions of the rifle they carried up and ready with stock against cheek, sighting along the barrel at any possible targets that came into view. - Approaching fence.  Going see through. -  The image on the monitor didn't change, but when Twitch glanced to either side to confirm her team was transitioning into stealth mode and cloaking, we watched a number of them fade out of sight as they began bending light around their bodies.  Twitch blinked and I snorted softly in amazement as the team members reappeared as ghostly outlines. - And spatial tracking is active. -  The wraith commander reported, naming the ability we were now seeing at work.  It made sense; for covert operatives to work best in a team, they needed to know where each team member was.  And for operatives that could go invisible, they needed a method to detect invisible team members, or the visibility aspect would be lost. It was then that I became aware of a presence just over my left shoulder.  Glancing back, I found a purple eyed brunette beauty gazing intently back.  Despite myself, I grinned. "Hey, Jen."  I greeted her with a nod and I watched her face immediately light up with a smile that pushed her from stunningly gorgeous to greek goddess. "Max. How are you?"  Her voice, a velvety smooth alto, eased into my ears and did its best to wrap itself around my brain stem, sending a thrill all the way down my spine. "Something has everybody interested in here." I nodded and gestured to the screen. "Operation Ninja.  The wraiths are penetrating the transport hub to spike the network and get us a scan of a live velkin's brain." Jen's smile became playful. "If I didn't get some of your recent memories and experiences in your goa download that reconfigured me, I wouldn't have had a clue what you were talking about there." "Ah."  My smile became rueful.  "Sorry about, . . wait a minute.  Did you say you got some of my memories and experiences, . . .?" "Yes."  She interrupted me with a giggle, the silvery sound sending a second shiver down my spine. "I did."  Jen moved in close to give me a quick kiss on the cheek, pressing lingeringly against me to do so, which let me instantly know she wasn't just a pretty face.  If what I was feeling was any indication, she had a pretty rocking body, too. "Now turn around and watch the screen.  You're missing Twitch about to cut through the fence, like she did to get you out of the cull camp." I nearly had to shake myself to regain focus.  Especially since Jen didn't back off from where she was pressed against me.  Instead she stayed comfortably against me, going as far as putting her arm around my waist.  Yet, when I turned to give her a questioning look, she pointed to the screen. "Watch, young man, watch!"  She quietly insisted. Twitch had indeed reached the fence with her team, the three metre high wall fitted with that same, twisting, organic-looking stuff I had faced before in the cull camp.  And again, with finger tips glowing with focused goa, she smoothly cut through it.  This time, however, two team members moved in to hold the fence open to allow the rest of the team access before it grew back together. We watched the fence writhe as it attempted to grow back despite the hands holding it back.  Then Twitch was the last one through. - Alpha Team, objective one.  Beta Team, objective two. Delta Team, you're with me. -  She sent over the broadband and the wraiths were smoothly moving forward. One team peeled off and headed towards the giant building we had named the garrison barracks, where the remaining hunters would be quartered.  It would be their job to get us a definite head count for our later strike. The second group headed straight for the cull cages, to get an idea of how many humans were being kept on site.  That left Twitch's team, which went straight for the building equipped with the communication array on the roof. The wraiths moved in a tight cluster, weapons ready and heads turning this way and that as they scanned for any sign their cover had been compromised.  Then they were against the entry door. - Locked. -  One of Twitch's team mates curtly announced after examining a panel on the wall beside the door.  He then moved aside as another pair moved into position, hands glowing with gathered goa as they probed at the lock holding the heavy door closed. Without warning the door softly hissed open to disgorge a quartet of hunters in full armor.  Yet they carried their rifles in casual hands, talking amongst each other in their gobbling, croaking language. - Stand by. -  Twitch tersely sent, waving her people back from the door.   Weapons ready, they carefully tracked the velkin out of the door and a handful of paces into the compound before she indicated they move inside. I felt a muscle jump in my jaw as they moved in.  If they couldn't breach the lock to get in, how did Twitch think they were going to get out?  

 

Might of the Risen

Tension continued to ripple through me as I watched through Twitch's eyes as her wraiths slipped into the building behind the exiting hunters. "Max."  Jen breathed quietly into my ear, her words meant for me alone.  "I can feel your absolute density climb.  You need to relax.  Twitch knows what she's doing." "I hope so."  I growled.  "Or this is going from a recon to a rescue mission." Beyond the door was a large, open space.  Low, pale yellow light, cast by wall lamps set at regular intervals, provided illumination.  Enough to see the walls were made out of a pale green material that absorbed or scattered the light more than it reflected it. - Ordell, you've got mapping. -  Twitch indicated as she glanced over her shoulder in time to see the door slide closed. - We are now committed, people.  Let's make it count.  Move! -  And she led the way, moving smoothly down a corridor that appeared on the left. "A building layout might be handy."  Felix noted, fingers dancing over his keyboards.  "Let's see what our bird is saying about that building.  Hmmm, constructed of some type of non-linear plastic.  Power plant there, corridors, conduits, ..."  His voice trailed off as he concentrated on sorting through the data and imagery that was scrolling across the monitor. - Twitch, we've obtained a rough building lay out, including power systems and conduits.  Use it to locate the computer terminal. -  And an image of the building, floor by floor, appeared in my mind's eye as Felix sent it out broadband. - Copy that, C and C. -  Twitch replied, her HUD now displaying the floor plan in the upper right hand corner.  Their position was marked with a flashing dot on the layout. - Right at the next corridor crossing, Brick. - - Copy that, boss. -  A quiet female voice replied to Twitch's command. Smoothly the wraiths advanced deeper into the building, Twitch calling out direction changes as they followed power conduits on the layout.  And so intent I was on following their progress, I didn't notice Jen and I being joined by the rest of the second gen juggernauts.  I half turned, meaning to take a look at Felix's satellite feeds.  Only to find the way blocked by a petite blond who was standing nearly as close to me as Jen, and was very nearly as beautiful.  Behind her was a broad shouldered African-American male.  He was muscular and arrogantly handsome, with a neatly trimmed goatee and hair cut close to his head, completely looking the part of an unstoppable physical force.  He stood with arms folded and expression intent as he too watched the events unfold on the big monitor. A quick glance the other way found an equally intent redhead, her pale, freckle-dashed face, with its high cheekbones, pert nose and full, ripe lips rivaling both Jen and the little blond in the looks department.  Then a big hand descended onto my right shoulder.  I glanced back and found the fifth juggernaut there, a North American west coast aboriginal, a tall, handsome, friendly looking fellow, much like the ones I knew from my time in Seattle.  He winked at me when I caught his eye. "Quite the show, eh, Max?"  He said with a grin. "Simon, hush!"  That was from the redhead, her voice with its Scottish lilt, warm and inviting despite the chastisement. "I'm trying to hear what Twitch is saying!" The brief exchange, and their oddly familiar presence turned my mind to something Jen had said, about having some of my memories and experiences.  They spoke like they knew the people around them, acted like they had been there before.  And, in a sense, they had, thanks to the memories and experiences I had shared with them via the massive goa exchange that made their creation possible.

Tall enough to rest her chin on my shoulder, Jen had done just that, both arms curled around my torso now as she molded herself against me. "I can almost hear the wheels turning in there, Max."  She whispered, her lips close enough to my ear that her words would be heard by no-one else.  In fact they brushed against my ear as she spoke, she was so close.  If there was any doubt of what she was feeling, she quickly displaced it by lightly running the tip of her tongue along my ear's outside edge. "What has you thinking so hard?" Thoughts churning, and blood sent seething through my undead veins by the fantastic sensation of Jen's killer body pressed hard against me and the intimate touch of her tongue, I cast wildly about for words that wouldn't come out as gibberish.  I wouldn't get the chance to answer. - C and C, we've got movement in the perimeter's northeast quadrant. -  Kat quietly reported over Magda's broadband. Felix's fingers danced and the satellite feed moved over to look at where Kat and the animus had established their perimeter on the camp's eastern flank.  The view zoomed in several times until we could just make out the crouching shapes in a broad semi-circle protecting the spot where the wraiths had entered the base.  Hopefully they would be leaving the same way, and so needed the area secured. - My northern units report several herds of deer spotted large, metallic shapes some twenty kilometres out, moving low and quick towards the base. - My jaw immediately tightened.  K'ethik!  I slipped free of Jen's embrace, slid in between the African-American juggernaut and the blond and took up station just over Felix's right shoulder. "We have a party crasher, Felix."  I pointed out.  Already scanning just beyond Kat's position with another satellite higher in orbit, the tesla nodded. "Indeed we do."  The screen in front of him sharpened to show no less than a full dozen familiar shapes racing through the long grass and scattered trees just northeast of the transport hub. K'ethik insect forms, and they were streaking at almost top speed.  I frowned as I stared at the giant millipedes, silently hoping they weren't accompanied by any humanoid forms.  Because that would mean they were from Campton, which was to the southeast.  To track in this direction, they would've passed uncomfortably close to Retribution.  Which could mean they were aware of our location. Yet these ones didn't appear to be vectoring on a south to north heading.  Instead they appeared to be moving straight across. Felix must've been thinking the same thing: "Trace, do we have any recorded K'ethik drops out of the velkin fleet in the last six hours?"  He turned to ask one of the teslas tasked with tracking the enemy fleet in orbit.  The tesla in question let his fingers work for a moment before answering, calling up several recorded images of the massive ships hanging in black space high above our world. "Three, sir.  Two as the fleet swung over the Atlantic.  And one about an hour ago, just south of Lake Winnipeg."  Fingers danced again over the keyboard, then up onto the touch screen to highlight an image downloaded from a still active ground station.  It showed angled lines of fire streaking across a late afternoon sky. "Trajectory and rate of fall would put them making ground fall approximately three hundred kilometres north by north east of the transport hub." "Damn."  Felix hissed before looking at me.  "Well within range." "They must be homing in on the closest velkin signal."  Another one of the teslas suggested. "Recorded video that captured ground fall shows them making straight for the base, even though other targets of opportunity were closer, like several cull camps."

I looked at Felix as he looked back at me. "The comm array."  We said simultaneously.  - Tovin, patch me through to Charge. - - Done. -  Tovin's voice said in my mind.  - Charge, I have Max on broadband for you. - - Hey, boss.  What's up? -  The javelin commander said, his mental voice echoing with his efforts as he trained with his people just east of the command tent. - Things might fur ball with Twitch's insertion into the transport hub. -  I tersely outlined.  - We've detected a dozen K'ethik insect forms closing quickly on the hub from the northeast.  If the mecha bugs do rip into the camp, we need to scramble asap and put boots on the ground to follow up.  Both to insure our people get out, and to take advantage of any chaos the K'ethik foment amongst the velkin. - There was absolutely no hesitation. - We're already geared, Max.  I'm mustering my teams to jump point Alpha for teleport right now! - - Copy that.  Tovin, spin up a full jump chain and prep to put Charge's company into motion. - - I have psyrens standing by now, Max. -  The psyren commander confirmed.  - They will commence jump outs at your command. - - Copy that. -  I switched mental gears.  - Kat, this is Max.  Hold your position; you have incoming K'ethik insect forms vectoring towards the base.  Do not engage, I repeat, do not engage.  When I give you the word, move to your primary fall back and prepare to move in as support when we effect an extraction for Twitch's team. - - Copy that, big man. -  The animus commander sent before she started relaying commands to the rest of her team.  To her credit, she remained cool and collected despite the news it was K'ethik moving in on them. Again I switched mental gears. - Twitch, this is Max.  I need a status report. -  At the same time I looked at the big screen which showed her looking at a complex velkin computer interface. - Max, we're preparing to spike the network.  Once that's done, we're on the hunt for a hunter to take down and let Magda scan from off station. - - And your teams? - - Stand by. -  - Alpha team, status report! - - Head count is done, commander and we are falling back to the fence. -  The Alpha team leader, a skilled male wraith by the name of Pogo, reported. - Copy that, Alpha.  Once you reach the fence, hold position and stand by. - - Will do, sir. -  Pogo replied. - Beta team, status report. - - Just finishing our count now, sir. -  A female wraith responded.  That would be Twitch's second in command, Harley - Give us five mikes, then we're bookin' it back to the fence. - - Five mikes, Beta.  You're on the clock. - - Copy that. - - All teams accounted for, Max. -  Twitch then sent and I nodded. - Complete the spike and begin your hunt.  However, you need to be aware that we've detected incoming K'ethik insect forms.  They made ground fall 300 kilometres distant and have been homing in on the hub's communications array.  We estimate they will reach the base's perimeter base within ten minutes.  If they breach, I'm rolling in with the full package. - There was a brief pause as Twitch absorbed that.  Then: - Copy that.  Initiating spike now.  Will advise when we have the hunter down and scanned.  if the bugs breach while we're still inside, we'll immediately fall back to the fence and await the cavalry. -

I nodded in satisfaction and turned to the juggernauts, meaning to tell them to get ready.  Only to find them already standing in a loose group a pace away, silently waiting.  I couldn't help the wry smile that found its way onto my face. "You guys feel like getting your hands dirty?" It didn't take the second gen juggernauts long to gear up.  It was almost as if they had been anxiously waiting for the opportunity to test their new abilities.  I stood back, now with my combat gear on, as Boost and a team of summoners ran a final check on them and the vipers, who had joined us upon learning that we were heading into action. In full kit like the juggernauts were, the vipers were almost uniform in appearance.  Despite being from a broad range of races, they were all whipcord lean and athletic, with a dangerous edge that we could feel radiating off them.  I watched as they shifted back and forth as if they could no longer stand still, expressions hard.  They looked like they wanted to engage in some serious mayhem.  Which, if directed properly, would be a very good thing, . . . They looked up as I approached, hard Transcended eyes looking me over, evaluating and measuring as if I were the opponent, instead of an ally.  I fought the impulse to frown at that.  If the vipers ended up being impossible to control, then they would be virtually useless to our efforts. "I'm Max."  I said once I was within audible range.  "The juggernaut commander." "Yeah, we know who you are."  A sharp nosed East Indian man stepped to the front, a challenging expression on his face.  He folded his arms and stared defiantly at me. "What do you want?" I felt my expression harden despite myself. "Probably not the best way to start this conversation, bud."  I growled.  "You might want to alter your attitude a bit." The man barked a laugh.  Then, with a hum of unleashed goa, his shield went up as twin swords appeared in his hands. "Or what?"  He sneered, lifting his swords into a ready position. "Are you seriously stupid enough to challenge the most powerful juggernaut on the planet?" The taut question came from the big African-American juggernaut as he stepped to my side.  He was already maxed out, the ground grumbling under his feet. "Do the math, pal."  A hard faced asian woman hissed with the hint of an English accent as she stepped around from behind the East Indian viper, shield already up and a pair of bull whips in her hands. "We outnumber you two to one." "It should be us giving the orders around here."  The East Indian snarled.  "Not you." "Well, now we know why vipers weren't summoned in any significant numbers."  That from the little blond, giving me a quick smile before coming to a halt on my other side.  She too was maxed.  She then turned her attention to the gathered vipers. "Max should've left you all as shamblers!" "Bitch."  That from another viper, this one wielding a two-handed goa-forged axe. "You'll pay for that!" "How?"  The redhead asked as she and Jen joined us, both of them also maxed. "We knock down buildings.  What can you do?  Dice tomatoes?" "They slice, they dice, they make fruit salad look nice."  The Native American juggernaut said with a grin as the final next gen heavy assault Risen joined the five of us.  Unlike the other four, however, he wasn't maxed out.  In fact, he hadn't even altered his absolute density.  He gave me a light punch in the shoulder, nodding in appreciation when he discovered I hadn't yet gone juggernaut either. "What's got these folks all riled up, Max?  Think they're excited to take on some velkin for the very first time, or what?" I found myself grinning at Simon's light tone, feeling it wash away my own tension.  I looked over at him and shrugged, my grin unwavering. "Nervous, mostly.  It'll settle once they get their hands dirty, Simon." "Nervous??"  The East Indian snarled, making to step forward.  Only to have the viper with the two handed axe put a hand on his chest. "Yeah, definitely nervous."  He said with a nod, looking at the East Indian with an expression that dared him to make a move. "You've gone through those bastards a few times though, haven't you, Max?" "A few."  I said with a confirming nod. The asian viper's bullwhips evaporated with a hiss of dispelled goa. "Then you won't steer us wrong, will you."  She said, making more of a statement than a question. "Definitely not."  I replied, my smile growing slightly.  Thanks to Simon's positive attitude, the vipers were recognizing their nervousness and were talking themselves back into the game. Nodding as he absorbed this, the East Indian examined me for a long moment.  Then, goa spiraling away from his disappating swords, he nodded. "Then we will follow you into battle."  He said, stepping forward with an extended hand. "I am Davinder." I took a step forward myself and took it in a firm shake. "Welcome aboard, Davinder.  You have my solemn word that I will not guide you wrong.  Or any of your fellow vipers."  I paused to speak a little louder.  "Now, do all of the vipers accept me as their leader?"  A chorus of 'yes' lifted from the small group. "Outstanding.  Then this is what we're going to do: the juggernauts will form a battering ram.  We'll rip through the velkin formation with our first pass.  Then it'll be up to you to cut what's left into bite-sized pieces.  Sound like a plan?  Yes?  Good!  Let's get over to the jump out point!  We have velkin to kill!" Tovin and a full half dozen psyrens were standing by the jump out point when we arrived.  Getting ready to jump out themselves, Charge and two full companies of javelins and ballistas were also there, going over their gear one more time. - Felix?  How are we looking? - - Well, that depends on your point of view.  If you were hoping to get out of this situation without any fighting, that's not looking so good.  But if you couldn't wait any longer to engage the velkin and see what we can do, then good.  The K'ethik have reached the fence and are chewing their way through.  I estimate breach in about a minute. - I nodded and took a deep breath. - Kat, retreat to fall back positions; I'm rolling in the full package. - - Copy that, big man. -  The animus commander quickly replied.  - We are falling back now! - - Twitch, you are on the clock.  You have one minute to complete your mission. - - Copy, one minute and counting.  We have the quarry in sight. -  The wraith replied.  I nodded then turned to Tovin. "Begin your jump outs."

 

Chapter 8: Between a Rock

The world blinked out then back in and we were looking at the transport hub, smoke billowing from the building closest to the fence. - The velkin have engaged the K'ethik in the base. -  Felix's voice echoed over the broadband. - We are reading heavy weapon fire around the communication array. - "Charge!"  I barked and the javelin commander's head popped up from where he was assembling his company. "Deploy!  Double time!  Go through the hole the K'ethik chewed!" Nodding, the javelin spun and motioned at the massive rent in the fence the millipedes had gnawed, using some sort of process that was preventing the fence from mending itself. "Go, go, go!"  He shouted at his people.  In tight teams of five javelins and one ballista, our ranged soldiers began moving in. - Time's up, Twitch. -  I sent over the broadband.  - We are entering the base. - - Copy that, boss.  We have our scan and we are bugging out. - I then looked over my shoulder at the ready knot of vipers, many of them already shielded and with weapons summoned. "Stay tight on our heels."  I then looked to the sides at my fellow juggernauts with a grim smile. "Shall we go introduce ourselves?" The first couple steps and I was breaking the sound barrier.  Another step and I was through the fence. - Juggernauts, your job is simple. -  I sent over the broadband as I powered through a ground transport carrying hunters to the communications building where the heaviest fighting was taking place.  Shredded metal and body parts flew in every direction before I changed my angle of attack and headed for the barracks. - You smash anything that isn't Risen.  You got that? - - Yes, sir! - Then five more streaks were ripping their way through buildings, transports and unsuspecting velkin. - C and C, we are moving and engaging outer elements. -  Kat tautly announced over the broadband. - Kallum, Jacobs, give me some cover fire.  Aim for that cluster of hunters, there. - I slowed just enough to look back at the tear in the fence.  Just in time to see the animus slip through, their energy rifles firing steadily at anything in green or silver and black.  Then I was speeding up to blow through the reinforced blast doors protecting the barracks' interior. Pieces of metal went flying as I skidded to a halt to take a quick look around. - Twitch, how many velkin were in the barracks at your last head count? - It was Pogo who answered, the wraith team leader that lead the squad into the barracks for the head count. "We counted nearly 150, sir. -  He said.  - The building has a capacity for a good number more, but it's like they're running with skeletal staff. - I nodded, slowly turning as I heard footsteps behind me.  Just like everything else about the velkin war effort; now that the humans were subdued and were being used as food, they didn't need all of their forces active.  It made me wonder where they were keeping them all.  And if we could somehow get up there and blow all those hiding velkin into dust. I smiled when the footsteps belonged to three of the vipers, the girl with the whips, another with a broadsword, and the third equipped with a polearm.  Then I was twisting back around as, with barks and snarls, several velkin barreled into the space we were occupying.  Two steps and I was smashing the heart of their squad apart, legs snapping, and bodies contorting as I went through them, alien screams filling the room.

Seeing me clear the way, the vipers moved in.  With a snarl of her goa-forged whips, the girl snagged a hunter by its armored leg before a hard yank pulled the leg out from under it.  Barking in alarm, the hunter dropped to one knee.  Which put it at the perfect height for the viper with polearm.  Darting forward and using one of the velkin I had downed as a ramp, he leapt into the air, spun tightly and slashed the blade of his weapon through the hunter's head, splitting it in two with a spray of green alien blood. The viper with the broadsword was busy, too.  As his comrades went one way, he went the other.  Stepping in close to a staggering hunter, he lopped off its leg with one smooth, quick swing of his goa-forged weapon.  Screaming with pain, the velkin dropped to the ground where, with a hard stab downward, he put the point of his sword through the hunter's face. Then I was coming back through, smashing the remaining hunters aside like so many bent reeds.  Whispering whip strikes, hard slashes and more deadly stabs made sure the hunters knocked down, didn't get back up. Two javelin squads moved in while we were mopping up, weapons held at the ready.  Good thing; as they cleared the door, a full dozen velkin came charging into the space, weapons firing.  One of the javelins went down, missing most of his left side.  Then the rest, and their pair of accompanying ballistas were opening up. Beams of blue-green light seared their way through the haze-filled air to hammer into several hunters.  The shorter javelin bursts punched through armor like it was tissue paper, immediately scything a number of the giant aliens down.  Interspersed with those were the continuous blasts leveled by the ballistas, the wrist-thick cable of pure light lashing out to strike their targets before being dragged across two, or three more before winking back out. Several heart beats of flurried motion and licking light, and it was over. "Sir."  The javelin team leader greeted me with a nod.  "The bulk of the hunters have moved to the communication center where they're still engaging the K'ethik.  Commander Charge sent us over here to help you clean the barracks out." "Very good."  I said, glancing over at where the javelin had been hit.  Despite taking a shot that would've killed a living human, he was talking with a pair of his comrades, assuring them he would be fine until they got back. "Your man sorted?  Good; let's go." We were smashing our way through our third group of velkin when I got the news I was hoping we wouldn't get. - Heads up, Max. -  Felix rasped via broadband.  - We are detecting activity in those two velkin warships hanging over the transport hub. - I grimaced even as I swept out a giant leg, sending a squealing hunter sprawling where, with a quick slash, the viper with the polearm finished it off. - Did you detect any sort of signals, Felix?  Something to alert the warships that the hub was under attack? -  I twisted in place and charged down the corridor we were now fighting in, to smash through another handful of hunters.  Pieces went flying as the two or three survivors opened up on me with their weapons.  Then bright blasts of energy from javelin and ballista weapons took them out. The last one got slammed in the head with a bright, white packet of energy, announcing the presence of someone other than javelins, ballistas, vipers and me.  Looking towards where the shot had come from, I smiled to see a trio of animus move in, weapons at the ready.  They looked tired but determined. "Mind if we tag along, sir?"  One of the animus, a swarthy skinned woman, asked.  "We got cut off from the main group." "Of course."  I said with a smile.  Then: - Signals, Felix?  Did you detect anything? -  I pressed over the broadband.

- Still looking, but we're not seeing anything. -  The tesla finally replied.  - Even on that low carrier wave they use for their network.  It could just be that the warships actively keep an eye open for any K'ethik that get to the surface.  Remember what you described to me happening at the end of your first trip to Campton. - My face tightened grimly at that.  I did indeed remember the fire dropping from the sky to pin several K'ethik millipedes before the rest of them scattered.  If the warships followed a similar protocol for millipedes in their base, we could take a pounding before we withdrew out of range. - Think we have a good enough feel for their systems that you'd see them powering up their weapons array, Felix?  Just enough to give us the heads up in case we need to bug out. - While I waited for an answer, I barrelled forward, joining the vipers and our ranged fighters as they engaged a good dozen hunters this time.  The velkin had thrown down several pieces of massive furniture to give themselves some cover from our weapon fire as they desperately defended themselves.  It was a decent tactic; already four of the javelin and one of the ballistas were down, holes in their bodies.  One of the vipers, the sword swinger, was also down, grimacing as he clutched at the stump where his right leg used to be. Shedding energy blasts, I blew through a stack of furniture on the right, hammering into a quartet of beleaguered hunters.  Two went down immediately, their chests caved in.  Another spun around to drop awkwardly, favoring a broken leg.  I would deal with it in a moment. That left the last one, who fumbled for its massive rifle as I turned tightly and darted towards it.  It never had the chance to fire.  Using the ruined furniture as a take off ramp, I launched myself through the air and blasted directly through the center of its body.  Dead almost before it could react, now the proud owner of a hole in its chest you could drive a car through, it limply collapsed onto the ground even as I landed, my super dense body making the reinforced floor buckle beneath my feet. - We can do that, Max. -  Felix again replied after a pause during which I was certain he was frantically looking for the answer amongst his computer systems. - We have satellites close enough, with sensitive enough equipment that we should be able to pick up the spike in power output that accompanies their weapons coming online. - - That's all I needed to hear. -  Then, out loud: "Let's clean up in here, folks.  The ships in orbit are targeting the millipedes.  It's going to get hot and uncomfortable down here in the next few minutes!" Thankfully the dozen we had just faced, ended up being the last living aliens in the barracks.  Once that was confirmed, I made us a door in the wall and we poured back outside. With fire actively chewing its way through the majority of the base's buildings down, the hub was as good as destroyed.  Yet, weapons shouldered, nearly fifty velkin were still engaging the K'ethik outside the communications building. - Jen, what's the status on those two orbital transports sitting on the deck behind the communication building? -  I wanted to know. - Scrap metal, Max. -  She replied in almost a purr, her mental voice as smooth and silky as her real voice. - We also took out the hanger with the personnel transports.  All the velkin have left is that lot facing the K'ethik in a last stand at the communication building. - I nodded, forgetting for a moment that she couldn't see the gesture. - Outstanding.  Nice work, Jen. - I got the feeling that she smiled. - Of course, Max.  Anything for you. - - Has any Risen engaged the K'ethik? -  I sent onto the broadband.

- Bojay and I tried. -  Going by the hint of a Scottish brogue even in her mental voice, that was the redheaded juggernaut. - Got tossed about, we did. - - Yeah. -  That low rumble was the African-American, who the redhead just named Bojay. - Firinne hit the thing dead on and while she dented it's head, it just kept going. - I frowned at that.  These ones were straight out of orbit.  They wouldn't have gotten upgrade data from those we encountered at Campton.  So either these new juggernauts didn't hit as hard as I did, which the Earth Mother had suggested.  Or the insect forms had already upgraded in response to something the velkin had done to them in orbit.  Either way, I would need to take them out before we left here. - Max, I've got Hannibal beside me.  He's wondering if he can jump into the battle.  He has six willing echoes that he says will try to occupy six millipedes and shut them down. - I thought about that for a second.  While I wasn't sure what would happen if the echoes took possession of a millipede, at least I wouldn't have to worry about those ones come time to withdraw.  Mind made up, I nodded. - Jump him in.  Tell him I'm standing by about 100 metres south of the communication building, observing the velkin and the K'ethik in an epic death match. - Neither side had made much progress by the time Hannibal jogged up, sporting a full sized rifle which he held with some skill. "Nicely done here, Max."  He commented, looking at the debris-strewn courtyard, dead aliens everywhere.  He then gestured to the heated battle raging in and out of the ruins of the communication building. "That would be our epic death match, hey?" Having been joined by Jen, Firinne and Bojay, along with the company of javelin and animus that were in the barracks with me, and the two remaining vipers, I nodded, arms folded as I returned my attention back to the raging fight. "You brought the echoes with you?" He nodded and patted his hip. "Safe and sound, right here.  I just need to get into physical touch range to effect the transfer." "Okay.  We'll provide the distraction."  I looked at my fellow juggernauts.  "Ready for more mayhem?"  They nodded eagerly.  Smiling, I looked back at the javelins and the animus. "We're going in.  Stay tight!"  Then we were bolting forward, our shields down tight and our absolute density maxed. Focused as they were on the millipedes trying to overrun their positions, the hunters didn't even see us coming.  One moment they were unloading everything they had at the twisting and charging K'ethik insect forms.  The next their broken bodies were pinwheeling in every direction as we smashed through them. Having held the remainder of our forces back while we determined what we would do with this final fire fight, Charge saw us plough through.  Simon and the blond, standing with him, also saw that and instantly were on the run, sonic booms announcing their breaking through the sound barrier on the way in. Grinning, Charge looked back at his remaining fighters. "Are we going to let the juggernauts have all the fun?"  He cried. "NO!"  Came the singular roar and then he was leading forward at a run, weapons coming up to bear. By this time the remaining vipers that hadn't gone with us into the barracks, also joined in the fight.  Goa-forged weapons hummed as they cut first through the air, then deep into velkin bodies.  It didn't take long before the hunters' numbers began to rapidly dwindle. Seeing his opportunity, Hannibal came running.  A couple shots dropped a pair of hunters that were too close to where he was going.  Then the echo was slinging his rifle over his back to smoothly draw out a large, flattened crystal. "Here we go!"  He said to no-one in particular and aimed for the nearest millipede. Busy chewing its way through a downed hunter's helmet, the millipede didn't even react to what it thought was another K'ethik moving towards it.  Then Hannibal was reaching out to touch the crystal to the giant insect's side.  The effect was instant. As soon as the filmy substance of the echo cleared the crystal, it slipped into the black armor warding the millipede's back.  The massive bio-mech instantly jerked to an abrupt halt. "You good in there, my friend?"  Hannibal asked the now unmoving creature.  "I hope so.  I don't have time enough to help you out."  And then he was moving to the next. Deliberate and quick, it didn't take the echo long before he had exhausted his store of echoes in the mysterious crystal he carried.  Back into safe keeping it went, then he was unlimbering his rifle. "I was so hoping I'd get to shoot some more aliens before I was done here."  He said almost gleefully.  Having watching the whole thing and catching his self-absorbed dialogue, I smiled.  Then I was grim once more as Felix finally made the call. - The warships have activated their weapon systems, Max. -  The tesla's terse voice nearly shouted across the broadband. - You need to get out of there.  You need to get out of there, right now! -

 

And an Alien Death Match

I instinctively glanced upward, half expecting to see blasts of energy already falling through the sky towards us.  Then: "Fall back!  Incoming fire from orbit.  All units, fall back!"  I shouted, putting action to words by backpedaling from where the remaining K'ethik were cornering the surviving velkin.  The other juggernauts, Charge and Kat quickly took up the call, urging their various commands to fall back. We managed to clear the area immediately surrounding the communication center when the first blast from orbit dropped out of the clear blue afternoon sky to pin one of the millipedes in place, searing its life away.  I grimaced as I threw an arm up to block the flare of light the blast brought with it.  Then I was refocusing my thoughts. - Magda, I need you to pull all our injured out now.  They are tagged and ready to jump. - - Jump outs of the injured have commenced. Max. -  The redheaded psyren immediately reported. - And the teleport chain is standing by to begin extracting the remaining troops from the battlefield. - I nodded tautly as I jogged towards the fence, aiming for the hole the K'ethik had made. - All commands, withdraw to designated fall back positions and stand by.  Extraction will commence immediately. -  I sent over the broadband.  - Magda, as soon as the first group has reached their designated position, commence extraction. - - Acknowledged, Max. -  The psyren answered. I reached the ragged hole the millipedes had chewed through the self-repairing fence just as the rest of the juggernauts jogged up.  I got a fist bump from Bojay, a shoulder slap from Simon, and hugs from the three women. "Now that was a beat down!"  Bojay rumbled with a grin.  Then we were all reflexively ducking as a rain of fire from the sky obliterated the communications building, destroying the remaining K'ethik and velkin alike. As I straightened I saw Hannibal running lightly towards us, back lit by the fading light filling the space behind him.  In his shadow were six more rough man-shapes, moving awkwardly as they tried to keep up.  Yet, with each step, their motion became more natural and less forced as the echoes inside the shells exerted more control over their new forms. "Nice of you to join us."  I rasped as Hannibal came to a halt beside myself and the other juggernauts, nodding in greeting to all of us even as a steady stream of vipers, javelins, animus and ballistas began moving past us and out the hole.  A heart beat later first Charge, then Kat took up positions on either side of the hole where they used shouts of encouragement and waving gestures to move their people through. Hannibal watched our people stream by for a moment before he answered. "Apparently this location is no longer safe."  He deadpanned.  "With fire falling from the sky and all." "Don't blame you there."  I rasped before looking beyond him at the other echoes as they staggered up, one at a time.  Also warily watching them were the other juggernauts, now in a loose cluster around me. "The transference's went okay?"  I asked after a moment's consideration.  Hannibal glanced over his shoulder at his new colleagues before nodding. "At least, it would appear so."  He added, returning his gaze to me.  "I will return with my colleagues to Retribution and do a physical to see how well they are adapting to the shells." Another flare of light behind us interrupted the echo's next words and we all ducked, even the echoes in their new bodies.

"I think it's time we all got out of here."  Jen suggested and, with murmurs of agreement, we slipped out through the hole in the fence. With the orbital bombardment of the base giving us a good reason to leave, it didn't take long for the company I had taken into the transport hub to assemble at the fall back point.  After confirming the base was clear of all Risen, the psyrens started jumping my soldiers back to Retribution. Last to leave, I stared at the transport hub, thoughts churning.  The hub had been reduced to glowing glass and ash by the bombardment.  Yet the warships in orbit continued pounding it, making sure it was completely cleansed of the K'ethik presence. This was the enemy that we faced.  One that didn't hesitate to slaughter its own people, if that action accomplished the overall goal.  They would sooner destroy their entire base than let it fall into the wrong hands.  Or pincers, in this case. My face tightened.  We would need to be as ruthless, as determined to defeat them.  There would be no quarter given, no letting them off the hook if they were down.  We couldn't give them a break.  We had to hunt them down, each one, destroy their ships, raze their bases to see victory against them.  'I just hope we have the willpower to do it.'  I mused darkly as yet another volley from orbit slammed into the ruined base, making the ground tremble underfoot from the impact. Warm fingers slid in between mine and Jen pressed up against me. "We won, Max."  She said, looking over at me.  "Yet you look like we lost." "We won this battle, yes."  I pointed out.  "Yet it was the K'ethik that gave us the opening.  And the velkin finished it by bombarding the base from orbit, killing their own people."  I frowned. "Our victory here feels a little, . . . hollow." The exotic beauty slowly nodded even as she moulded herself to me and gave me a kiss on the cheek. "As a soldier, moral victories are often as important as actual victories."  She said softly. "Yet, in this place, at this time, while we act as soldiers, we are not.  We are Risen, with the sole purpose of driving the velkin from Earth so we can have our final rest.  So we must accept victory however we get it." I nodded.  It was a pragmatic view, one I had come to expect from Risen.  And, in truth, I too wanted this war over as quickly as possible, so I could join Abby in paradise.  Yet there was something here, something that didn't sit right, . . . Jen squeezing my hand recaptured my attention. "Our turn."  She whispered and turned to lead me by her hold on my hand to the jump out point where Magda and a handful of other psyrens had been working to transfer everybody back to base. Back at Fort Retribution, there was a mood of elation as the entire camp celebrated our victory at the transportation hub.  Jen smiled as we winked in to find the air filled with cheering and Risen everywhere hugging and shaking hands, smiles on every face.  Her smile didn't waver even after looking over at me and finding me wearing a rather pensive look. "You are way too serious by far, Mr. Niekro."  She said with a giggle.  Her expression went from mischievous to sensual. "I think we should celebrate too.  Just the two of us,..." My frowned deepened as I looked at her.  Then I let a long sigh hiss through my nostrils as I carefully extricated my hand from hers.  I needed to get a handle on this woman situation, and immediately.  Or only more problems would crop up in the future.  Problems I may or may not have the resources to deal with.  And the time to deal with it, as fire rained from the heavens in my mind's eye, was now.

"What's the rush, Jen?"  I quietly asked. Jen's smile faltered. "I'm not sure I know what you mean, Max."  She replied, her smile fading further at seeing the serious expression on my face deepen.  "I mean, I only just met you a few hours ago, after we reconfigured you."  I explained.  "And while you may have some of my memories and experiences in your head, I don't know much about you.  Yet, here you are, wanting to drag me off for a private celebration.  What's going on here?" She started to reach for me, then hesitated. "I thought that was obvious, Max."  She began, her eyes carefully studying me.  "I know enough about you, that I want you.  Not just for a roll, or for a night.  I want you for the rest of our unnatural lives.  However long we have before this stolen existence is returned to the Earth Mother." Now Jen reached for me, taking my arm in a gentle yet firm grip as she drew herself closer. "I know about Twitch, and Kat."  She quietly said.  "I know about Jace, and what happened with her.  I even know about Abby." I flinched at hearing my wife's name, yet Jen maintained her hold, tightening her hand slightly so my flinch didn't take me out of her grip.  Using that hold, she once again drew close, kissing me gently on the cheek. "I'm not going to try and replace a woman that spent 50 years of her life with you.  That would be impossible and unfair, to both you and her.  So I will not ask for that love." Again Jen kissed me on the cheek, this time using her hand to hold my face in place as her lips lingered, making my skin tingle with her touch.  Breaking that kiss after what seemed like an eternity, she went on, her voice quiet yet confident and thoughtful. "However, I will ask for your understanding.  I want you to understand that while Twitch, Kat and Jace are all good Risen women, they are not juggernauts.  They won't understand you, like I will.  They won't feel what we feel, they won't see what we see.  And they won't think how we think.  How can they?" "I did not reconfigure you to be my lover."  I quietly insisted, turning to look her in the eyes. "I know, baby, I know."  Jen softly replied, letting her fingers trail over my lips as she returned my gaze with a frank and open one of her own. "Nor did I, Jenza el  Farouk, awaken from my shambler slumber, looking for one.  But when I found myself looking at you, on one knee after exhausting yourself creating me, my mind filled with your memories, feelings and thoughts, I knew I had found the man I had looked for my entire life.  I could not help the rush of emotion.  I fell in love with you in that instant." The last was spoken in a whisper, her lips brushing against mine.  Then she was kissing me and I felt the power of her passion rush through me, undeniable and sweet.  It didn't take much of that kiss to get me to pull Jen into my arms, her arms going quickly and sensuously around my neck in response to hold me close.  And it didn't take much more before she was taking my hand and insistently pulling me to her tent. It was well into night by the time I laid back, my body reverberating with the echoes of our love making.  As I felt my breathing slow and my heart return to its normal rhythm, I found myself amazed. Jen was right.  While what I shared with Jace was incredible, it was nothing compared to what I had just experienced with Jen.  It was like I felt each sensation more keenly, more deeply, almost like we were already in tune with each other's bodies and rhythms, as if long time lovers.  And while that normally would've been sufficient to astound me, what I found even more astonishing was I didn't find myself consumed with guilt and second guesses like I was immediately following my time with Jace.  'What's happening to me, Abby?'  I cried into my mind.

Then my attention was recaptured by Jen's soft lips kissing their way across my chest.  Again, unlike Jace who had fallen asleep at the end of our lovemaking when she exhausted her supply of goa with everything we tried, Jen was more than awake.  I captured her eyes as she slowly and deliberately slid her nakedness over me as she claimed my side and top.  As amazing as I thought her body was clothed, it was orders of magnitude more incredible naked.  And she moved it over and on me in the perfect way to bring me the most arousal. Her fingers reached up to carefully trace over the lines of my face as she propped herself onto my chest, one leg hooked over my hips.  She smiled happily to see my eyes devouring her exotic, almost otherworldly beauty. "Mmmmm."  She said huskily in a sated voice.  "I would've waited as a shambler for a thousand lifetimes for just a moment of that.  You, sir, are truly amazing." I chuckled softly before her lips claimed mine for a moment.  With her fingers tangling in my hair, my arms went around her body and I returned her kiss with a great deal of passion.  Only after several long and delicious minutes had passed, did we finally break again. "You are pretty incredible yourself, Jen."  I managed to husk before she darted in for another quick kiss. "It's the company, baby."  She whispered, leaning in with the intent of claiming my mouth again even as our renewed passion began moving our bodies more fervently against each other. So of course it was the perfect time for a telepathic interruption. - Max, Felix needs to speak to you in the command center. -  Tovin said into the depths of my mind in the quiet voice that was meant for one on one communication. - Says that it's urgent. - Sighing with enough force that Jen paused, eyebrow raised in curiosity, I nodded. - Tell him I'll be there shortly. - "Problems?"  The exotic juggernaut currently in my arms quietly asked, seeing my expression.  I nodded again. "I need to go talk to Felix in the command tent.  Says it's urgent." Jen darted in for another kiss before she slid off and began hunting for her clothes. "I'll come with." "Sounds good."  I rolled in the opposite direction, grabbing my pants and underwear off the floor to begin pulling them on. The teslas were bustling busily in the command tent, almost all of the work stations manned, when Jen and I stepped inside.  Felix didn't even look up as we approached where he was staring at no less than four separate monitors, fingers moving across screens and keyboards so quickly, they blurred. "Felix, what do we have?" "That."  He pointed to the biggest monitor.  And immediately I felt tension ripple through me. Velkin space-going transports, three of them.  The massive vessels were sitting just outside of the ruined transport hub.  Inside several dozen armored hunters were slowly sweeping through the destruction, various instruments in their hands.  The satellite image didn't give any more detail than that. I let a sigh hiss through my teeth. "Should've expected that."  I glanced over at Felix, who was now looking at a monitor that was tracking the two warships in geosynchronous orbit, hanging over the hub's location.  Unlike the sleeping hulks we had seen before the attack on the hub, they were now alive with light and surrounded by a halo of smaller ships. "A major transportation hub getting put to the torch like that would be hard to ignore.  Especially if the K'ethik were involved.  Now a small army is parked in there, combing through the ashes looking for answers.  It'll be nearly impossible to put all of it on our robotic friends." Felix nodded in agreement. "The insect forms leave distinctive injuries and damage to armor and buildings.  As do our weapons and abilities.  If the aliens have been keeping track of our attacks against them, they might have records of previous encounters." "Or not."  I retorted.  "As far as I know, this is the first time the Risen have gathered so many Transcended in one spot where they could act as an army, instead of specialized groups moving around the countryside, assisting other Risen companies in various campaigns."  I returned my attention to the screen that was watching the velkin investigating the destroyed base. "While they'll be able to identify the weapon marks as something different than what the K'ethik bring to the table, I don't think they'll immediately connect us to them.  Not yet.  Soon enough, though.  In fact, if we had some way to keep those warships in orbit off our ass, I'd roll another package in there and wipe those bastards out and let them know without a shadow of a doubt, it was us."  I rasped. "We should start looking at not only keeping those warships off us, but blowing them to hell."  Jen added, pausing to give me a quick kiss on the cheek before stepping closer to the monitors to take a look at the velkin swarming all over the destroyed base. "There's going to be a point in this war, maybe sooner versus later, where we'll have to deal with that." I grimly nodded.  I had been working over a couple possible plans in my head with regards to that very thing and I was fairly sure Jen knew that.  However, I was also starting to think if we had some sort of ground based weapon system we could use to knock those ships out of orbit with, that'd be better than what I was mulling over.  Especially if they did start taking closer notice of Risen in the wake of our attacks on their assets. "Regardless, baby, I'm with you.  We should roll another package in there and drop those hunters into a deep hole." Hearing both Jen's ferocity and her use of the familiar pet name, Felix looked over at me, eyebrow lifted. "What can I say, man?" I smiled.  "She's a juggernaut!"  I said, knowing my answer only addressed Jen's ferocity.  Smart enough to recognize that, and my own reluctance to talk about it, Felix nodded as he looked over at her for a brief moment. "That she is, my friend.  She definitely has your fire!"  He returned to his keyboards and screens, fingers dancing once again. "Until we do have some sort of defense against those ships in orbit, I suggest we lay low for a bit.  Perhaps clear up some of these side projects we're working on, like the transport and the armor.  Speaking of projects, did Hannibal manage to procure additional shells for his willing group of echoes?" I nodded. "Six millipedes; he managed to have the echoes possess them in battle.  Somehow he then got them to transform to the humanoid form and got them out of there.  He was going to do a physical to see how well the echoes were adapting to their new surroundings." Felix nodded. "Makes sense.  Like most of the things our former Carthaginian general does.  I can only hope the echoes he procured have a similar mindset." "Ditto."  I said.  "Okay, I want to take a day or so to evaluate what we accomplished at the hub so let's keep an eye on those hunters to see what they do.  At the same time, the teslas will focus on getting those transports and the armor up and running.  I'm see where Hannibal's at with his echo comrades and we'll analyze what Twitch managed to pull out of that hunter's head to see if we can crack their network." I paused to take a quick look around the bustling command center. "As far as I'm concerned, Operation Bullrush is still in effect.  Let's not lose our momentum here.  Once we've got some answers, we'll clear out those cull camps and establish some controlled territory that we can expand and defend." As Jen smiled approvingly at me, and Felix jotted down notes, I folded my arms over my chest. "Let's keep the ball rolling!"

 

Rosetta Stone

From the command tent I retreated back to my own tent. I had some serious planning to do and I didn't want to co-opt space in the command tent for what I intended. So it was back to my own space. There Jen gave me a hand as we cleared space and set up a couple white boards and a desk. The white boards quickly got filled with the particulars of Operation Bullrush, as well as Operation Ninja, which I was counted as completed. Both had come together quickly, but when pasted against a background of nearly 50 years’ worth of guerrilla warfare against the velkin, I was thinking it hadn't come together fast enough. That aside, I now had something new I needed to work out. For my own sanity, as much as for anything else. Already I had pushed back deep into my past to dredge up my life as a Ranger in the American SOCOM division. That meant dredging up all the old habits we had when planning operations and carrying out missions against our targets. None of this fly by the seat of your pants bullshit.  Weeks, sometimes months went into planning out the details of complex operations. Every variable had to be considered, every possible outcome examined. We had done next to none with either Bullrush or Ninja. Of course, I had also sloughed responsibility for planning those operations onto people that I was now considering divisional commanders as our Transcended numbers continued to grow. Regardless, I had to take the reactionary nature of our last engagement out of the equation and put some solid planning back on the board to give us an overall direction. "Okay, so Bullrush and Ninja are stage 1." I said, using my finger tip to draw on the touch sensitive white board, which was more a LCD display than an actual board. "They gave us the foot in the door, the test bed for our capabilities in working as a company of Transcended instead of just a team." Nodding from where she stood on the white board's other side, Jen peered at the man tall display. "So we use the data and encounter graphics from the battle at the transport hub to build on." She said, looking over at me. "Like a foundation." I grinned. "Exactly." I confirmed. I then quickly sketched three boxes, labeling them acquire, consolidate and defend. "The idea of any conquest-based military action is the acquisition of territory.  That territory is important for a number of reasons, including the availability of resources, strategic positioning and defendability." I tapped the acquire box. "You capture that territory by sending in recon and special ops to soften or eliminate certain hard and high priority targets; assets deemed useful by the enemy in defending that territory. That's followed up by engaging any defensive forces in direct battle, defeating them and driving them from the territory you mean to take. You then reinforce and consolidate." I paused to tap the second box. "Ensuring your supply routes are secure, that captured defenses are retasked and that the captured territory completely belongs to you. Once that is done,..." I reached out to tap the last box. "You defend what you've taken, with the understanding that the enemy you pushed from that location will eventually want it back." I then drew a large box around all three of the smaller boxes, then a second box a few centimetres away, with an arrow connecting the two. "Once your defenses are secure, you then repeat the process to continue the conquest. It's a cycle that you steadily repeat, until you've achieved your objective." "So what's our objective, babe?  The world?"  Jen wanted to know.  I grinned again. "Eventually, yes.  But we don't have the resources to try to take territory all over the planet at the same time.  Nor do we have the support of a fleet in orbit, like the velkin.  So we focus on much smaller pieces first, that we can take and defend with what resources we do have."

I paused to quickly make a drawing of the planet, with rough estimations of the land masses.  I then sketched several triangles in the space around them.  I tapped the group that was opposite North America. "Here's the fleet cluster that's floating over North American, and more specifically the transportation hub.  While they are in orbit, it'll be next to impossible to make ground conquests without them having the ability to quash any advances we make with their superior firepower.  It comes back to what you said in the command tent." "About needing to knock those ships from orbit."  Jen said with a thoughtful look. "Exactly.  We take a base, or even hit a convoy hard, and they're going to see it.  We need to either blind them, or take them out before we start achieving real results on the ground." I drew a smaller circle with several lines radiating off it, which I then connected to other circles with lines as well as the triangles next to my rough Earth. "This represents the velkin network.  If we can crack it, we can co-opt it and take control of their ability to not only communicate,..." "But to see what is happening on the ground!"  A smile appeared on Jen's face.  "So we blind them." I nodded. "Far easier to do that than knocking them out of the sky.  At least, right now it is.  We need to press Tovin and her psyrens for a translation on the data and language Twitch dug out of that hunter's head.  And we need the teslas to get us control of that network, now that we have access." I pulled out a data storage crystal from a storage pouch and held it up. "A copy of Twitch's scan of the hunter's brain."  I then pulled out several sheets of diagrams and information. "And a schematic of the velkin network, which we will need to interpret to figure out where it goes and what it does when it gets there." "Do you sincerely believe the ships in orbit are hooked into the network?"  Jen said, reaching out to take the network schematics out of my hand and flip through them, her thoughtful expression returning as she examined the data found there. "I've no doubt.  Especially after watching them drop out of the sky in force after the hub was destroyed."  I replied, returning the data crystal to its storage pouch. "I don't think the ships detected the K'ethik attack.  I think they were advised of it by the network and spun up a response.  But we won't know for sure until we crack the encryption on the network and take a look for ourselves." I stared at the diagram for a moment, thoughts churning.  Then: "Time to call in some resources that hopefully haven't been tasked yet." - Magda, are you online? -  I then spoke into the silence of my mind, in the hopes that the psyren who seemed to have her eye on me, was allowing herself to keep telepathic tabs on me. - Right here, Max. -  Was her immediate reply in confirmation of my hope.  I grinned despite myself and winked at Jen. - What do you need? - - A translation of a neural scan one of your fellow psyrens did in support of Twitch's penetration of the transport hub before the battle.  The teslas are currently tasked with monitoring a velkin investigation at the hub and I'm too impatient to wait for them to take it back up again tomorrow. -  I paused. - If you're not busy, I'd like you to take a look at it. - - I'm not. -  She quietly replied.  - I am on my way to your quarters now. -

By the time the redheaded psyren arrived, I had been joined by the other juggernauts, each of them bringing something to the brief, as I was starting to call it.  Bojay brought a psionic receiver, like the device Felix was using to translate the telepathic sensory signal we had used to track what Twitch was doing during her penetration of the hub.  Simon had one of the work stations the teslas were using in the command tent, this one freshly pulled out of stores, along with a couple large touch screens. For her part, Firinne brought a computer core and a power supply, both easy to carry with her juggernaut strength.  And behind her the little blond had a stack of connectors and cords.  Working together, we quickly had everything up and going by the time Magda joined us. If she was put off by the other juggernauts being there, she didn't let on.  Instead, the redheaded psyren glided into the tent and lightly landed, throwing back her hood to look around at everybody.  When her eyes finally fell on me, she smiled slightly then stepped to me. "I believe you have a recording you'd like me to take a look at, Max."  She said, the quiet yet vibrant statement making the other juggernauts smile. I nodded and, slipping the crystal out of its protective pouch, I handed it to her.  Taking the cylindrical crystal in her hand with a nod of thanks, Magda took her eyes off me to peer into the crystal's depths. "Ah, Jazz did this recording."  She quietly noted.  "Motor and sensory cortices, hypocampal and limbic imprint, . . ."  She looked at me and nodded. "It's a complete scan.  Even though the velkin brain appears to be seriously different in structure, basic neural patterns are consistent with ours." "Can you source out their language?" Magda returned her attention to the crystal for a moment, then turned to look at Firinne, who had powered up the work station and psionic receiver. "Can your array receive a signal, Firinne?"  She asked and the redheaded juggernaut, the two similar enough in appearance to make most do a double take, turned her attention to the keyboard, her fingers dancing nimbly over the keys. "I'm no tesla, but I think, . . . ." The receiver began to hum with power and the monitor in front of Firinne lit up and was immediately filled with velkin symbols, as we had glimpsed decorating their buildings, equipment and vehicles. "Got it."  The redheaded juggernaut announced with a grin and Magda nodded, turning her attention back to the cylinder in her hand. The image on the monitor shifted then the screen split in half with one still dedicated to line upon line of the alien text.  The other, however, was filled with images.  Trees, deer, rivers; things you'd expect to see in a casual fly over of a piece of wilderness.  The images would highlight, move to the screen's foreground, then fall back.  At the same time, a line of text would highlight and it too would move to the foreground on its half, before falling back to make way for the next set. "I'm identifying connectivity within the memory cortex."  Magda explained, her eyes never leaving the crystal. "I'm using the images to elicit a reaction from the cortex in response, fooling the recording into thinking it's still the brain and receiving sensory stimulus.  The linkages are the result of the recording making the connection between the image and a corresponding name within the language stored in the memory." "Holy shit."  Bojay rumbled, a look of amazement on his face. "You can do that??" "Doing it, actually."  Magda quietly corrected him.  "And done."  She handed the crystal back to me.

"It would appear the velkin brain operates in a similar fashion to our own."  The psyren continued to explain. "Information is stored as a series of symbols, which are then shuffled and manipulated to create memory, thought and calculation.  Language, mathematics, images; they are all symbolically represented in memory engrams.  Each symbol is handled slightly different by the neurons responsible for maintaining the engram, changing its energy output slightly."  "Telepathy is the sensing of those fluctuations, mapping them to our own symbolic library and interpreting the symbols in such a fashion that we then see, in our mind's eye, what those neurons are creating.  Memory engrams, thought, language, intent; each creates that specific pattern of generated energy." She looked over at the monitor.  The side that had the images went blank.  Then English was rolling by, words in the human language quickly mapping to words in the velkin language. "And with that telepathic Rosetta Stone, you now have command of the velkin language." The words kept mapping to each other for a brief moment before, with a blur, the side with the English text began scrolling entire pages of information. "According to this recording, the memories belonged to one Ghal, a senior hunter with responsibilities in logistics and defense.  And as such, it had access to the network that connects all velkin technology via a lowjack sub signal, resistant to most forms of disruption." A phrase of several velkin words and numbers high lighted on the alien language side. "The access code to the network."  Magda looked at me with a smile.  I couldn't help but smile back. "And now we have the keys to the kingdom."  I said.  "Thanks to you, Magda." Magda's smile grew in response. "It's the least I could do, for the savior of Campton." I sighed at that, my smile becoming wry.  Then I was looking at Firinne. "We need to get that code over to Felix, ASAP!" To say the teslas were excited to have the access code to the alien network was a gross understatement.  Felix whooped with glee after he punched it in via the connection they had established with the network and watched the firewalls drop away to grant access to the network's core. "We are in!"  He crowed.  Then his eyes nearly bugged out when Firinne handed him the rosetta stone recording that gave a symbol by symbol translation of the velkin language to English that Magda was able to create. "And a translation algorithm on top of that??"  He stammered, looking from Firinne to me and the other juggernauts then back again. "Are you serious?" I grinned. "What can I say, Felix?  I got tired of waiting.  I grabbed a copy from Twitch, and got Magda to translate it for me using telepathic language transference." "She can do that?"  Felix's eyes widened as he stared at the crystal "She did it."  Firinne said with a grin, the conversation in echo to the one Magda just had with Bojay. Looking from the redheaded juggernaut to me, then back at the crystal, Felix slowly nodded. "Well, okay then."  The crystal went into a reader at his work station and he looked up to watch the data scrolling over his screen, complete with a symbol by symbol translation of the velkin alphabet.  Another nod of satisfaction then his hands were a blur as they raced over first one keyboard, then another before finally lifting to dart over the touch sensitive screen.

"Translation algorithm in place."  He reported, half to himself as the tesla bent his attention to the task. "Creation of matrix, application to files within the network,..."  Felix's voice drifted into silence as he became momentarily absorbed in his work, leaving Firinne and I to watch, our arms folded over our chests. A few moments passed, with Firinne looking over at me with a questioning expression and me shrugging in reply.  Then, without warning, Felix was sitting back, wearing a satisfied smile. "And there we go!"  A swipe over the screen in front of him, and we watched the network architecture unfold before our eyes. "Full access, with complete real time translation."  He looked over at me and nodded. "We are now watching the watchers." I winked at Firinne, who flashed me a brilliant smile, before I stepped in to take a closer look. "Can you identify the network linkages to the fleet?"  I asked and with no hesitation, Felix reached out and tapped several lines running along the outside of the schematic. "They've split them up according to how the fleet is clusters, allowing local communication hubs to shoulder the majority of the data flow."  The tesla explained, his eyes darting over the schematic with the same speed his fingers had been working the keyboard earlier.   It wasn't long before he tapped a specific set of links. "And that would be the cluster over our destroyed transport hub." My eyes narrowed thoughtfully as I stared at the lines for a moment. "And what sort of data are those linkages carrying back and forth to the fleet, Felix?" The tesla reached up and tapped the screen over the schematic and a split screen appeared, detailing the type of information currently being carried over that section of the network. "Status reports on the investigation on the ground to the fleet commanders, imaging and sensory data and internal checks as the ships in this cluster continue powering up."  Felix said after quickly scanning the split screen. Again I threw Firinne a quick look, the redhead nodding in confirmation when I caught her eye.  It was as we had diagrammed back in my quarters.  The network indeed carried sensor data to and from the ships in orbit.  The question still remained: could we leverage that functionality to our advantage?  One way to find out: "Think it's possible to mimic that data and feed their system false sensor reports?" Felix's thoughtful expression deepened. "You know, that's an excellent question."  He looked to me and Firinne.  "I'm guessing you want to do that, so you can blind those warships up there.  That way they won't react to additional attacks we would launch on their ground assets." "Exactly."  I confirmed with a nod.  "They reacted fairly quickly to the attack on the hub.  Whether that was due to an alarm sent over the network from the hub or their own ship board sensors, I'm not sure.  Either way, if we can isolate them from the network, and/or feed them false sensor data, we might lock those eyes in the sky out completely.  And while that won't allow us to act with total impugnity, at least it would grant us a measure of freedom from immediate retaliation." "Indeed it would."  Felix instantly agreed.  He went silent a moment as he considered what he was seeing on the screen versus what we were looking to accomplish. "I should be able to set up a shunt for the sensor data, allowing us to record routine information then loop it back so their sensors think they're seeing new data when in fact they are seeing nothing at all.  And now that I have full access to the network itself, I should be able to build a series of filters that would effectively let the ships know only what we want them to know.  Useful not only to lock them out, but send them on goose chases across the planet if we want them completely out of the way." I grinned at that. "We didn't think of that possibility."  Firinne said with a smile of her own before looking at me.  "That could prove to be very useful." "Yes it could."  I agreed.  "How quick could you slap something like that into place?" Felix grinned. "Already done."  He said.  "You can tell the velkin haven't had serious attacks on their networking capabilities.  A similar human system would've been firewalled at every node, convoluted, redundant structure to handle denial of service assaults and active intrusion suppression.  The velkin have none of that."  His fingers danced for a moment. "And I need to make sure our intrusion stays low key so the velkin will keep it that way.  What protection is there now, was due to us managing to hack their network four decades ago when we were trying to figure out what they were doing with the surviving humans." I gave Felix a hardy slap on the shoulder. "Excellent work, my friend!" Felix quickly grinned. "And to you and your fellow juggernauts as well."  He returned.  "Without your 'impatience' leading to you digging in before anybody else, we wouldn't have the rosetta stone algorithm or the access code." Firinne and I laughed, knowing it was true.  Then abruptly I sobered. "Now, the trick will be to make our discoveries count!"

 

Who You Gonna Call?

Firinne and I were walking back to my tent, talking about possible ways to use the new network access to our benefit when I spotted Hannibal and his six new comrades.  They were slowly walking from where the javelins and ballistas practiced their hand to hand combat.  Already, only hours after taking possession of the K'ethik shells, the six echoes Hannibal had recruited were in full control of their new bodies.  They moved smoothly and without effort, the seven of them talking and moving with a great deal of animation. "Firinne, let the others know I'm just having a quick word with Hannibal before I rejoin you."  I said. "Will do, Max."  She replied, flashing me another one of those brilliant smiles of hers.  She reached out to capture my hand and give it a squeeze. "Just don't take too long, hey?" "I won't."  I replied with a smile of my own, returning her hand squeeze before letting go and angling towards Hannibal and his comrades. "Ah, our esteemed commander!"  The Carthaginian echo said with a smile and a nod. "My friends, may I present Max Niekro, juggernaut and commander of Fort Retribution?  Commander, please meet the six that have agreed to possess K'ethik shells and assist us in our efforts to expel the velkin invaders from our planet." He then indicated the first of the six that stood beside him, all garbed as he was in military fatigues. "First, Yuutl or Raven, of the Haida nation, west coast of Canada.  He was killed when Europeans attacked his village in retaliation for warriors of his tribe driving off other settlers who were attempting to kidnap some of their women." "Next, I have the Celtic female warrior Corraidhan, who took up arms to resist the Roman invasion of their land, only to be captured and gang raped by Roman legionnaires before she was crucified as a spy." My eyebrow lifted as Corraidhan inclined her head in my direction.  A brutal way to become an echo.  I could only hope it wouldn't affect her in the long run.  Then I noticed her shell, which had taken on aspects of femininity, including swellings where her breasts would be, broader hips and a narrowed waist.  Now that was exerting control over one's shell.  Again, I found myself hoping she showed that kind of mental resolution in battle. "Beside her, is Bridget Bishop, the first woman wrongly accused and hung at the Salem Witch Trials."  That echo too had exerted enough control over her shell that she had breasts and hips. "Next is Grigori Rasputin, the Orthodox monk assassinated for his part in supposedly undermining the Russian monarchy of the time." That sent my eyebrow back up as I looked at the big shell Hannibal had indicated.  Rasputin, from what I read, was also a pacifist with a great dislike for war, which helped make him extremely unpopular at the time.  Could he, or would he now embrace war?  For our sake, I hoped so.  The Russian echo had also made his shell more powerful and taller than the others, perhaps in reflection of how he looked when he was alive.  Or of his ego, depending on which story you believed.  I could only hope he wouldn't bring his brand of insanity to this battlefield. "Beside him is Adeesa, a Tutsi woman who was brutally raped then drawn and quartered while still alive during the ethnic conflict between her people and the Hutu, a neighboring ethnicity."  Like the other female echoes, this woman of African descent had also given her shell a womanly shape.  And like Corraidhan, it would be interesting to see how stable she was, given the echo was created via overwhelming brutality. "And finally, Caesar." I looked back at Hannibal with a frown.  A Roman?  Fighting beside a Carthaginian?  How entertaining that would be!

"Which one?"  I asked, my question eliciting a wry smile from Hannibal. "The first one."  Was his reply and I looked back at the shell he had indicated, which politely inclined its head upon catching my eye. The first one?  As in Julius Caesar??  That was incredible, for lack of a better word.  It was said he was the greatest general Rome had ever known, an asset we could certainly use.  Determined and ambitious, he was assassinated before he could achieve absolute power by a group of senators led by Brutus.  Thanks to that, Caesar fell into the criteria Hannibal had used for the creation of an echo.  His psychic outcry at the betrayal must've been great to have created an echo.  Unlike Rasputin, Caesar hadn't made his shell into a giant.  Instead, it was close to Hannibal's in size and structure.  Younger than Hannibal's echo by a couple centuries, and thus not involved in the Punic Wars that pitted a republican Rome against the city state of Carthage for control of the Mediterranean, it would be interesting how the two would get along.  And how Caesar would get along with Corraidhan, since it was Caesars's armies that first crossed the British Channel to invade Briton, home of her people. "An interesting collection, to be sure."  I said, before turning to the other six.  "A pleasure to meet all of you.  You have the thanks of the Risen for your willingness to assist us in our efforts against the velkin invaders." That was greeted by inclinations of the head, or slight bows of the upper body, faint smiles on metallic faces that were shaped to reflect their ethnic backgrounds.  Then I was drawing Hannibal aside. "A former Roman general, a Russian monk and a Celtic warrior, beside an accused witch, a victim of ethnic violence and a Native American fisherman?  Do you think you can get them trained enough to actually fight?" "Caesar and Corraidhan, yes; they already have the warrior's spirit despite having forgotten much of their former lives.  The others will be more of a challenge."  Hannibal admitted with a thoughtful frown. "However, they've shown promise already.  Like myself, they've had plenty of opportunity to watch the many wars Humanity has fought between their deaths and now.  Including the velkin invasion, though that was more a slaughter than anything else."  Hannibal returned his gaze to me. "I've discovered that if you watch a thing enough times, you become familiar with it.  And that familiarity is granting them some ease in learning how to actually wage war." I slowly nodded in agreement.  I had observed the same thing.  You expose somebody often enough and long enough to the same act, soon they themselves could perform it almost flawlessly. "Excellent work, Hannibal.  Please keep me updated as to your progress.  I'm going to join the other juggernauts in my quarters as we do a little planning.  Once you're done with your echo colleagues, you are more than welcome to join us and provide some input." Hannibal smiled and inclined his head in thanks. "I will do so, if the opportunity arises." "Very good."  I again looked at the other echoes. "Good luck to you all!" My fellow juggernauts were standing in front of the whiteboards when I stepped into the tent some time later.  Magda too was still there, still with her hood down and standing on the ground as she and Firinne conversed in low tones. "There he is!"  Simon declared with a grin, catching sight of me as I stepped inside and all faces turned towards me. "Good news with the echoes?"  Bojay rumbled and I nodded as he and I fist bumped.

"Hannibal is bringing the new recruits up to speed."  I reported, slipping between Simon and Aria, the little blond, having finally gotten her name from Firinne on the way back from the command tent. I was about to continue as I stepped up to the board close to where a beaming Jen was standing, her hands already reaching for me, when Magda abruptly groaned out loud. I immediately stopped and twisted towards her. "Magda?"  I asked with no little amount of concern to see her leaning heavily against the desk, a hand to her head. "Are you alright?" "No."  She managed.  "There's,. . . . something wrong."  She pushed away from the desk to stagger towards me.  Expecting her to fall, I took a half step forward, preparing to catch her with my hands reaching for her.  Then her hand brushed against mine and the world exploded in a fury of color and sound. There have been few moments since I was summoned that I was thankful to already be dead.  One was when Tate and I were ambushed and only by virtue of being Risen, did I make it through.  And now I was experiencing another one of those moments. The pain was distant, a pressure that I could feel without it truly bothering me.  At the same time, I could feel some kind of force spinning around me with such violence, I thought it would've sucked out my breath and left me to suffocate, if I needed to breath.  As it was, the maelstrom Magda's touch had thrown me in was all consuming, and overwhelming. For a long moment I swirled within it, its forces threatening to pull me apart, the pain ebbing and growing in a strange sort of rhythm.  Then, with a brutal abruptness, I was being cast out of it and found myself falling towards the ground. Unconsciously I braced for the anticipated impact.  What had happened?  Had Magda's teleport ability gone haywire and thrown me to Earth Mother knows where? It was as I fell that I saw it.  A great spindle of dark green metal that, for the lack of a better term, looked like it was stabbed into the Earth's very flesh.  Actinic arcs of energy raced up and down its height, which was partially hidden by wispy clouds, the spike reaching higher than a ridge of mountains that rose nearby.  Just what the hell was that thing? Then my attention was being pulled from it by familiar flashes of light visible through the clouds.  There was a firefight going on down there, on the ground, fairly close to where the spindle met the ground. As if somehow triggered by me spotting it, suddenly I was through the clouds and on the ground, right in the middle of a furious battle.  Lines of Risen, dug in behind makeshift barricades of downed vehicles of both velkin and unknown origin, were desperately firing at heavy velkin fortifications surrounding the spindle's massive base.  Summoned goa-forged weapons joined energy rifles of velkin design as Risen of all types, including Transcended, attempted to punch through the heavy defense. For their part, thousands of velkin hunters manned the spindle's defense, their long rifles firing almost continuously to keep the Risen forces back.  Flashes of focused plasma darted back and forth to slam into barricades or a shimmering energy field that I saw protecting parts of the velkin fortress.  They were joined by bolts being fired from javelin and ballista weapons, as well as heavier blasts coming from something three ballistas were firing together.  Javelins also were working in teams to fire a heavier weapon than their regular crossbows, yet not as heavy as a ballista bolt. These blasts were more successful in penetrating the energy field protecting the fortress.  I watched as another segment fell, the shimmer pixelating then shattering into a thousand shards of light before disappearing, letting the naked metal wall get hit by plasma and goa fire. I briefly wondered where the velkin air support was until I saw several smouldering wrecks on the broken ground between the two lines, the majority of them obviously velkin in design.  The others, however, were something all together different, making me curious as to who they belonged to.  A heart beat later a wedge-shaped craft of gray metal streaked out from behind the Risen lines, resembling the velkin transports I had encountered before, with the open to the air passenger section, closed cockpit and stubby stabilizer wings. However, from this section, I saw what looked like humans manning larger, mounted versions of the plasma rifles.  They swung the weapons around via handles set into the butt, targeting and firing out the open doors in steady streams at the velkin positions.  At the same time, nose mounted cannons added their fire as the oddly maneuverable craft hovered, slid sideways and darted in close before arcing away to avoid enemy fire.  It was able to work for several minutes before heavy blasts from the fort struck it, knocking it from the sky.  The craft joined the wrecks on the ground with a rough explosion on impact. A handful of surviving crew members managed to scramble free and make their way back to the Risen lines even as several more flyers appeared, peppering the fortress with rapid fire plasma from their mounted cannons. Then I was amongst the fighters themselves, liches, ghouls, vampires, Transcended and others ducking out of the way of shots that came close before grimly standing and returning fire.  Summoners moved along the line, repairing small injuries or putting Risen back together, and psyrens hovered at intervals, extending psychokinetic shields to blunt a heavy barrage and facilitate communication. Again I saw what appeared to be humans, fighting alongside the Risen.  When they fell, plasma burns on their bodies, there were no summoners there to put them back together.  Instead other humans that were clearly medics with white armbands marked with red crosses, would gather them up onto stretchers and quickly clear them away. I stared at that for a moment, memories of my own battle experiences flitting through my mind as I tried to wrap my brain around the fact that humans were involved in this battle.  Then I became aware of snatches of conversation, buzzing around me like a swarm of angry bees. ",...pull in the rest!  Don't worry about protecting the shrine.  We need,..." ",...they said it'll drain the planet's molten core and destroy our magnetic field.  Then we'll have no protection,..." ",...detected some sort of life force down there that they want to harvest,..." I grimaced at that last one.  It sounded very similar to something Tate had said about how the velkin wanting to somehow drain the Earth Mother's very essence. Before I could put much more thought into it, the ground underfoot rumbled ominously.  Then Risen all around me started screaming in agony. I jerked in surprise when a ghoul just to my right spasmed wildly as the goa was sucked out of its body and into the ground before it fell into a heap of mouldering, lifeless bones.  And beside it, a vampire howled as the goa in its body was also rudely drained, leaving it to crumble into ash and dust. At the same time, the spindle began to hum, so loudly I could clearly hear it though I was a good two or three kilometres away from the base.  Then, with forks of blue-white energy flickering over its entire surface in a frenzy of light and motion, the top of the spindle erupted to send a seething cable of pure goa rocketing into space. "They tapped the core energy!"  I heard someone scream.  "And the Earth Mother is recalling all her donated goa to survive!"  Even as those words reached my ears, more Risen fell apart all around me, their goa sucked back into the ground to leave them lifeless bones, or worse, dust. "We have to attack while we still can!"  Then the Transcended were going over the top of the barricades, howling wildly as they fired everything they had. I found myself following them, charging the velkin battlements with desperate energy.  The hunters dropped like flies, the metal of their fortification peeling and rupturing under the assault.  Yet the spindle kept sending that column of goa skyward, each second draining more and more of the Earth Mother's very essence.  Then we were among them, and velkin died on every side.  I reached out for the spindle itself, its metal warping under the power of multiple plasma bursts and blasts of goa-fire.  And pain filled me, like living lava poured over top of me, searing me through and through.  A heart beat later, everything went black.

 

Chapter 9: A Quantum of Urgency

Agony roiled through me, more vicious and angry than the wave that thrust me into that strange place with the velkin spindle sucking the life out of our planet.  Then, abruptly, it abated just as I was beginning to think it would tear my undead body apart. My eyes flickered open and I found myself looking into Jen's worried face. "What,...what the hell happened?"  I managed to mumble through a mouth that felt like I had sucked down a kilo of sand and dust. "Thank the Earth Mother!"  Jen husked, relief rolling across her flawless features. "I thought you had been called back to her and were dead!" "Wha-what?"  Then summoners were bustling all around me, forced to step around Jen when she refused to move out of the way.  The healers had their hands already glowing with healing energies and I felt the pain recede as those hands moved over my supine body. "You need to give him some room, Jen."  Boost gently urged, stepping into my field of view from the other side. "Give my people a little space to work." Jaw set stubbornly, Jen leveled a hard look at my friend, looking as though she was readying a hot retort.  So I reached out and touched her on the arm, hoping to forestall her words.  Her eyes instantly dropped to me, and her hard look disappeared, replaced once again by concern. "It's okay, sweetheart."  I rasped.  "Boost knows what he's doing.  The faster the summoners work me over, the quicker I'll be back on my feet." Her hand reached out and tenderly cupped my face and I could see that if Transcended had the capacity to cry, she would have tears in her eyes. "I just don't want to leave you alone, baby."  She quietly said, her emotions plain in each word. "I won't be, Jen.  I'll have Boost right here."  I flashed my friend a quick wink, and he smiled, nodding reassuringly. "I will be, indeed."  He confirmed. "Besides, hun, he just wants you to step back to let his summoners work.  Not actually leave." A thought occurred to me. "You know what, scratch that.  Help me off this stretcher."  I rasped, wincing as I tried sitting up and felt pain flare through my body once again.  To be feeling pain as a Risen, meant I had suffered some severe trauma at several different levels.  And while the summoners would more than likely be able to repair that damage without any lasting effects, I knew a far faster method.  I needed to touch the ground and go juggernaut. Jen must've guessed what I wanted.  She quickly moved to help me sit up, waving the summoners back. "Are you sure this is a good idea, man?"  Boost asked with a frown as he watched Jen help me off the stretcher and carefully stand. "Positive."  I rasped, then willed goa to enter me. The first tendril snarled almost animalistically as it reached out of the ground to bite into my back.  I grunted with the force of its aggressive strike, feeling the pain instantly ebb with the rush of the Earth Mother's life force into my body.  The second and third tendrils, wrist thick as always, hummed rather than snarled, but they too hammered into my body to pour goa into the nearly empty vessel that I had become. Teeth grit against the howl that filled my mind, I let the tendrils push the goa back into me as Jen hovered nearby , watching intently to make sure nothing went amiss.  And I felt each pain wither and disappear until, slowly popping the bones in my neck as I stretched, I stood erect and restored.

"Well, that's one way of fixing you up, I suppose."  Boost admitted with a wry grin and I chuckled. "Seemed the fastest way of getting it done."  I said.  With a final stretch, in which Jen took the opportunity to step close and slip her arm possessively around my waist, allowing me to put mine around her shoulder, I gave her a squeeze and a smile before returning my attention to Boost. "How about Magda?  How's she doing?" Boost's expression became grim. "Nowhere near as good as you, my friend."  He rasped, then motioned I follow him as he made his way deeper into the medical tent. That was where we found the red haired psyren, pale and unconscious on a stretcher, a pair of lights nearby shedding enough light to see she wasn't doing very well. "No matter what we do, we can't rouse her from that state."  Boost said in a low voice, frowning as he looked at her. "No amount of goa will repair what happened inside her head." "Her head?"  I looked back at him with a frown of my own, even as Jen slipped free to take a step closer, her own eyes narrowed as she looked the fallen psyren over. Boost nodded. "Her psionic cortex, the portion of her brain that was dedicated to psionic ability, has been completely scrambled.  Pathways have been jumbled and shunted, neural clusters disrupted and redistributed, support cells nowhere to be found.  And any attempt to rectify it using the psyren template has failed to force the neural tissue into its previous pattern." My thoughtful frown deepened as I considered that. "I have a feeling something happened at Campton. Something that might have changed her capabilities."  I said musingly.  "After all, she was the only one that was mostly intact at the end of the K'ethik attack beyond a blow to the head.  And the humanoid shells were generating that scrambling signal that interfered with all the psyrens' capabilities."  I looked over at Boost. "Could that signal have been more active?"  I asked. "How so?"  He countered, his own thoughtful expression deepening. "What if it was being generated on a wavelength similar to a microwave, which, if the power is high enough, can denature proteins." Boost's eyebrow lifted at that. "You think the K'ethik actually managed to microwave her psionic cortex at Campton?" I shrugged. "It'd be an effective counter against psionics, wouldn't you agree?" Boost snorted softly. "I'll say.  Ridiculously effective, if Magda is any evidence of how such a weapon could work."  His thoughtful expression returned. "Yet, something else must've happened to force her cells out of template and into that configuration.  Microwaving the tissue would've just broken it down.  My summoners would've been able to repair that, like they did her colleagues also present at Campton." I let my eyes fall back onto the unconscious psyren.  Something had happened to force her out of template?  Something that couldn't be rectified??  But there was only one power that could alter a Risen template, . . . - I knew I couldn't hide the truth from you, my juggernaut. -  The quiet voice that I had come to associate with the Earth Mother, quietly whispered into my mind.

- I did indeed change Magda's brain so the power of clairvoyance would manifest strongly in her.  I needed you to see the future, as I am seeing it.  So you can prepare. - - But now Magda will not wake, Mother. -  I countered.  - I thank you for granting us this great gift of a glimpse into the future, so we can work to prevent it.  But will it be at the cost of one of your most valuable children? - - Fear not, my juggernaut. -  The voice returned, against my expectation, if I was frank about it.  She hadn't shown any desire to explain herself or speak further beyond a single communication in the past.  Not that what she next said was any help. - You are the catalyst for change. -  And then I felt her presence leave, much as it had in the past, leaving me staring at Magda's unmoving body. Just what the hell was that supposed to mean?  A catalyst for change?? "Maybe if we could determine when her template began to change."  Boost began, thinking out loud. "We might be able to see how or what was affecting it, and work towards reversing the effect." I pushed my most recent communication with the Earth Mother to the back of my mind and nodded in agreement. "Are your people tracking that?" "Does it matter?"  Jen abruptly interjected, her expression hard as she looked down at the unconscious psyren. "We should just leave her like this." My eyebrow lifted at that. "Holy shit, Jen.  That's a little cold, don't you think?  Why do you say that?" The brunette juggernaut shrugged without lifting her eyes from Magda. "She almost killed the only man I could ever love."  She rasped tautly before finally lifting her eyes to me, and I saw them seething with the force of her emotions. "You'll have to forgive me if I'm not feeling horribly generous towards her at the moment." "I don't think she acted maliciously, or deliberately."  I countered only to watch a muscle ripple in Jen's jaw with her tension. "If you had been taken from me, my love, . . . ."  She paused, her fists clenching and unclenching as I quickly stepped to her.  Then she threw herself into my arms, dry sobbing against my shoulder. "Shhhh, it's okay."  I husked, gently stroking her hair as she clung to me with desperate strength. "I wasn't taken.  I'm fine.  And thanks to Magda, we have a vision of the future that'll help us." "I know."  She husked.  "You're just the only thing I've ever chosen for myself, both as a living woman, and as a Risen.  I can't bear the thought of losing you." That, of course, made me think of something. "Boost."  I rasped and the summoner jerked his eyes off the unmoving Magda and looked at me. "How quick can you get a psyren here?  One that can pull images out of a person's mind and press them onto a psycrystal?  I need something recorded!" I didn't know her name, but I thanked the silently hovering psyren as she handed me the cylinder of pressed crystal.  Normally clear when inactive, its depths now swirled with the captured images she had just pulled from my brain. "And now I need a player."  I muttered half to myself.  Then: - Tovin, can you get the command team to come to the medical tent?  I have something I need to show them. -

"Holy, . . . shit."  Charge was the first one to speak, and those were the first words out of his mouth. "I know, right?"  I drew in a deep lungful of air, feeling its chill enter my lungs, before I sent it back out in a long sigh. "I've seen it before and it still blows me away." "But what does it mean?"  Felix rasped, his expression wondering.  "We all knew the velkin were threatening to destroy the Earth.  It was the reason the Earth Mother summoned us all back.  Yet, if we were to go by this vision, we epically fail." I looked over at Tovin, who hovered near the door to the small alcove Boost had led us to for our impromptu war council. "Maybe our resident psyren has an answer for us.  How much do you know about clairvoyance, Tovin?" The cloaked figure was silent for a moment as she obviously digested my question. "Not as much as I would like, I'm afraid."  She finally admitted in a quiet voice after that pause. "Using one's psionic abilities to penetrate the time stream to look forward, or backward is extremely difficult.  Even with our enhanced capabilities as Transcended.  From all reports, the most skilled in the ability, which is rare at the best of times, can only get feelings, or brief glimpses.  The energy that creates the time stream, while impacting our daily lives, is challenging to sense as a psyren even though it bears similarities to psionic energy.  And that energy is in constant motion."  She paused to focus her attention on me. "To have a vision of such clarity and detail is virtually impossible." I grimaced. "Well, not only is it possible, Tovin, it happened."  I bluntly replied.  "Even though the vision virtually lobotomized the psyren who had it." "Damn."  Charge husked in stunned disbelief. "Wait, wait, wait."  Felix said, suddenly pushing away from the table he had been sitting against. "You said the energy that creates the time stream is in constant motion." "I did."  Tovin confirmed. "Well, motion in energy systems usually means uncertainty.  And while the past has already happened, thereby eliminating uncertainty, the future hasn't.  So it gets the bulk of that inherent uncertainty.  That could mean the vision Max was somehow pulled into, is a possible future, since the future would obviously be in uncertain motion or flux." "I kinda hope so."  Twitch dryly noted, arms folded beneath her breasts as she frowned. "I, for one, don't like the idea that we are looking at what we couldn't prevent.  That means this last 50 years has been for nothing.  Which is bullshit, if you ask me." "Okay, so the future's in flux and hasn't happened."  Kat interjected.  "Which means this thing the velkin have hasn't been built yet and the Earth Mother isn't getting her core drained."  The animus looked quickly around the circle. "Guys, we've just been given a serious heads up, here.  We now know what could happen, instead of just guessing at it.  That gives us a major advantage.  Because we know what to look for, and what to prepare for."  A mischievous smile danced on her full lips for a moment. "And the best part about it?  The velkin have no clue we know." "Nice."  Charge said with a grin even as Twitch, wearing a grin of her own, nodded in agreement. "Well, I for one, am going to study this recording."  Felix gestured at the image on the monitor, the final one from Magda's vision that showed that last surge of energy over the spindle's base. "Some of the tech is the same, but I see several things we don't yet have.  Like that armor I spotted on a couple of the Transcended." "You mean that stuff that shed velkin plasma fire."  Boost said and smiled when Felix nodded. "Yeah, that's the stuff."  He looked over at me.  "Finding something that is that effective in blunting velkin weapon fire has so far eluded me.  If I can somehow reproduce that armor, along with the flyers and some of the other things I saw, we could definitely have that advantage sooner versus later."  He rubbed his hands briskly together. "And I wouldn't mind putting together a search routine to see if we can spot that spindle via satellite before it goes into action.  Maybe get the jump on them and destroy it before it could become operational." "Don't forget all the crust rippling at the bottom, bro."  Charge pointed out.  "That thing could've been launched from orbit like a projectile to get maximum crust penetration." "Huh, good point."  Felix said with his customary expression of thoughtfulness reappearing. "I'll have all of the sideways viewing, and outward looking satellites looking in and around the enemy fleet as well." "And I'll get my guys working on those multi-Risen weapons, the ones the ballistas and javelins were using."  Charge said.  "If we can team up a bunch of people and summon weapons that hit with that kind of power, then we're solid gold."  He said, indicating the monitor with a gesture. "Okay."  I stood from the table I had been leaning against. "Sounds like we all basically have a good idea what we're doing.  I'm going to continue fleshing out our battle plan, with this new information worked in, and you guys keep going with what you've got going on.  Our time line hasn't changed."  I abruptly grinned. "Only our level of urgency!"

 

Best Laid Plans

Hannibal was standing just outside the tent as my team scattered, each intent on their tasks, both old and new. "Ah, Max."  He said with a faint smile.  "Your juggernaut colleagues told me I'd find you here.  I arrived just in time to see the last part of that recording." I nodded as he fell into step beside me, my goal my tent where the other juggernauts waited to hear why I had called the impromptu meeting. "And?  What did you take from it, Hannibal?"  I felt strangely impatient after watching the recording.  Both to get on with our efforts to prevent the devastating velkin attack in the future.  And to discover a way of healing Magda, who had unwittingly sacrificed her very undead existence to give us enough to a glimpse into the future that we may just be able to prevent it from happening that way. Somehow sensing that impatience, Hannibal didn't prevaricate. "While I didn't see me, or any of my fellow echoes fighting in that climatic battle, I think I saw evidence of their presence." I threw him a quick look, eyebrow lifted. "Don't frickin' keep it to yourself, Casper."  I rasped.  "What evidence was that?" "The armor that currently intrigues our good tesla commander." That brought up both eyebrows. "I'm getting a feeling you're about to tell me it's K'ethik in origin."  I rasped, still looking at him. "Produced by their bio-mech technology, yes."  He said. I couldn't help the slight grin that touched my lips. "Bio-mech, huh?  You've been talking to Felix again, haven't you." An equally slight smile creased Hannibal's silver lips upward. "Guilty."  The smile vanished.  "The armor I saw appeared to resemble the duraplate armor the shells are equipped with, created with a zero-gap metal that's more grown than forged." "Zero-gap?" Hannibal nodded before lifting a gloved hand to tap on his chest, producing a solid knocking sound. "Earlier today our good tesla commander had some questions about some of the software we had discovered governing how the shells maintain themselves."  The echo let his hand drop back to his side.  "When I described the sub-routines I saw governing the replacement of the outer metal covering, with how it was made, what I would have to ingest in terms of materials and how it would actually be placed on my skin, that's what Felix called it."  Hannibal paused.  "Upon asking for clarification, he described it as taking all the molecules in a metal and reducing the space between them to zero, or as close to zero as advanced physics would allow."  He finished, making a gesture with his hands, first holding them wide apart then bringing them together to illustrate the removal of the molecular space. I frowned as I considered that.  It sounded a lot like how I felt when I maxed my absolute density going juggernaut, like every piece of my skin was being made denser by cramming everything together in one place.  And the increased density made me virtually impervious to anything the velkin threw at me.  If the K'ethik shells used a similar method, albeit with their living machine technology, it certainly would explain the velkin failure to penetrate their shells with anything less than a ship-born heavy gun. "Okay, so this zero-gap metal is how the K'ethik form their external armor, which we've seen in action against the velkin.  How do you propose to use that technology to create armor for us that don't have the tech built in?"  I asked.

Instead of answering, he stopped and held out his hand, forcing me to also pull up if I wanted to see what he was doing.  And I watched in amazement as a long piece of black metal, just like the stuff forming the outer armor, steadily extruded from a slot that had appeared in his wrist. "You've got to be frickin' kidding me."  I said in a stunned voice, not wanting to believe my eyes. "As it turns out, metallic sources serve best as seed material for the zero-gap metal."  Hannibal went on in an almost conversational tone as if I hadn't spoken, or a piece of metal wasn't extruding at a good rate from his wrist.  The piece finished and he pulled it free so a second piece could start exiting his body. "Which is logical enough.  And, coincidentally, velkin metal is the best seed material I can find for quickly making the zero-gap metal." I harrumphed at that.  It certainly explained why the millipedes didn't mind chewing on velkin armor and equipment. By this point the second piece had freed itself and, as a third followed it, Hannibal placed the first piece in the hand doing the extruding.  It was about thirty centimetres long, five wide and maybe five millimetres thick.  He then licked the second piece and smoothly placed it long edge to long edge before drawing back.  My amazement only grew when the two pieces remained adhered together. Seeing my astonished look, Hannibal hastened to explain. "Apparently there is a mechanism that I currently have located in my mouth, that generates some sort of energy field that temporarily puts the top layer of molecules in a state of flux.  I have a moment or two to place it against any surface before those molecules form a permanent bond with that surface.  So pieces of zero-gap then become one."  And to demonstrate, he held up the two pieces he had bonded together and sure enough, it looked like it was now a single piece, with no evidence of a joint or a weld point. "Incredible!"  I breathed, taking the piece from him to turn it over and look at it from all sides. "On-demand bio-forging and molecular welding to create custom pieces out of zero-gap metal.  And it's pretty damn light, too." Taking the piece back out of my hand to add the third extruded part to form a larger square of black metal, Hannibal nodded. "I don't think Felix could've said it better himself."  He dryly noted, once again handing me the piece of armor, now a third larger. I went juggernaut and tried bending the piece of armor.  And found myself nodding in appreciation when it actually managed to resist my full effort, slowly deforming from it's original plate to a curved piece.  Carefully bending it back, noticing at the same time that the spots where the pieces were welded together remained consistent with the armor's overall integrity, I looked at it for a moment. "Now the question remains: can it withstand velkin plasma fire?" It took a few minutes to traverse to the test firing range Felix had set up in the tesla zone a couple days ago.  There I fixed the piece of armor to one of the stone targets Felix had originally set up to test his reverse engineered rifles.  I then looked back at Hannibal, who had retrieved his weapon from his quarters.  I gave him a ready nod. Returning the nod, he raised his weapon and took aim, firing a single burst at the piece of armor.  And I grinned in satisfaction as I watched the armor shed the plasma fire like so much water off a duck's back. "Spectacular."  I said, mostly to myself, as I pondered the possibilities of being able to use K'ethik armor. "Now try firing several shots, Hannibal." 

I took a step back and watched with no little satisfaction as several blasts slammed into the armor with no effect.  The stone around it wasn't so lucky; it began to melt and twist from having to absorb all the shed energy.  Still, it didn't take away from the effectiveness of the zero-gap metal in deflecting plasma fire, and shots fired with considerably more energy than from a standard velkin weapon at that. Shouldering his weapon with his own nod of satisfaction, Hannibal smiled. "I'd say that put any questions to bed about how good K'ethik zero-gap armor is." I carefully extricated the piece of armor from the melted rock around it and looked back over at Hannibal. "Right.  Now we just need to know how quickly your people can make it, and what you need to custom fit it to those Risen that need it." Using a carrying strap he himself had made for his weapon, Hannibal slung it over his shoulder and strode to where I was standing, taking the piece of armor from me when I offered it. "Speed will depend on the availability of raw materials, according to my internal specs."  He replied. "Full sized millipede shells could be grown in less than an hour with unlimited materials.  And it'll also depend on what you want protected." That got me thinking.  I tapped on finger tips as I listed out a couple of quick points after a moment's worth of thought. "Well, if we're taking strictly Risen here, body core and head only, with neck protection.  The rest can be replaced or reattached, if severed.  Even damage to the core can be repaired, however I'd rather keep that to a minimum as it'll consume goa resources that we can use elsewhere." I looked back over at the thoughtful echo.   "Different ball game though, if we somehow manage to get humans into our ranks.  Then we'll need considerably more protection.  Minimum head, body core, and partial arms and legs.  We'll need to include some scalloping joint protection, as humans don't work so good if you blow out one of their joints." Hannibal nodded. "Very true, as I remember my original self seeing that happen to a warrior or two."  He paused as if making a mental note. "I'll prep a number of sets that you can come and take a look at later today.  With myself and Caesar both, we should remember enough of our old lives that we'll be able to craft decent armor that will fit well, yet leave a great deal of mobility." "Sounds perfect."  I replied.  "And I'll get Tovin to have her psyrens do a quick psychokinetic scan of everybody to get their physical dimensions so you can tailor some of those suits to specific Risen." Hannibal nodded again, apparently satisfied with the direction our discourse had gone.  Then he was handing me a small comm device.  Taking it, I frowned as I looked it over, a flatted and tapered cylinder roughly the size of my little finger.  It certainly didn't look like anything I was familiar with, either from my past or from the equipment we had 'borrowed' from the human military. "It's K'ethik tech."  Hannibal explained having saw my expression of confusion.  "I don't want the echoes to be left out of any of these power discussions you seem to be having recently, as I almost was.  And since we can't be contacted via telepathic broadband, this is the next best thing.  The stud on the side activates it and immediately puts you on a signal similar to the broadband, that'll reach any of us within a 5000 kilometre radius." I whistled. "That's some serious range, Casper."  I rasped, looking up at him.  "Don't be afraid to share more of these goodies when you find them.  We could use the leg up."

Hannibal smiled. "We'll certainly do that, as we ourselves discover them."  He bowed his head.  "Now to our armor making.  Which, just to let you know, will exhaust our supply of velkin metal in about two or three hours." "Gotcha.  I'll put a couple Upgrade teams on going out to the hub site to see if we can scrape up some more.  We left enough of it around when we evacuated." "Excellent."  Hannibal smiled and again bowed his head in thanks. Leaving the echo to his work, I quickly made my way back to my tent, which had become the ad hoc juggernaut headquarters.  As I approached it, I called Tovin on the broadband. - Tovin, can you get a hold of Charge for me? - - He's on broadband now, Max. -  Tovin replied. - Charge, can you get a couple teams together with some psyren support? - - No problem, boss. -  The javelin instantly replied. - What's the mission? - - Hannibal thinks he's got a method of mass producing K'ethik armor for us.  But he needs velkin metal as raw material. - - K'ethik armor?  As in the stuff we saw in the recording shedding plasma fire? - - That'd be the stuff. -  I confirmed. - Hot damn!  I'll go with the teams myself!  We'll have everything that isn't bolted down back to base within the hour. - I found myself grinning at Charge's enthusiasm. - Sounds good, bud.  Let me know when you get back. - - Will do, boss.  Charge out. -  And the javelin was gone, presumably to put his scavenger teams together. By that time, I was stepping into the tent. "Max!"  Firinne said from where she and Bojay were furiously diagramming a skirmish diagram on the white board.  Simon, with Aria looking over his shoulder, was pulling up data and diagrams on the computer, and Jen had one of the velkin tech rifles disassembled on a table, her face thoughtful as she looked at the parts. At the red headed juggernaut calling my name, all heads came up and smiles appeared.  Jen was quick to step into a warm and lingering embrace, kissing me before leaning back. "So how did the war council go?"  She asked as the other juggernauts crowded around.  "What did everybody have to say about the vision?" My expression became thoughtful. "It scared them."  I replied, fishing the psycrystal with the vision imprinted on it out of a pocket and tossing it to Simon. "Load it up, Simon, if you would.  And you guys can see what I saw." There was no quiet exclamations of stunned amazement by the end of the recording, like Charge made when my command team first saw it.  But there was no mistaking the grim mood that now dominated the tent's single chamber. "That's some serious stuff."  Aria said, the petite juggernaut looking at the rest of us.  "A glimpse of the end of our world." "One that's not going to happen."  Bojay insisted with a growl.  "The future hasn't happened yet.  We can still change it." I nodded in agreement. "And we're going to, guys.  By finding that thing, and destroying it before the velkin can deploy.  In the meantime."  I indicated the white boards with a gesture. "We need to finish our battle plan!" We spent the next couple hours furiously working over plans that worked, and discarding ones that didn't, building on what Jen and I had started a few hours previous.  Finally, we settled on establishing a ground presence, then slowly working to retake North America from there.  But it hinged on the teslas blinding the fleet in orbit, and blocking its communication with the alien ground forces. "No, guerilla strikes are the way to go."  Aria insisted.  "Fast and hard, before melting back into cover.  That way they can't get a bead on us." "But we don't have the resources to mobilize our center of operations."  Firinne countered, reaching out to tap a rough map of the continent she had made. "We get the velkin's attention and they're going to start looking for us.  To stay out of sight, in addition to blinding their eyes in the sky, we need to be fully mobile." "Why can't we go underground with our ops?"  Simon asked with a frown.  "That'll allow us to be active against them and still stay out of sight of their ground forces."  As we all looked at him, he stepped to the white board and quickly sketched a broad, supported space underground, with a main entrance and several bolt holes. "I remember being a civil engineer when I was alive, maybe a hundred years or so before the invasion.  And we were doing some pretty advanced stuff with building underground.  Entire complexes and transit networks kilometres under the surface, as cities wanted to grow up and down, instead of out."  He looked back at us with a grin. "Given the materials, I can design a space that will hide us from the velkin even with their eyes in the sky.  And if we can't build out here, we can always check to see if the velkin left enough of our cities behind that we could find a ready made location." "Sounds like we just found a job for Twitch and Kat, and their people."  Jen said with a smile, looking over at me. I grinned. "It sure does, doesn't it?"  I took a quick look around at my fellow juggernauts.  "All in favor of pursuing Simon's underground base idea?"  I smiled when they all nodded. "Excellent.  So we send out the wraiths and the animus to see what they can find and go from there." Twitch nodded as she looked at Simon's diagram, reproduced in the command tent several minutes later. "Underground base.  Makes sense."  She grinned as she looked over her shoulder at me. "Bring on the Bat Cave!" "Nice."  I chuckled.  "Glad Batman was still around by the time you were born." "Hellz yeah."  Twitch said with a laugh.  "Bad ass vigilante with a crap load of cool, high tech toys he used to beat the living hell outta the bad guys?  Batman is the shit!"  Then she was dead serious. "I'm going to need some maps and plans from Felix of the cities we have within decent jump range, as well as any velkin presences in the area.  Full kit, along with recording and mapping gear and some psyrens in case we get into trouble." I nodded. "All doable, Twitch." "Cool.  Kat know yet?" "Not yet."  I replied and she nodded her understanding. "She'll want in on this shit.  It's right up her alley."  She pushed away from the table she had been leaning against. "I'll go find her and bring her up to speed.  You want a brief on what we're planning on doing?" I shook my head at that. "It's your op.  You run it as you see fit."  I said.  "Your team was professional and competent during Operation Ninja, getting us the results we wanted and everybody back in one piece.  I'm confident you'll do exactly the same with this."  I smiled. "Bring me back news on a viable location, along with all your people in one piece, and we'll call it good." Twitch returned my smile with a warm one of her own. "Thanks, Max."  She stepped closer to reach out and give my arm a squeeze.  "I appreciate your confidence in me and my people.  It means the world." "It's well earned."  I replied, looking down at her.  "I know you'll find what we're looking for." "Sure will."  She grinned. "One Bat Cave, coming up!"

 

Leaving Dodge

Felix nodded in greeting as I stepped into the command tent a few minutes after seeing the last of Twitch's team jump out.  Returning his nod, I made my way to where he was, as always, keeping an eye on two or three monitors at the same time. "Tracking?"  I asked and he silently pointed to the screen to his left. Provided by a satellite just passing by overhead, the screen presented a bird's eye view of Retribution.  I reached out and tapped the screen to summon a secondary menu which allowed me to select for detect motion, our work around to find the wraiths when they were full stealthed.  I then zoomed out with a swipe to a much broader view that included the target city, a location to the northwest of Retribution. High lighting the city, I then zoomed in on it and quickly found one of Twitch's teams on the edge, carefully working their way into the ruins in full stealth. "Wraiths are on the ground at location Alpha."  I rasped and Felix pulled up a smaller screen to make a notation before letting it disappear again. My fingers then moved over the screen to pull the view back before scrolling to the southeast to the hub.  Again I zoomed in and quickly located Charge and his scavengers. - Charge, status report. -  I sent via broadband. - First loads should be dropping into camp right now, boss. -  The javelin quickly replied.  - But I have to admit, I have a funny feeling about this.  I mean, there was scrap everywhere, but it looks like the velkin were putting it into specific piles.  Like they were measuring or testing something. - I frowned at that. - Think they're tracking this stuff, Charge? -  I asked and I got the impression that he frowned. - Maybe.  Might be useful to get Jolt to have some teslas scan it, just in case.  I wouldn't want it ending up tagged and having the gobbies track it back to Retribution. - I chuckled at the new nickname, finding it wholly appropriate as it not only referred to the gobbling sound the aliens made as part of their speech, but to the green color of their armor as well. - Good idea, man.  I'll put Felix on it right now. -  And I looked over at the tesla commander.  "Want to get a couple guys out there to take a look, Felix?  Charge suspects this incoming metal might be tagged." Felix frowned. "That's a possibility."  He admitted before turning in his chair to peer over at the dozen or so teslas working in the main command center.  "Wilts, Mitchell, go out and do an impulse scan of the incoming velkin scrap.  Let's make sure it's clean before we start breaking it down." "Yes, sir."  The two named teslas both said before they stood and quickly made their out of the tent.  Nodding in satisfaction, I turned back to the monitor. - We got guys on it, Charge.  And we've got eyes on the site; if we see any hint of velkin activity, we're pulling you out of there. - - Copy that, boss.  Charge out. - I turned back to Felix, meaning to ask him what an impulse scan was.  Only to be interrupted as a tesla in the main area suddenly shot to his feet. "Sir!  I'm reading a spike in activity on the velkin network!" "What??"  Felix twisted back around from staring at his subordinate to looking back at his screen, his face intent as his fingers danced across the screen.  I watched intently myself as the schematic depicting the network appeared, with flashing indicators everywhere.

"Damn it!"  Felix hissed, isolating several of the indicators and magnifying them so he can take a closer look at them. "Talk to me, Felix.  What's going on?"  I demanded, leaning in to look over his shoulder. A lean finger tapped several flashing data streams. "We've triggered some sort of alarm."  He responded.  "We blinded all of their active sensors, but we didn't account for any passive sensors they had working."  Felix's fingers danced for a moment over the screen, high lighting other data streams and activating a translation algorithm using the data we obtained from the rosetta stone recording. "There, right there!"  He pointed at a cluster of flashing indicators.  "They tagged the metal, just as Charge suspected, so they could use automated means to make measurements in their investigation.  And when those tags abruptly changed location, traveling several hundred kilometres to the east, that triggered the alarm." More finger dancing, then: "And now they've tried to confirm what's happening with active sensors and failed.  So transports with hunters are being dispatched to the surface."  A tap activated a countdown, which quickly started to spin down. "We've got maybe ten minutes before they get here." "Here, as in Retribution??"  I asked and Felix jerked a nod. "Shit!" - Tovin, go broadband and announce a general evacuation.  Everybody is to grab their gear and head to the jump out point, now! - - Where are we sending them, Max? -  Tovin's quiet voice replied, unflustered by the sudden request even as I felt the broadband open up and the telepathic announcement go camp wide. - Scatter protocol.  All units will be systematically jumped out to maximum range on the points of the compass.  First group will go due north, second group north by northeast, and so on. - - Copy that.  Jumps are commencing. -  Even as she made that announcement, I heard several Transcended and Upgrades go running by the command tent at full speed. For his part, Felix was equally busy. "We are evacuating, people."  He announced tersely as he stood from his station.  "Save your data and pull your cores.  No, don't worry about the equipment.  We're rebuild after."  Then he was putting his instructions to work on his own station, quickly shutting things down and saving his work, before reaching over to disconnect and pull the data core from its housing. I took the opportunity to pull out Hannibal's communication device.  Pressing it to my jaw, I felt it adhere when I pressed the activation stud. "Hannibal, do you read me." "Loud and clear, Max."  The echo's voice spoke as if he was standing beside me.  "I'm seeing a great deal of activity in the camp, along with groups jumping out.  What's going on?" "The metal Charge sent back from the transport hub for your people to use in the conversion to armor, has been tagged.  The velkin detected the material jumping from site to site and are sending teams down to investigate.  We are evacuating the camp to avoid a full discovery and possible confrontation.  Can you have your people report to the jump out area immediately?" "Will do, Max."  Hannibal sounded almost as unconcerned as Tovin had when I told her we were evacuating. "And you?  What are you doing?" I had to grin tightly at that. "Staying behind, of course.  This might be a chance to take a shot at our friends without risk of collateral damage."

"Ha.  Excellent.  I'll join you." "Very good.  I'll meet you at the camp entrance once everybody's been pulled out." "See you there."  He confirmed.  I pressed the stud and let the communication device fall back into my hand. - Tovin, keep four of your best pyrokinetics behind.  Once our people are clear, I want them to burn everything here to ash.  Leave nothing behind. - - Copy that, Max. -  The psyren responded.  - And when were you planning on evacuating? - - I'm not.  I want the velkin to keep their attention focused on this location while our people get clear.  So I'll be keeping them busy. - - Then I'll be staying in range to jump you out when you sound the all clear. -  She said firmly. I knew better than to argue with the veteran psionic. - You got it.  Connect me to Charge, will you? - - You are go for Charge. -  She said a heartbeat later. - Charge, you were right.  The metal was tagged.  We have incoming hunters that'll be on site within five minutes.  Can you stay put for a bit until we get the all clear? - - Damn! -  He snarled.  - I knew it.  It was too damn good to be true.  Yeah, we can hold out here for a bit.  What's the call? - - Full evac, scatter protocol to all the compass points, pyrokinetics to burn what's left to ash. -  I stepped out of the tent just as several psyrens floated close and began jumping the teslas out. - Once I give the all clear, we'll move everybody back in. -  I finished. - Copy that.  I'll be standing by.  Good luck, boss. - - Good luck to all of us. -  I grimly replied.  - Tovin, what's our status on the evac? - - 85 percent. -  Was her answer.  - And I have our pyrokinetics standing by. - - Have them start on the empty sections now.  The sooner this place is gone, the quicker the velkin will leave. - - Copy that. -  She said and I watched a plume of flame appear on the camp's northern edge.  'Here we go!' It had been too easy; our early victories and setting up the camp almost unimpeded.  I should've anticipated a setback like this as happening sooner versus later.  No campaign, no matter how well equipped, trained and prepared, goes off without a hitch.  And now, with Retribution emptying and burning all around me, I was getting yet another confirmation of that.  I just wished it didn't frustrate me so. Motion captured my attention and I turned to watch my juggernauts jog up, every one of them in full battle kit.  Just as well; I don't think they would've left even if I had ordered them to.  Jen stepped close to give me a quick kiss before moving out of the way to let me address everybody. "Okay, guys, once the camp is clear and the remains are burned to ash, we're going out to the perimeter and wait for the velkin to arrive.  Once they do, . . ." "It's clobberin' time!"  Simon said with a grin, smacking a fist into a palm in an unmistakable gesture.  I grinned. "It sure is.  We need to make sure no matter how many hunters arrive, none leave." "What about their eyes in orbit?"  Aria wanted to know. "Hopefully they'll stay blind long enough to not know what happened to their team.  If they see us dropping them into a hole, they may just fire on us from orbit.  And I'm not sure we're built to withstand that kind of fire power."

The command tent lit up with a 'whoosh', the flames hot enough to be felt on our undead skin even though we were a good twenty metres away. - Evacuation complete. -  Tovin quietly noted.  - Full purge commencing.  And I have velkin signals inbound, twenty kilometres and closing. - Nodding even though Tovin wouldn't see the gesture, I watched the command tent reduce to ash, every component, electronic or other wise, destroyed by the incredible heat of the pyrokinetic flame, which had the power to undo even metal's molecular bonds. - Purge complete.  Armory and core equipment have been transported to a secure location.  And I have withdrawn to a fall back point with the remainder of my team.  You, Hannibal and the juggernauts are all that are left on site, Max. - - Thanks, Tovin.  Excellent work.  Please pass my compliments on to everybody for performing flawlessly. - - Will do, Max. -  The psyren said.  - Those velkin signals should now be within visual range. - - Copy that. -  "Okay, guys, the velkin will be on top of us shortly.  Let's get ready!" Jogging out to where the entrance of the camp once was, we found Hannibal in full combat gear, waiting for us.  The echo nodded in greeting as we jogged up. "That was quite the show."  He dryly noted, his rifle held ready.  "The psyren sure know how to light things up." I nodded before turning and looking back over my shoulder at what used to be Camp Retribution.  Where clusters of field tents, equipment stores, practice grounds and personal tents once were, now only the odd splash of black remained.  Tovin's pyros had completely and effectively erased the camp from existence, leaving little behind.  They even managed to retain most of the wild grass that had grown between the tents, giving the location an abandoned feel. With nothing else in the way, I found my eyes drawn to the heap of scrap still sitting on the spot it had been transported to from the hub. "Doesn't look like much."  Firinne commented, the other juggernauts joining me in staring at the heap of scrap. "Enough to bring the gobbies down on our heads."  I retorted rather dryly.  The red headed juggernaut flashed me a grin. "Gobbies.  I like that."  She said.  Then we were all tensing as the sound of velkin thrusters reached our ears. "Here we go!"  Bojay rumbled and I felt their absolute densities jump and their shields snap into place. Eyes narrowed, I watched the velkin transports swing in, the open passenger compartment stuffed full of armored hunters.  The transports did a circle around the heap of scrap then, thrusters snarling, they landed one at a time in a loose formation about ten metres distant.  As soon as the transports were close enough, the hunters were jumping out, their massive rifles held ready. We watched them fan out, weapons up and scanning as they warily looked around.  Oddly enough, I was getting the feeling from these hunters, each over three metres tall, that they were nervous.  I glanced over at Hannibal and found the echo with his rifle also up and aimed, ready to go when I gave the signal.  And it struck me as the shell's silver and black peaked out from beneath his combat fatigues. The hunters were nervous because they thought they were dealing with the K'ethik!  That thought made me automatically glance skyward.  If the velkin thought the K'ethik were somehow involved, that meant we definitely had ship born heavy guns targeting this location, something we had hoped to avoid. - Tovin, I need you to keep a teleport lock on us. -  I sent over the broadband.  - I suspect the velkin think they're dealing with K'ethik.  Which means, ...-

- They have weapons trained on you from orbit. -  Tovin finished my sentence for me.  - Lock is established, Max.  I will jump you out to the north fall back point on your signal. - - Copy that. -  I held up my hand and all eyes were on me as I began dropping fingers.  Five, four, three, two, one,... With stone flying, the juggernauts took off, multiple booms announcing them smashing through the sound barrier before they were slamming into frantically firing velkin.  For his part, Hannibal sprinted forward, firing steadily as he shouted wordlessly,  the howl jerking not a few heads in his direction.  And with the attention came shots. Armored with the zero-gap armor, the velkin plasma burned holes in his clothing and nothing more, Hannibal shrugging off even multiple shots to continue running towards the battle.  Which unsettled the nervous aliens that much more.  Not that having six juggernauts ripping through their ranks was calming them down. My first pass took out two transports, the metal crumpling before my irresistible force with little effort.  The velkin's armored bodies fared as well, me cannonballing through their midst sending several flying, limbs shattered and armor breached.  The air was quickly filled with alien screams of agony and death, interspersed with the static crunch of discharging weapons. I skidded to a halt and made a second pass, a straight line through the middle, somehow avoiding Bojay as he took a perpendicular route.  Between the two of us, we sent nearly twenty velkin into the afterlife, and destroying three more transports. Over and over we went, our slashing attacks punching holes through their collapsing defenses and obliterating their escape route.  Left behind was shattered wreckage, broken bodies and the moans of the dying. - Heads up, Max. -  Tovin come on over the broadband as I made another pass, ploughing through a knot of hunters that tried to make a stand against my attack, weapons firing almost non-stop.  My shield easily shed the plasma, spilling it onto the ground which then lit on fire from the superheated gas and particle matter hitting it. - Felix has a portable device tapped into the velkin network and says the hunters are calling for reinforcements! -  She continued and I immediately put my head on a swivel. Out of the sun they came, nearly a dozen more transports.  Several hunters started firing as soon as they spotted us, the ground around each of us, Hannibal included, shuddering from multiple strikes. "Max!"  Jen cried as she ran towards me.  "Give me a boost!" Nodding, I cupped my hands together as she accelerated towards me.  Then, going close to the speed of sound, she leapt up, her foot landing on my hands.  My reflexes sharped by juggernaut mode, I was able to lift up at the same time with all my strength, hurling her into the air. Going that fast, then suddenly catapulted into the air, Jen became a missile that arced up and through two descending transports, ripping them apart as they exploded into flame.  I grinned.  That was nice!  Then I was digging in myself to launch towards the transports that made it to the ground. Again we cut through them with little effort, each of our darting charges leaving trails of fire behind us until the entire area was crisscrossed with flaming lines.  More hunters were ripped apart as we smashed through them, some losing limbs, others having holes torn through their armored bodies. Without relent we hit them, grinding their bodies into the ground and smashing the last of their vehicles into crumpled heaps of melted plastic and torn metal. Again Tovin caught me in mid-pass, this one hitting a group of stragglers that were trying to retreat from the carnage. - More comm traffic, Max. -  This time her voice held a note of alarm.  - Felix says the survivors have called in an orbital strike to purge this location. - That caught my attention.  I skidded to a halt to take a quick look around to locate everybody.  Then I was blinking away after images as a blast from the sky hammered into the ground ten metres from where I was standing.  An instant later a miniature storm of dust and rocks swept over me, kicked up by the impact even as the ground trembled underfoot.  Then the sky started to rain fire and brimstone, big gun blasts falling as dense as rain drops all around us. I staggered as two struck on either side of me, the heat from the massive blast actually searing my skin despite being in total juggernaut mode. -Tovin!!  Evac us, now! -  I howled into the depths of my mind.  Only to hear her panicked voice replying: - The EM discharge from the weapon strikes is scrambling my lock. -  The psyren cried. - Take who you have locked on now! - I ordered.  - The rest of us will make due. - - But, but Max,...I can't lock on to you. -  She began. My reply was cut off as a blast only a couple metres away picked me up and tossed me heavily through the air to land several more metres distant, my density making me sink nearly a foot into the ground upon impact. - Don't worry about me. -  I fired back, kicking myself free as I tried to blink the afterimage of the blast away. - Take whoever you,... - And then the world disappeared in a burning flare of light and sound.

 

Lazarus

The light took a long time to fade.  As did the heat searing my flesh.  It felt like it was peeling my flesh right off my bones, charred strips of meat dropping onto the ground to leave me a naked skeleton. Finally, though, it faded, leaving me in blessed, cool darkness.  Maybe I slept again in the ground for a time, I don't know.  I just know I didn't travel to the garden, and I didn't get to talk to Abby as I so desperately wanted to do. I just woke up. My eyes fluttered open and I found myself staring straight up at a pale blue sky, wisps of clouds here and there.  With my vision returned, my senses also began to repent of their exodus and I began to feel cold ground beneath me.  Shifting uneasily, I summoned the strength to sit up.  And, in doing so, my eyes fell onto my seared and blackened form. Holy shit, I was barbecued!  Cajun style, even!  I braced myself against the wave of pain logic said should now wash over me.  And I felt mildly surprised when it was only a warm tingle instead of the jolting agony that I expected, having seen people burnt during the war and having them describe how it felt. "Over here!"  I heard a voice shout from nearby.  And before I could turn towards it, glowing hands were working over my body. "Just hold still, buddy."  A woman's voice said in a Midwest American accent.  "Whatever you got yourself into, you've been badly burnt."  Then she came around the front and I saw a harried looking Transcended in worn street clothes, her mousy brown hair pulled into a tail and her face lined with fatigue.  It was her hands that were working me over, making her a summoner. I complied, knowing summoners did their work best when their subject was unmoving.  And I took the opportunity to look around. The last think I remembered, I was on the plains, tall grass in every direction, dodging blasts of energy from the sky.  Now, however, I was in a forest, mixed soft and hardwoods putting me north of where I had been.  By a long ways, ... I frowned as I considered that.  How the hell did I travel from Retribution to here?  And just where the hell was here, any way? Further pondering was interrupted by two more Transcended abruptly appearing.  Going by the goa-forged weapons in their hands, they were javelins.  And they looked as tired and harried as the summoner. "We gotta go, Greta."  The one, an African American, hissed in a British accent.  "The aliens have spotted our trail and are tracking this way!" "Just a second, Chris."  She fired back, grimacing as the glow around her hands intensified for a brief moment.  "He'll be ready to walk in a second.  Want to give me your spare pants?  He's had his burnt clean off." Then all three were ducking as plasma fire started streaking by over head. "Too late!"  Chris stood and fired off several bolts of blue-green energy. "They've spotted us!" I jerked as a blast hammered into my back, meant for the summoner.  She winced at that. "Sorry, fella."  She said, throwing me an apologetic look.  "But right now you make a better barricade than anything else." The still unnamed javelin to her right suddenly spun around, missing most of his left shoulder.  His weapon then whirled into dancing motes of light and disappeared as he dropped with a grimace and a groan of pain onto the ground.  Hunkering lower, Greta threw him a quick look then back at me.  I think she was somewhat surprised to find me looking at her. Realizing I must have something going on if I was able to take a plasma shot to the back and not have a hole in me, she leaned in to take more advantage of the cover even as Chris fell to his knees in time to miss taking a shot to the head.  Still he wasn't long out of the woods; he managed to squeeze off a couple more shots then he too was going down, a gaping wound in the chest.

"Damn it!"  She hissed, her eyes lifting to me.  "Is,...is there something you can do?"  She quietly pleaded. I looked at her for a moment.  Then I reached out, summoning the goa.  It snarled as it reached out to grab my hand and I jerked with it entering my body. Now I felt pain.  Pain that multiplied exponentially as a second, then a third, and amazingly a fourth tendril reached out to slam into my body.  I felt the charred skin around my mouth split and tear as I threw back my head and silently screamed with the agony that churned unrelentingly into my body.  And the pain was still echoing through me when I abruptly flipped over, restored to full status and charged the squad of velkin that were advancing on us, firing their rifles relentlessly. The first I cut down by sticking out my arm, smashing its legs in the wrong direction, sending it toppling to the ground with a thin squeal of pain.  I immediately slammed on the brakes, my bare feet chewing through hardened ground as if it were wood chips, sending shards of stone spraying.  Then I was coming back through as the aliens frantically spun around in an attempt to bring their weapons to bear on me. Two actually managed to get shots off, but my shield shed both blasts easily, leaving smoking holes in the ground where they dropped to.  A heart beat later I was smashing into the rest, sending three metre tall bodies flying in every direction. Again I skidded to a halt, eyes darting back and forth as I looked for more to take out.  And, in doing so, spotted a pair of transports moving slowly through the trees, hovering just off the ground.  A smile creased my lips for a second, then I was streaking towards them. Two steps and I shattered the sound barrier with a sharp 'boom', a vapor cylinder appearing in front of the compression wave I was creating.  Then I was through it and slamming into the leading transport, the bottom of the crafting hitting me mid thigh.  Several stunned velkin watched me rip through, literally chopping their vessel in half before I was beyond them to slam into the second one, which had turned towards the stricken first. Striking this one full on, I was a battering ram, punching through the command console, taking out the pilot before moving into the passenger compartment where I smashed four more velkin that were sitting there before exiting through the power plant.  That, of course, breached the plant's reactor core and the entire craft exploded in a ball of concussive flame, bending trees around it back with the force of it. Ignoring the burning craft, I looped back around and spotted several hunters scrambling from the first downed transport, their weapons already tracking me.  Again I left burning holes to mark my forward path as the shed plasma slid down and onto the ground.  Then the velkin were screaming, legs shattered and bodies broken as I powered through them. The last one flipped end for end over me to drop heavily onto the ground.  Stopping, I turned and took a quick couple steps to where it thrashed weakly on the ground, mortally wounded.  I didn't hesitate to then drop my fully densified knee squarely on the hunter's head, squashing it like an overripe melon, brains and fluid spurting through the sudden tears in its crushed helmet. It took a moment to execute the two or three other hunters that survived the attack in the same fashion before I called out: "Clear!" "Just what the hell are you??"  Chris said, clutching his chest where the summoner had healed him enough to get him moving.  I looked at him as I approached the spot where they had first found me. "He's a juggernaut, of course."  The other javelin replied before I could answer, the Risen holding his shoulder.  He too had been healed just enough to get him moving.

"Haven't you seen one before?" "Like you have, Mick."  Chris countered with a snort.  "Damn things are as rare as hen's teeth."  He lifted his eyes back to me as I came to a halt, buck naked in the cool spring breeze. "Whatever you are, brother, you've my thanks." "And mine."  The javelin Chris had called Mick, added.  "Without you, man, we would've been toast.  The bastards already chewed up most of our team in a fight a few hours back.  They've been chasing us down ever since." Then Greta was standing close, tying her tattered jacket around my waist. "There."  She said primly.  "Now you won't be scaring the liches and the ghouls with your business all hanging out there." "Thanks."  I said, my voice still a little hoarse.  I then took a quick look around at the woods surrounding us.  As I did, I caught Mick leaning close to Chris to mutter: "Not horribly fair that he gets to come back built like a Greek god and we are just ordinary." "Shut up, man."  Chris growled. Greta turned away from me to address the two javelins. "We need to get you two back to base where I can do a proper job of putting you back together.  We can't afford to lose any more of us today.  Not with the aliens pressing from the north like they are." That caught my attention. "The velkin are pressing against the Risen in this area?"  I cleared my throat with a cough to ask. Greta turned back towards me, a frown on her face. "Velkin?  Is that what you call them?"  At my confirming nod, she sighed.  "I don't know where you've been, friend, but they've been pressing our forces for months.  The Earth Mother gave us a high priority target to hit once we were brought here, to North American, last winter.  And, even though we missed destroying it, our attack put the Risen on the velkin radar.  They've been systematically hunting us ever since." I slowly stretched the muscles in my neck and shoulders, feeling the bones shift into proper alignment with slight 'pops' and cracks. "Well, now that I'm here, I'd be more than happy to help you with that."  I said and a tired smile appeared on Greta's face. "That's the best news I've heard all day."  She said. "Especially with what we just saw you do!" It took nearly two hours of tromping through the woods before we arrived at the base Greta and the two javelins were trying to reach.  As bases went, it was perhaps a third Retribution's size, and in far greater disrepair.  Shabby tents stood in unhappy, uneven clusters behind rough wooden walls, both of which had been thrown up with little organization or purpose. Greta waved at two ghouls sitting high up in the trees as lookouts as we approached.  The skeletal creatures returned the wave before settling back to their posts, almost vanishing in the dense foliage once they stopped moving.  Then we were stepping past a handful of liches with battered looking machine guns at the camp's entrance to enter the camp proper. "An interesting place you folks have here."  I musingly noted and Greta quietly laughed. "You don't have to play nice, Max."  She said with a smile.  "Let's call it as it is: a dump.  But it was a dump before my team and I arrived from Europe." I looked over at her, suddenly curious. "You traveled here from Europe?  How'd you manage that?  Psyrens don't have that kind of jump range."

"True."  Greta admitted.  "So we took an old human boat, with enough fuel to make the journey.  Since we didn't have to worry about creature comforts, like food and water, we had more than enough space for the extra fuel." "Uhg."  I grunted.  "That would've been a long and boring journey." "Especially with this guy."  Mick jerked a thumb at Chris, who immediately made a face.  "Apparently you can have your sense of humor surgically removed.  He's undead proof." "At least I was summoned with all of my brains intact."  The British javelin quickly fired back.  "Unlike present company." As the two javelins continued to verbally spar, Greta looked at me with a sigh. "Can you imagine dealing with that for nearly two weeks straight?"  And I chuckled lightly as I shook my head. It was as we neared the center of camp that I saw a cordoned off section, with heavily reinforced fencing marching along the outside.  And within it looked like there were several Risen in various states of disarray, Transcended if I wasn't mistaken. One constantly struck himself in the face, muttering angrily under his breath as he did.  Another frantically dug in the dirt, pausing just long enough to fill in the hole he was digging, before moving over and starting another.  And yet another chewed on the flesh of her arm, ripping off great chunks to frantically chew and swallow before roughly vomiting it back up with her body's inability to ingest, before she began again, the wound never growing larger thanks to the goa keeping her intact. Catching sight of the expression of horror and disgust on my face at seeing these Risen abusing themselves, Greta caught me by the arm. "I'm guessing by your expression, you haven't met any Lost before."  She said and I looked at her with a frown. "Lost?" She nodded. "Risen that can't accept the fact that they've been summoned back.  They are stuck in a memory loop where they remember dying and that's all they know.  Their own deaths, over and over." "Damn."  I husked and Greta nodded in agreement. "So they punish the new flesh the Earth Mother has given them, in the hopes that they'll be returned to the ground."  Greta sighed.  "At least you know where those ones stand.  With the Forgotten, it's quite a bit harder." I frowned.  Yet another label I hadn't heard before.  Greta smiled again at my confused expression. "Again, it looks like you haven't dealt with those yet.  Those are Risen that haven't finished dealing with issues they had in their former lives."  My frown became thoughtful.  Now that I could understand.  Memories of my time with Abby were still fresh, fresh enough that I was feeling pangs of guilt being with first Jace, then Jen, although Jen's presence soothed much of that guilt away.  It didn't matter to my mind that she had been dead for 300 years.  To me, it was just a few weeks ago that I was laying her cancer-ravaged body into the cold, unyielding ground. I was able to step past the need to dwell on that loss, by the understanding that beating the velkin would grant me release.  I could see, however, where some might not possess that mental strength to push past such an obstacle.  I only did, because Abby saved me from myself after I returned from war, broken and wounded in mind and soul. "So, what kind of past life issues are we talking here?"  I quietly asked and Greta threw me a quick look. "Some I won't tell you about, because it makes those Risen monstrous, terrible creatures that we had to literally drive away as they began to hurt those around them with their behaviours.  Most are less serious, but enough to render them useless to the war effort against the aliens.  Depression over lost love, or their lost life, trust issues because they had been taken advantage of, inferiority or superiority complexes that are mammoth in proportion; these are just the tip of the iceberg." She sighed again. "While it would be nice that all those that are summoned back to fight against the aliens are willing to do so, and are prepared to do whatever it takes to get it done, a good number are neither.  They don't want to be undead, and so refuse to support us in any way."  She grimaced.  "These are the Forgotten." It was my turn to let a sigh ease through my nostrils as I realized just how lucky I was to have Tovin available to ease the minds of the second gens that we recovered from the ranks of the shamblers.  The liches we had at Retribution as Upgrades, were already as adjusted as they were going to be, a pragmatic and fairly intelligent bunch, even before upgrading.  Yet another stroke of luck in my initial effort to rally soldiers against the enemy. "I'm guessing you don't have any psyrens in your ranks."  I said and Greta quickly shook her head. "I saw one or two at work, while I was in Europe but nothing since arriving here."  She explained, making me think back to the couple dozen we had at Retribution.  Then I was forced to focus on the here and now as she pointed at a tent that was just slightly larger, and in slightly better condition than the others. "Ah, here we are.  The commander's quarters!" A Risen looked up from a handful of dirty maps as Greta led the way in, the two of us ducking to step through the tent's low door.  And I frowned as I watched her immediately perk up, unconsciously patting her hair and squaring her shoulders to maximize how well her bust was situated.  'What the hell??' "Ah, Greta!"  The deep, sonorous voice marked this Risen as a man, tall and broad shouldered.  "Welcome back."  He stepped into the light and my frown deepened as I caught the movie star good looks, with dimpled chin, chiseled cheekbones and a flashing smile. "And I see you've brought someone new."  A wave of something I couldn't identify swept over me as he extended a hand. "Welcome to Fort Wilderness.  I am Jeremiah." A glance at Greta yielded the summoner was flushed and obviously aroused, her eyes wide as she started at this Risen who, despite the good looks and powerful body, was no Transcended. I carefully took the hand. "Max."  I replied and Jeremiah flashed me a brilliant smile as he gave my hand a quick squeeze and shake before dropping it. "Ah, welcome, Max.  We'll get you some clothing so you don't have to walk around with a jacket tied around your waist.  And don't worry, we'll get you working on something shortly."  Then he was turning away from me and back to his maps. "I,...I think he'll work out very well, Jeremiah."  Greta finally managed to find her voice to say.  "He took out an alien patrol that was chasing us and saved our lives." "That's nice, Greta.  Now, if you don't mind, I have work to do." Flushing even further, Greta nodded to Jeremiah's back and, taking me by the arm, guided me back outside. "And now you've met our glorious commander."  She said, the flush slowly fading from her face the further we got from his tent.  "Isn't he amazing?" "Yeah."  My answer was curt. Now I knew why this camp was a frickin' disaster.  They were being led by a demonic!  An incubus, to be exact, the male version of the crowd control succubi Finlay had brought with him on his trip to Retribution.  That wave of unidentifiable sensation I had felt when he reached for my hand was pheromone.  And when he saw he had no effect over me, he dismissed me out of hand. Greta's prattle about how great and amazing the incubus was, faded into the background as my brain began to spin with ideas and plans.  The solution here was obvious: I needed more Transcended.  And not any addled by a demonic's pheromones or consumed with memories of their own deaths. Unfortunately I would have to work with one that was, to make that happen.  Carefully I began to plan. It was time to wake the dead.

 

Chapter 10: Reboot

Greta pointed to a tent that was falling down around the skinny pole it had been hung on. "Here's a space for you."  She said with an apologetic smile.  "Jeremiah is more a man of action, than of logistics.  He hasn't really concerned himself with getting equipment and materials for the Risen here." "That much is obvious."  I rasped and she grimaced. "He just tries focusing on getting his soldiers ready."  The summoner began to say in protest before I held up a forestalling hand, clearing my throat.  "No knock on your boy there, Greta, but he obviously has no clue on how to wage a war."  I pointed out. "Oh, and you do?"  She crisply fired back, instantly irate with her arms folded beneath her breasts.  "I suppose you're going to tell me you were a soldier in your previous life." "SOCOM Ranger, to be precise."  I retorted dryly.  "With tours in Afghanistan and Iraq."  Greta sighed at hearing that, her resistance fading, obviously aware of those past conflicts "Okay, so Jeremiah is no soldier and you are."  She returned my frank look.  "What do you suggest we do?  If you want to take command here, he's going to resist you.  That much I do know." That deepened my frown.  "Seriously, how the hell does a demonic get a command, anyway?"  I asked.  "And to watch him use pheromones to push you around seriously made me want to drop him into a hole.  He's just an incubus, not a Transcended." "You, you know what he is?"  Greta squeaked, eyes flying wide.  That deepened my frown. "Oh, snap.  Buddy didn't tell you, did he."  It was my turn to sigh.  "Look, I know it's tough to fight biochemical control.  I can see you're in his thrall."  That was enough to make her lift her chin, her expression tightening as she prepared a denial.  And just as quickly the expression faded and she sighed. "I am, aren't I."  She said, a fair amount of misery entering her voice and I nodded. "Don't beat yourself up over it, Greta.  Like I said, it's hard to fight pheromones, especially since that's his purpose: female crowd control.  I ran into the female version of him, succubi, a few days back, and those girls had every male in camp staring at them, from ghouls to Transcended." My expression grew thoughtful. "But I might have a way around both his reluctance to lose command and his biochemical control over you." That grabbed her interest. "How??"  Greta asked, eyes wide with curiosity as she looked at me. "I'll tell you, right after I get some damn pants and a shirt.  This whole diaper thing is starting to annoy me."  I said with a grimace and she laughed. Thankfully the summoner had access to what little clothing supplies the camp had available and she was able to get me a set of clothing that more or less fit.  And as she was hunting that gear down, I took the opportunity to reset the tent she showed me.  So when she returned several minutes later, she found a properly erected tent in place of the bedraggled thing that she had left behind. I heard a low whistle of astonishment from inside as I was fixing the last couple of items I found in there including, surprisingly enough, a cot.  Since Risen don't need to sleep, it raised the question as to why a cot would be present.  I pushed the thought aside and stepped outside to find Greta, Chris and Mick standing there, each with an armful of clothing. "Max, you know how to put up a tent."  Chris said with a grin before he stepped forward to drop the clothing he had into my arms.  "I think I need you to come over and show me how it's done.  Mine looks like shite."

"Yeah, mine too, bro."  Mick added as he gave me his load of clothing too.  "Sorry about bringing the whole store; we didn't know your size so just grabbed anything that looked close to Greek God." I chuckled at that. "I swear, I wasn't this cut in real life beyond my time in the army.  The Risen reboot is to blame."  I said with a grin, earning laughs from all three. "You were in the army, mate?"  Chris said with a look of interest as I stepped into the tent to quickly put my clothing in a pile.  I then began to dress, talking as I did. "Yeah.  Greta and I were just talking about that.  I did tours in Afghanistan and Iraq as an American SOCOM Ranger." "Damn, that's some next level shit."  Mick said with an amazed shake of his head.  "Fighting behind enemy lines with minimal support and everything."  His expression became thoughtful.  "I read about those wars.  Multinational forces spearheading efforts to remove religious extremists and a dictator, right?" "Respectively, yes."  I replied, stepping back out of the tent, tugging straight the baggy sweatshirt I had pulled on over a tee-shirt.  It finished off the tattered, over-sized look I apparently favored out of the offerings they brought me.  One look at the pile had me silently vowing to find the nearest military base I could find to raid their quartermaster stores.  The military gear was so much more comfortable and functional than these hand me downs. "The multinational force did a fair amount of stabilizing once the targets were either captured or eliminated.  Infrastructure, security, transportation; we did it all.  My unit was tasked with operations behind enemy lines, supporting Special Forces, scouting and suppression duty." Chris nodded as I listed off what I had done during my time in the military. "Impressive list.  And certainly something we could use here."  He gestured at Mick and Greta.  "This is all we got, in terms of Transcended.  I mean, we came over with a couple animus and another javelin, but we lost those guys in the skirmishes we've been having with the aliens since our failed mission." I frowned as I came to a halt beside the British javelin. "So no teslas or wraiths."  I said, getting a shake of the head from all three with each.  "And Greta already said you lot weren't assigned a psyren." "Were we supposed to?"  Mick asked, curious.  "I mean, we got assembled in what was left of the UK.  I died over there about a hundred years before the invasion as an ex-pat American, having married a British girl.  And so when I was summoned, I ended up being over there already.  And none of the Transcended teams I saw there had these other types you mentioned." "Same."  Chris said.  "'Cept it was my bloody country, born and raised.  No ex-pat shite for me." "Whatever, man."  Mick fired back, preparing to further defend his case, which forced Chris to brace for another round of sparring banter.  Seeing it coming, I held up a forestalling hand. "Seriously, boys, I don't give a shit where you came from or how you got there."  I interjected.  "All I care about is the here and now." "Sorry."  Mick said apologetically, Chris quickly echoing him as Greta fought to keep a smile off her face. I nodded to acknowledge the apology then pressed on. "We definitely got ourselves a situation here.  Not to put too fine a point on it, but you kids are in the shit.  Starting with your boss, the incubus." "Screw that guy."  Mick hissed, his face twisting with distaste. "Aye, Jeremiah is a turd."  Chris added, both comments making my eyebrows lift in curiosity.

"Not fans, I see.  I'm sure you have your reasons.  Not that it matters; we're working around our demonic so Greta here isn't forced to choose." The two javelins threw the summoner dirty looks, making her blush defensively. "Don't rush to blame her."  I quickly instructed.  "Incubi use pheromones to control female subjects and it's hard to fight biochemistry.  Especially as Transcended, filled as we are with goa, which makes biochemistry possible." "As long as we no longer have to deal with that dirt bag, I'm all for it."  Mick flatly announced.  "You certainly seem to have a lot more going on, Max.  I'm with you from this point on, man." "As am I."  Chris said, looking expectantly over at Greta, who only blushed more. "Don't expect her full support until we break Jeremiah's hold on her."  I flatly stated.  "Now, we need reinforcements and we need them quick.  Any shamblers around?" "You mean those poor sods that didn't get enough goa to come all the way back?"  Chris asked and I nodded.  "Yeah, they seem to hover around the camp.  Not doing anything really; just stumbling around and moaning.  Why?" I grinned. "These poor sods are our ticket to instant reinforcements."  I began.  Before I could continue, however, there were several throaty shouts from the west part of the ragged encampment.  That was swiftly followed by the characteristic snarls of velkin weapon discharge. "Damn!"  Mick said, summoning his weapon.  "Sounds like the aliens managed to track us back here anyway." "Doesn't matter."  I said, feeling my absolute density climb as I went juggernaut. "They're all going to be dead in a couple minutes." There were ghoul and lich bodies everywhere by the time we reached the western wall.  Massive velkin hunters were amongst them, methodically shooting off their heads as they penetrated past the wall.  Here and there knots of Risen desperate fought back, their slug throwers rattling as they hurled streams of heated metal at the armored hunters.  And, as the original human soldiers discovered when they tried to do the same to the velkin during the initial invasion, they watched their jacketed slugs carom harmlessly off the hunters' armor. "Mick, Chris, get their attention."  I curtly commanded. "Right."  Chris replied, weapon coming up, Mick right beside him.  Then their goa-forged weapons were firing, hurling bolts of energy possessing the power to get through that armor. One of the giant hunters went down immediately, a smouldering hole in the side of its helmet.  A heart beat later another went down, a blast hole in its chest. That was enough to get their attention. "Uh oh."  Mick stammered as several big velkin rifles came up and took aim at them. "My turn."  I grated and darted forward. I was a blur of grim intent, smashing through the lead alien line as they desperately tried to adjust to my speed and angle.  Giant bodies tumbled in every direction in a now familiar pattern as I crushed legs on my way through.  A step beyond the wall, I saw the transports they had come in and immediately angled for those. The first exploded in a massive fireball as I ripped through the power plant.  The second I chopped into three pieces before hopping up onto the roof and stomping the whole thing flat.  And the third got its front end crushed before I flipped the back end over on top of it.  Then I was heading back to address the remaining hunters, who were slowly staggering back to their feet and looking around to see where I had gone. By the time they located me, I was already ripping my way through their ranks on my return trajectory.  With eight down in the first assault, and another ten in the second, their broken bodies pinwheeling away from my charging form, that left only a dozen or so.  And each one of them opened up on me as I dug in to stop my second run, sending dirt and rocks spraying away from me.  Shedding the plasma fire, I surged forward once more. This run, I watched Chris and Mick make their shots count, with the hunters' attention focused on me.  Five of the dozen remaining hunters were already dropping as I made my last pass, their armor perforated by the javelins' accurate fire.  Then, as abruptly as it had begun, it was over, the last velkin brokenly collapsing to the ground. With nods of acknowledgement for a job well done, the javelins joined me in dispatching any that managed to live through the all-out counterattack.  They put a bolt in each survivor's head, while I used my maxed out absolute density to crush those same heads with a guillotine knee. Greta was already examining the downed Risen in and around the broken wall to see if any were recoverable when we returned. "These aliens knew what they were doing."  She said, carefully coming to her feet to dust off her hands.  "A single shot to the head, separating it from the rest of the body, snuffs out a Risen's ability to hold on to goa, effectively killing them again."  A gesture took in the body-littered battle field. "None of these Risen are recoverable.  And that's almost a fifth of Jeremiah's total force here." "Makes it that much more important to get reinforcements then."  I bluntly pointed out.  I looked over at a handful of liches that had made a stand behind a makeshift barrier of wood and sheet metal as they stepped out from behind cover to morosely look at all of their comrades that were down. "Let the liches take care of the fallen.  Lead me to your shamblers and I'll show you what I mean!" Several minutes later the four of us were hunkered down behind some bushes as we watched some 200 shamblers milling around just south of the base.  I frowned as I watched their aimless movements, my mind churning. According to Tovin, shamblers were attracted to life force, the kind generated by living creatures instead of goa, the more pure form.  If that was a Risen base, then the creatures inside would be fueled by goa, not life force.  So what was bringing these shamblers here, if no life force was available?? "Has there always been all of these shamblers close to the base??"  I asked, looking over at the other three.  The javelins quickly shrugged, not having paid attention to the comings and goings of shamblers. Greta, however, was much more thoughtful as she mulled over my question. "From what I remember arriving last year, their numbers then were actually quite small.  Only after Jeremiah took command, did they actually start to climb." Oh really.  My eyes narrowed as I considered for a moment what Charge had said about demonics and their needs and purposes.  From what we had seen at Retribution, the shamblers seemed to have a desire to stick around the cull camps, where lots of humans were found at various times.  So, unless Jeremiah kept a petting zoo of live animals in there, which I highly doubted, there was only one other possibility to explain why so many shamblers were attracted to this spot. I just hoped he wasn't stupid enough to somehow smuggle living humans into a Risen camp.

 

Pandora's Box

If Jeremiah had done such a thing, it would explain the velkin interest.  The hunters would literally be able to smell the living from a good distance away, as a predator scented its prey.  And it would explain the horde of shamblers I was now looking at.  I only hoped I was wrong; to have living humans underfoot like that would be a nightmare to deal with. I sighed and grimly pushed the issue to the back of my mind.  There would be time enough to deal with that later.  Now I had to focus on getting a new crop of second gens going, or face an uphill battle against aggressive enemy forces.  A battle I would be fighting with just me, two javelins and a compromised summoner. "Okay, we need to separate one of those shamblers from the others."  I said, lips pursed thoughtfully before looking over at Chris and Mick.  "Since velkin have recently been active in and around the base, I need you two to stand watch while I go out and get one."  I looked over at Greta.  "Once I secure a test subject, probably by knocking it out, if it can be knocked out, I need you to pull up the template for a Transcended psyren." "Template?"  Chris looked puzzled as he looked from me, to Greta, then back again.  Greta returned his look for a moment then nodded. "Each summoner has all the Risen templates, which dictates the level of goa each Risen type needs to function at that level, along with their physical parameters and functionality."  She quickly explained.  "The templates are hardwired into a summoner's brain as part of their template.  We use them as our healing paradigm where we use goa to reattach limbs, regrow limbs and repair all damage, great or small." "No shit."  Mick grinned.  "You learn something every day." "That's because you didn't know anything to begin with."  Chris quickly delivered his shot before I silenced him with a hard look. "Stay frosty."  I said as I stood.  "If the velkin catch me napping out there, I'm coming directly back to talk to you two after I drop them in a deep hole." Leaving the two javelins with nervous looks on their faces, I quickly walked towards the nearest shambler cluster.  Again, as I approached, I marveled at how closely these creatures resembled the zombies you saw in the movies.  Shuffling in vague circles, a number of them were moaning in low, gutteral voices as I approached.  Yet, since I didn't have the muddled life force that living creatures used to get around with, they had no interest in me. I walked into their midst as they ignored me, looking at a number of them.  Which one?  Which one could be a psyren?  It had to be female; Boost tried pushing a psyren template onto a male and it just slipped right off and refused to be pinned down, like trying to catch smoke with his bare hands. There, that one.  I pushed through the unresisting shamblers to the one I had picked.  'Here's hoping you're a girl.'  I thought then rapped it hard on its mostly naked skull. Of course it didn't even react, continuing to moan and shuffle as if I not only hadn't hit it, but wasn't even there. "Fan-frickin'-tastic."  I growled.  If I couldn't knock it out, how was I supposed to bring it back to where Greta and the javelins were waiting?  Damn it, where was Tovin when I really needed her. That, of course, brought up the question I'd been avoiding since I woke up on the forest as a crispy critter: where exactly was I?  And where were all my people from Retribution?  And the grand daddy of them all: just how the hell did I get here?? I stared at the shambler as it shifted under my hand, not trying to get away per se, just not able to keep still.  I couldn't let the questions bog me down.  Not with velkin breathing down these guys' neck.  I needed second gens, and quick.  Once that happened, I promised myself I would get the answers to those questions, and more. 

So yet again, I pushed them into the back of my mind and readdressed the puzzle as to how I was going to get this thing back to my summoner.  Unfortunately, if I couldn't knock it out, there really was only one way.  I went juggernaut and reached into the shambler's empty body to take hold of its spine, a dry, dead-meat covered column of shifting bone.  Then I simply picked it up like a doll and began walking back to where Greta and the javelins waited. "Man, that looks creepy."  Mick commented as I walked up, the shambler twitching in my hand, limbs still moving as it tried to walk in the air. "Try holding it."  I suggested with a grimace.  "It's like a possessed ventriloquist's dummy, with a mind of it's own." Greta stood with a grimace of her own, carefully avoiding the weakly flailing limbs. "Now, what exactly do you want me to do with this, . . . thing?"  She asked. "First, check if it's male or female."  I instructed, keeping the shambler at arm's length.  Greta's hands began to glow and she moved closer to the shambler.  A second later: "It's female."  She reported, looking expectantly over at me.  I heaved a sigh of relief. "Okay, good.  Now, I need you to take the psyren template and pin it onto her goa structure." "And how do I do that?"  She asked, hands still glowing as she stared at the shambler. "Mentally take the template you see in your mind's eye, superimpose it onto where you see the shambler's template and will it to stay while channeling your healing goa."  My eyebrow lifted at seeing the confused look on Greta's face.  Why was she having so much trouble with the concept, when Boost took to it like a duck to water?  It better not be because she was compromised by the incubus or I was going to beat that demonic into a pulp. "You need to push it into place with your mind while channeling your goa."  I said, trying to clarify and I frowned when Greta's nod was uncertain.  "Just give it a shot and see what happens." Nodding once more, the summoner extended her hands and I felt the bone beneath my fingers warm as she began to push goa into the shambler. "I,...I don't see a template to superimpose over."  She stammered after a brief pause.  "The place where I normally see it, is empty." "Then put the psyren one there."  I instructed, the shambler wiggling in my hand. "Okay, I think it's placed.  Now what?"  She threw a quick glance over at me. "Now use me as a goa battery to push enough goa into the shambler to achieve the template's parameters." Again she threw a quick look at me and only when I nodded  to confirm what I just said, did she extend her hands once more.  I then felt goa begin to leave me and flesh immediately began to appear on the ragged skeleton I had in my hand. I waited until flesh was starting to close around my hand before I put the shambler down.  Stunned by its abrupt change in status, it actually stayed in one spot, quivering as the rest of its body filled in.  To maintain the flow of goa, I reached out and put my hand on the now rebuilt shoulder and watched as the rest of the body filled in, skin, muscles, organs, all appearing with a shimmer of channeled goa. And then she was done, her black hair wet as she shivered in front of me.  I quickly pulled off my sweatshirt and slipped it over her head. "Where,...where am I?"  She stammered with a soft Asiatic accent, twisting to look over her shoulder at me.

I smiled reassuringly. "Don't worry, you're with, . . ."  Then my brain exploded as a massive telepathic probe pushed itself into my mind. Images, sensations and feelings all streaked by my mind's eye as the probe shifted through my memory, a seething mass of color and sound that threatened to overwhelm me.  Instead of giving in to it, though, I pushed back.  I pushed back with everything I had, forcing the surge of information to slow, to focus on the here and now, instead of the memories of the past. The probe took that in, too.  I could feel it examining my mind, how it was laid out, how my will gave it structure and substance. Then, as abruptly as it had stormed into my mind, the probe was gone, leaving me a little dizzy. "I'm so sorry, Max."  The petite woman standing in front of me, wrapped up in my sweatshirt quietly said.  "I,... I just needed to know." Shaking my head to clear it of the cobwebs her probe left behind, I pasted on a weak smile. "That's okay.  As long as it put you in the right frame of mind to understand what has transpired here, . . ." She slowly nodded. "I believe it has."  With every word she spoke, I could hear her confidence growing.  "I am Risen, summoned back by the Earth Mother to fight a war against the alien velkin, before they destroy everything." "And your past life?" "Is in the past."  She firmly replied.  "What has happened, has happened.  I must look forward, to the end when we will defeat the velkin and free our world.  Only then will I be released, to return to my slumber, my soul passing on to the next world." "And do you know what you are?"  I again prompted, hoping she had drawn that out of my mind during her probe. Again her answer was firm and confident. "I am a Transcended psyren, wielder of psionic power and ability."  Her elfin features, as perfect as a porcelain doll, flashed me a quick smile. "You can call me Chi." I nodded in satisfaction, a smile of my own creasing my lips. "Welcome back to the world, Chi."  I held out my hand, which she took without hesitation. "Thank you, Max."  Chi replied, her smile bright. "Amazing."  Greta breathed in astonishment, eyes wide as she stared at Chi.  "To bring her out of that shambler form, and to have her so balanced, . . . I can hardly believe it." It was Chi, however, that replied to that. "You can thank our friend, the juggernaut."  She said, with a look to me and a nod.  "It was his balanced mind that granted me balance, even as his memories and thoughts answered every question I could have about being Risen and a psyren.  It settled me enough that I can accept what I have become, even as I look forward to defeating the velkin and earning my return to the Earth Mother's bosom." Greta could only shake her head in astonishment at that, Chi's quiet yet confident and determined answer only adding to her amazement.  Unfortunately I didn't have the luxury of time to wait for her to pull her jaw up off the floor. "Suck it up, Greta."  I bluntly instructed.  "We're not even close to being done here.  Prep your other templates; we'll rotate them through so we can get as many of each kind as we possibly can."  Then I was switching to Chi. "And Chi, I need you to bring each in, hold it in place while Greta applies the new template, then telepathically fill them in and rebalance their psyche so we don't have any more Lost or Forgotten.  We can ill afford to waste any more opportunities the Earth Mother has given us." "On it."  Chi replied, already exuding that quiet serenity that seemed to go hand in hand with being a psyren.  She turned and looked at the throng of shamblers and one immediately began making it's awkward, shuffling way towards us. Satisfied that the ball was rolling, I looked over at a stunned Chris and Mick. "I need you boys to head back to my tent and grab all the clothes I didn't use there.  Once you drop them off here, I then need you to raid the stores you originally got them from and bring the rest.  We're about to have a couple hundred naked people here that will need something to cover them up!" "Rodger that."  Chris bounced up, grabbing Mick by the arm to pull him up too.  "We'll be back shortly." "Make it quick, boys."  I gruffly pointed out as a second Transcended started taking shape from the shambler Chi had brought in.  "We'll have a whole company ready by the time you get back." Which wasn't far from the truth; Greta reformatted a couple more psyrens and summoners right off the bat to help her with upgrade process.  That impressed me.  I thought she was so far gone with her pheromone corruption, that she couldn't think straight.  Perhaps channeling all that goa burned some of the corruption out, I don't know.  Either way, she worked harder and faster with each reformat that we were flying by the midway point. As the group of shamblers dwindled and the number of Transcended multiplied, Chi dedicated more psyrens to balancing out the newcomers to keep the process going smoothly forward.  And, with only a couple exceptions that I was called in to help with, Chi using my mind as a template to rebuild the broken minds she was working with, it did indeed go very smoothly. Afternoon was falling as the last of the shamblers were reformatted, a pair of wraiths that nearly shuddered in relief to find themselves released from their shambler downgrades.  I quickly looked over 200 second gen Transcended with not a little satisfaction.  We had javelins and ballistas, summoners, teslas, psyrens, wraiths and animus.  We even had a couple of juggernauts, thanks to me showing the all-or-none upgrade protocol to one of the second gen summoners that seemed to have quite a bit of skill.  It was Retribution, rebooted. "Well."  I said quietly.  'That went far better than I had hoped." Beside me a tired Greta nodded. "100% conversion is a pretty good rate."  She agreed.  "Now, the question is: are you going to tell Jeremiah about them?" I looked over at her, knowing it was her corruption that was forcing her to ask.  And, for a moment, I debated whether or not to tell her, knowing I ran the risk she'd make a beeline for his tent and tell him everything. Then my face tightened.  Screw Jeremiah.  If that incubus abuser wants to lord it over a handful of liches, he can have his empire of shit.  I had better things to do than worry about what that maggot was going to do next. I've got velkin to kill.

 

Max's Marauders

The second gens crowded around me, looking expectantly in my direction.  They were a motley looking lot, many of the males wearing only ragged, cut-off pants, some of the females with pieces of cloth wrapped around their breasts for a modicum of modesty.  I so needed to get them gear.  Time to call on what passed for experts on the surrounding territory. "Chris, Mick."  I called out and the two javelins pushed their way to the front.  "You have a good sense of the surrounding territory.  Any old human military bases nearby?" Mick looked like he had no idea, a puzzled look on his face as he mulled my question over.  Chris, on the other hand, was a bit better informed. "We saw one on the way in."  He said with a thoughtful nod.  "Maybe a day or two's worth of travel on foot from here.  The tossers hit it from orbit, turning half into glass and ash.  But the other half looked fairly intact." "I hope it's the half we need."  I said musingly.  "Okay, second question: did you see any giant black and silver millipedes there as you went by?" "Giant bugs??"  Chris frowned, caught a bit off guard by my question.  "Not that I can recall.  You're not seriously telling me you have." I grimly nodded. "A second alien race the velkin brought with them by accident, called the K'ethik.  They're bio-mechanical in nature, essentially organic robots.  They hit hard, they're not picky about who they attack and the velkin can't beat them short of firing on them with their big guns in orbit."  I lifted my voice to address the entire company. "If any of you come across these giant robotic insects in the future, contact me or any available juggernaut immediately.  Consider the K'ethik your enemies and extremely dangerous.  In my experience, only juggernauts have been able to handle them.  Is that clear?" "Yes, sir."  The company said in unison before quietly talking amongst themselves about this newest threat. "Okay, so it looks like the base is clear of K'ethik.  We now need to jump the entire company there in the hopes that the base's quartermaster is still largely intact.  We'll find clothing and essential equipment there."  Again I lifted my voice.  "I need everybody to break up into teams of ten with at least one psyren, one tesla and one summoner per group.  Brin, Dack;" The two second gen juggernauts we managed to reformat immediately looked up, a fresh faced Caucasian woman with light brown hair that looked like she might have been a cheerleader in her previous life, and an East Indian male respectively. "Stagger yourself every third team to give us maximum coverage." "No problem, Max."  Brin said brightly in a pleasant soprano while Dack smiled and nodded.  He wasn't so much for words, which suited me just fine.  Juggernauts didn't talk.  We smashed shit.  Enough said. Thanks to Chi getting a military way of thinking from me when she used my mind as a stabilizing agent for her own troubled mind, then passing that on to everybody else, the entire company moved quickly and smoothly to do as I had directed.  In a matter of moments we were divided into twenty teams of ten, each team with psyrens, teslas and summoners. "Chris, think of the location so Chi can pull it from your mind."  I said, the British javelin, Mick and Greta in my team, along with Chi, the first we had recovered in this reboot of Retribution. "Done."  He announced, and Chi nodded. - Setting coordinates now. -  Her telepathic voice came over broadband as she passed the coordinates to the other psyrens.  - Stand by for teleport. -  Then:

- Go. -  And the forest and Jeremiah's tattered camp winked out of existence and the worn and weathered remains of another NADF base appeared around us. - Scan for any active signals, Chi. -  I kept things on the broadband, in case the base was compromised.  - Javelins, ballistas, ready your weapons. -  I gave the battered buildings on every side a good look over, each showing signs of that initial orbital bombardment that had destroyed a good chunk of the base. Thankfully one building that wasn't damaged too heavily, was the quartermaster's, almost straight ahead. - Target sighted. -  I went juggernaut as I began to move forward.  - Stay on my six and pay attention to your visual scanning.  Same with you psyrens.  I don't want anything bigger than a cricket sneaking up on us! - The other teams began jumping in behind us and by the time we had gone a hundred metres, the entire company was there, moving forward in ready crouches with the javelins and the ballistas weapons up. - Animus scouts, any of the local wildlife report unusual activity? -  I sent and there was a mental ripple as the question was passed to each team. - Heavy velkin activity, sir, almost continuously for the last few months. -  A male voice replied.  - The deer have been spooked by their transports. - - I have several raptors confirming the same thing, sir. -  A female voice added.  "Along with a number of larger, space-capable vessels. - Awesome.  I felt my fists clench almost of their own violition.  That could mean there was an actual velkin base nearby, perhaps even a transport hub. - Have they seen anything recently? -  I asked but before I could get an answer, there was an alert that rippled over the psyren network. - We've got multiple signals approaching from the south. -  A psyren reported from that direction.  - At least fifty hunters in four transports. -  There was a pause, then:  - They are moving into the base. - Shit!  Had they spotted us?  Maybe because we were so close to a velkin base, they had eyes on from orbit.  Either way, we needed to deal with these guys, and quick.  We needed those supplies and not even a hundred gobbies were going to keep us from them. - Animus, does the wildlife report the velkin passing through the base on a regular basis? - - Confirmed, sir. -  The male voice that initially spoke, said.  - The deer see them passing through the base at least two or three times a day. - 'Nice one, Chris.'  I thought darkly.  'You found us a base that also happens to be a velkin road.'  At least the silver lining was that we hadn't been spotted by active scanning from orbit.  Which meant no rain of fire dropping down to burn us to ash.  I'd had enough burning to last a thousand undead lifetimes, thank you very much. - All teams, move into cover amongst the buildings now!  Ballistas and javelins, take up positions to open fire on the enemy transports as soon as they are within firing range.  Psyrens and summoners, the building that is our primary objective is directly ahead of Team One.  It will become our fallback if the enemy force proves to be untenable.  All wraiths, penetrate the objective and all buildings within fifty metres radius and sweep for hidden obstacles.  Let's move, people, move! - The wraiths in my team ran past me at full speed, cloaking as they went, aiming directly for the quartermasters storehouse.  At the same time Chris, Mick and the other javelins in the team slowed, bringing their weapons to the ready as they began looking to the south.

- Team leader, One A and One B have penetrated the building. -  One of the wraiths that had scampered ahead, reported. - We are seeing no movement, no sign of occupation. - - Copy that.  Primary stores are on the main level, back of the building.  Proceed to that location and secure. - - Acknowledged, team leader.  One A and One B, out. - The rumbling sound of velkin ground thrusters reached my ears at the same time another alert came rippling over the broadband: - We have visual contact.  Targets are in ballista range, fifty metres and closing to javelin range.  Are we go to engage? -  That was in the clipped voice of one of the ballistas in the southern most team. - As soon as the targets are within javelin range, all units are cleared to engage. -  I sent.  - I repeat, as soon as they are in range, you are green to engage. - - Copy that, team leader.   Thirty metres and closing. - "Let's go, guys."  I said out loud.  "We need to be inside that storehouse now.  The fireworks are about to start!" We were just slipping into the building's dusty and grimy lobby when the first ballistas opened up  along the south perimeter, their throaty discharge quickly joined by the higher-pitched snarls of the javelins. - Team leader, we have engaged. -  Came the curt report and I heard the velkin return fire, the bark of their rifles ripping through the air in counterpoint to the smoother discharge of the goa-forged weapons. "Max!"  Chi had moved forward to where the wraiths had managed to unlock the gate barring the way into the main warehouse. Jogging deeper into the building, I nodded in satisfaction to see the storehouse was packed full of the massive equipment pods we had been using at Retribution. "Bingo."  I husked.  Then a bit louder: "Prep 'em for jump out, Chi.  I want every one of these damn things jumped to the shambler field behind Jeremiah's base." "No problem, Max."  Chi moved closer, examining the nearest pod for a moment.  Then it winked out of sight, and she moved to the next one. - Max, it's Brin. -  Even Brin's mental voice had that bouyant cheerleader-level energy.  - Dack and I are in position to assist the javelins and ballistas.  Are we cleared for ground assault? - - Max your densities and make 'em cry, Brin. -  I quickly fired back and I could almost hear her giggle. - You got it, boss.   We are engaging. -  And a heart beat later explosions began to pepper the sounds of weapon fire. For a brief moment I fought the impulse to go and join them before stifling it.  Getting these supplies was more important than smashing out aliens, . . . barely. "Chi?"  I looked into the storage space and saw nearly a quarter of the pods had been jumped out. "Getting there, Max."  The petite psyren reported, snapping another one out of sight.  She was fast, but not fast enough. - I need two more psyrens in the storehouse, pronto! -  I sent over the broadband.  And I was immediately rewarded with the soft pop of displacement as two jumped in, one in cutoffs and a wrap, the other in a shirt with the sleeves ripped off and baggy jeans. "Those pods need transport back to Jeremiah's base."  I said, pointing at the mass of massive grey cylinders still packing the space.  "Get the coordinates from Chi and commence your jump outs." "Yes, sir."  The psyrens said in unison before they moved forward to join the petite Chi.  And almost immediately the pods began leaving in groups of three.

- Southern perimeter, status report. - - We have finished chopping them to pieces, sir. -  That was the ballista who had spoken earlier.  - Javelins are moving in to finish them off.  But our psyrens are picking up signals moving in from the north.  They may have gotten off a distress signal. - - Copy that. - I shifted mental gears slightly.  - Chris, Mick, lead Team Two, Three and Four to the north and set up a kill box.  If those gobbies get too close, ventilate them. - - Rodger that. -  Chris replied.  - We are on the move. - Nodding in satisfaction, I glanced back to where the psyrens still worked.  Good: halfway done. - Team leader, south perimeter clean up is done.  All teams are moving to reinforce Two, Three and Four at the northern approach. -  The ballista's voice reported.  I nodded in satisfaction, thinking I should get his name.  He seemed like a competent fellow. - Copy that. -  I sent and once again glanced into the storehouse.  Another handful were gone, leaving just over a third left.  Unfortunately I didn't think we were going to get them out of here before, . . . - Max, it's Chris. -  The British javelin announced on broadband.  - We have visual on the boogies and they are closing fast.  Five transports worth.  Estimate they'll be within firing range in about a minute.  Are we cleared to engage? - - I need more than a minute to get the last of these supplies out, kids. -  I sent back.  - Keep them off our backs for another ten. - - Rodger that. -  Chris replied.  - Thirty seconds and closing. - I mentally began to count down in my head.  Five, four, three, two and one, . . . and I smiled when I heard the ballistas and javelins fire.  They were quickly joined by the sound of exploding power plants, meaning Brin and Dack had also moved north to engage the enemy. Then the last of the supply pods were gone and the three psyrens were striding towards me. "All clear, Max."  Chi reported, the other two nodding in agreement. "Outstanding."  I said with a smile.  - All teams, stand by to withdraw.  Mission objective has been achieved.  Psyrens, lock your targets, priority queue to any wounded, and begin jump outs on my mark. - I indicated that the psyrens should follow me as I began walking towards the building entrance.  We were quickly joined by the two wraiths that had been scouting through the building to make sure we remained undisturbed during our collecting.  As we walked, I listened to the sounds of battle to the north.  Already it was fading, indicating that we had gained the upper hand.  A final couple of explosions then silence.  That was my cue. - Psyrens, begin your jump outs now. -  And I looked over at Chi.  "We leave only after everybody else is clear."  I indicated and she immediately nodded her understanding.  "If you two need to be elsewhere, . . ."  I began to say to the other two psyrens and they immediately shook their heads. "We made sure our teams were accounted for before we joined you here, sir."  The one, an African woman with the fine facial bones and high forehead of the northern tribes, added in the lilting accent of her people. I nodded in appreciation.  Good thinking, there.  Then turned as the doors to the front of the building opened and Chris and Mick jogged through, along with a handful of javelins and wraiths. "Northern perimeter has been cleared, Max."  Mick reported as the small group came to a halt around me, the psyrens and the Team One wraiths. "Good."  I looked at Chi.  "Jump status?"

She paused long enough to consult with her sister psyrens then she was looking back at me. "That was the last group to jump out, Max.  Just us now." "Excellent.  Take us back to camp, Chi."  And the battered lobby disappeared in a wink of light and sound. A heart beat later we were standing in the leaf litter, under the trees behind Jeremiah's camp.  A few metres away the supply pods were neatly stacked in a number of rows. "Okay, guys, excellent work back there!"  I called out.  "Give yourselves a hand for your first successful incursion against the velkin!"  And the company broke out with cheers and clapping, some patting each other on the back in congratulations. "Unfortunately we don't have time to properly celebrate as this camp is an active target for velkin patrols.  And now that we've stirred the hornet's nest by defeating not one, but two separate velkin forces, they're going to come looking for us.  So let's get ready for them!  I need five volunteers to serve as quartermasters so we can get this gear handed out."  I looked back at the pods as a forest of hands lifted behind me, virtually the entire company volunteering.  I did some quick math as I recalled how much each general supply pod held, versus the electronics pod, and logistics pod.  Thankfully we had a good number of each. "We should have enough for, . . whoa."  I said with a grin, turning around to see every hand up, including Chi, Greta, Chris and Mick.  "Now, now, not all at once."  I quickly pointed to five standing nearby. "You lot.  Now let's get these pods cracked open and these supplies handed out.  Four sets of clothing, top to bottom, for each person, with appropriate under garments for each." As the ad hoc quartermasters stepped forward to open the pods and begin sorting through the gear inside, I raised my voice again. "While our quartermasters sort through and prep to hand out the clothing and equipment, I need a team of javelins, ballistas and animus to scout out the surrounding territory to find us a camp seperate from this one." Again a forest of hands shot up.  I quickly selected ten or eleven of them and waved them in close. "Give me a spot that's defensible, preferably on raised ground, with enough space to construct a good sized camp on it." "Yes, sir."  They said in unison and, after getting their gear from the quartermaster and changing into more appropriate clothing, they were off. "Now I need the teslas."  And I was quickly surrounded by twenty second gen teslas.  "Okay, you lot are my electronics package, running my surveillance and data operations.  I need you to bust open the pods with the electronics in them, do an inventory then mock me up some command work station clusters and networks.  If we're going to fight this war, we're going to need eyes and ears on the world." "We're on it, sir."  One of the teslas, a bright eyed sandy brown haired woman said, the others nodding in agreement.  Then they too were off, after getting their gear and equipping themselves properly. And finally: "Greta, can you grab the other summoners for me?"  Nodding, she ran off through what was left of the company, gathering up the dozen or so summoners that we had before returning. "Thanks."  I said to her before I addressed everybody.  "Now, what I want from you folks is, after we get a camp location pinned down and start setting things up, I need you guys to put together a med center for me.  A place where a field hospital will be located, as well as any study and research we need to do.  Think you can do that for me?"  I smiled when every one of them, including Greta, nodded, excitement appearing on their faces.  I knew from serving as a goa battery to bring each and every one of them back from shamblerhood, none of them were doctors in their previous life.  So the opportunity to serve as healers in their new lives as Risen, was pretty damn exciting for them.  I certainly wanted them to get the most out of it.  Not to mention, they would be needing the practice for when we actually jumped back into the shit and started trading big shots with the enemy. "Outstanding.  Now, most of what you'll need to set up a functional field hospital is located in the logistics pods.  We'll get you to go and sort through there now, with a mind towards picking things out that'll benefit Transcended, like portable operating rooms, lighting, space heaters, blankets and the like.  Dressings, antibiotics, stitching; that's for the living.  And we won't be needing that right now.  We'll leave those materials in the pods.  Any questions?  Great!  I'll let you go to it!"  And then the summoners were off, talking excitedly amongst themselves about the possibility of actually running a field hospital. I grinned as I watched them move off. "You've certainly taken this motley lot and pointed them in the right direction, mate."  Chris quietly commented as he came to a halt beside me to watch as the rest of the company got their equipment allotments from the quartermasters. "This looks more organized or equipped than anything we were doing over in Europe."  He looked over at me.  "Whatever twist of fate threw you into our laps, I'm thankful for it.  Now we actually have a fighting chance against the enemy here, with you in charge." I chuckled dryly at that. "Just doing my part, Chris."  I said, returning his look.  "I was summoned for the same reason as you were: to fight the war against the velkin.  If I got some extra skills and experience to bring to the party, I'm going to do just that." "Which is why I'm grateful, mate."  He looked back out over the company, most of which were now properly clothed and equipped, most of them in loose knots as they talked about their new clothing and gear with smiles on their faces. "You're going to turn this bunch into a real army, you are."  I chuckled again as I looked over him and he grinned. "We just need to give this army a good, proper name.  Let me see,...how about the Risen Rejects?  No?  The Intrepid Transcended.  Naw, too many syllables. Oh, I got it!"  He snapped his fingers.  "Max's Marauders!" I laughed out loud at that. "You know, that has a bit of a ring to it.  I like it!"  I looked over the company of second gens I had just commanded to victory, as capable as the troops I had left behind at Fort Retribution. "Max's Marauders, it is." Chris nodded, his smile growing. "May we never fail!"

 

Fallen Angels

I looked at the neat row of tents that marked the barracks dominating the south part of the new camp the Marauders had set up five kilometres to the northwest of Jeremiah's camp.  Swinging west we had the field hospital, north was the command tent and the east I set aside for the armory.  All around me Transcended worked, setting up the perimeter fence, an EMF barrier we found in the logistics pods.  It would form a diffusion bubble around the camp, making it harder to spot with sensors.  A bit of stealthiness was never a bad thing. The growl of velkin thrusters in the distance pulled my attention in that direction and I lifted a pair of binoculars to my eyes.  There, a trio of transports, packed full of hunters, moving two kilometres south of our new location.  It was the fifth such patrol in the last two hours.  More proof that our attack at the old human base had them rattled. - Chi, can you have the wraiths meet me at the east entrance? - - At once, Max. -  The petite psyren replied, her mental voice already nearly as calm and confident as Tovin's had been when we first met. It didn't take long for the wraiths, a mixed group of men and women, to gather around me at the east gate into the camp.  With a brace of javelins guarding the gate looking on, I began to tell them what I wanted them to do. "I have two missions."  I said, looking around the circle of attentive faces.  "First, I want a handful of you to return to Jeremiah's base and let me know if we're getting more shamblers gathering on the south perimeter.  Second, I need some of you to go down onto that enemy thoroughfare down there and tell me just how often they use it.  And I need to know how much of that thoroughfare is within ten kilometres of the camp." "That's doable, sir."  A Caucasian woman said with a confident nod, her words quickly echoed by the others. "Excellent,.  Decide amongst yourselves who will go, then advise me via broadband."  The wraiths nodded and immediately began discussing the mission parameters as I slipped out of their midst. As I was striding towards the command tent, a flurry of activity as the teslas continued setting up the command center computers and data stores, one of the teslas, a young fellow that looked Mediterranean, walked towards me.  In his hands was some sort of device. "Sir, if I may have a word."  He began when he was close enough to address me. "As long as you can do it while walking."  I replied, not slowing.  The tesla nodded as he stepped in beside me, matching me step for step. "Well, I was a mechanical engineer in my previous life, and died only ten years before the velkin invasion.  And I've gotten my hands on a couple of their weapons this morning.  With the microforge and extruder that came with the logistics pods, I was able to retask some of the tech we took from the enemy." That slowed me down.  I looked over at him. "You found time to do that?"  I asked, curious.  He quickly nodded.  "We divided the command center set up and, with the expertise from my previous life, I was able to complete my task quickly.  I then took a look at the equipment we had in the logistics pod."  The tesla tersely explained.  My eyebrow lifted. "Very not bad, friend.  So, show me what you managed to do with this repurposed tech, . . " "Dante, sir." "Dante.  Impress me, brother.  Show me what you got." Nodding, he pulled out the piece he had in his hands.  Though there was some obvious changes, I recognized the shape.  It was a weapon.

"I call it a Reaper.  I know, a rather done name, but considering what it brings to the table, I felt it appropriate.  Based on velkin tech, I have dual plasma emitters, triple power packs, a three grade step up and an absolute mag contain that has zero leakage." I took the device from Dante's hands with a thoughtful nod, turning it over in my hands.  It was compact and light, far better than the re-engineered rifle Felix had built.  Dante continued to list its capabilities as I looked at the Reaper frame. "It will fire either a concentrated married burst from both emitters, stagger the bursts, or double up single bursts in a variable burst rate, determined by the operator." I looked up from the frame at Dante at that, both eyebrows coming up at the same time. "I've heard similar spec preps during new weapon platform demos."  I said with a slight smile.  "Just what kind of mechanical engineer were you, Dante?" The tesla chuckled quietly. "Sorry, sir, for the slight deception.  I worked as a small and mid-size personal arms specialist for Athena Weapon Systems, a weapons contractor and supplier to the Unified Earth Defense Force."  He admitted with a slight shrug and a deprecating smile It was my turn to chuckle. "Not only a tesla, but a bona fide weapons engineer to boot.  You'll be handy to have around, Dante.  Now, if I can get me an aeronautical engineer, . . ." "Sir?"  Dant's smile widened.  "I think I might be able to help you there, too." She was finishing a series of connectors that completed the last of the computer clusters for the command center when Dante and I walked up. "Zara."  Dante called out and the woman, an honey skinned woman from southeast Asia, turned and looked up. "Dante.  Commander."  She greeted us with a smile as she dusted off her hands, her English flawless and without accent.  "What can I do for you?" "A little bird told me you know something about aeronautical engineering." Zara threw a look in Dante's direction before slowly nodding, her smile fading somewhat. "In my previous life, yes, sir.  I was an airframe specialist with Valkyrie Aerospace, a defense contractor with the Noram government, about 150 years ago." I found myself shaking my head in wonder.  What were the odds that two actual weapons engineers, with military experience, would find themselves being converted into teslas?  Not only that but being incorporated into a guerrilla army, fighting a desperate fight that could absolutely use their skills to help them? "Perfect.  Feel like picking up a little of your old life?  I need someone to design and build a transport and an all purpose fighter, using velkin tech." Zara's smile returned full force, a tired but genuine thing filled with delight. "I would love to, sir.  As long as somebody else designs the electronics package.  I was always terrible at that part." "I'm sure we can find someone that'll be happy to do that."  I assured her.  "Dante here will show you where the microforge and the extruder are.  And we'll start making runs against enemy targets to get you some raw materials and tech to reverse engineer." Leaving the two talking about the microforge, I carried on to the command center, set up in the heart of the large command tent.  There I spotted a pair of teslas hooking up a communications array.

"Can that thing tap into our satellite network?"  I asked after I made my greetings.  The two, both women, quickly nodded. "All we would need is access protocols, sir."  One added, with a confirming nod from the other. I cudgeled my memory for a moment, trying to remember the protocols that Felix had used to access the network.  Ah, there they were!  Grabbing a stylus and a sheet of plastic left over from the packing materials the computer stations came in, I began to quickly jot down the series of numbers and letters that made up the access codes.  I then quickly sketched out the protocols for the satellites we had been using. Once that was done, I looked at the sheet quickly to see if there were any errors.  Huh, not bad for pulling them directly out of my memory. "Try these."  I said, handing the sheet to the nearest tesla.  "Those are the protocols and codes we were using at my previous posting." "Thank you, sir."  The first one that spoke, said.  Pulling up a camp chair, she sat in front of the terminal they had been working on and quickly powered it up.  That done, they activated the communications array, ran a brief test on it, then pointed it at the sky.  It didn't take long for them to capture one of the thousands of signals coming from the satellites still alive up in orbit. Nodding, the tesla who was working the keyboard checked the satellite's identity against the short list I had given them.  Finding it there, she then uploaded the access codes and went through the protocols to establish a link.  Seconds later, data was scrolling over her screen in an unending stream. "Uplink and downlink are secure."  She reported, looking over her shoulder.  "What task do we need the bird to do, sir?" "Eyes on."  I indicated.  "It should be making a sweep over us right about now.  I wouldn't mind seeing where that velkin base is in relation to us and Jeremiah's camp." "Tasking."  The tesla said, her fingers dancing over the control surfaces.  "And there we go." An image appeared on the monitor, a heavily wooded area with some low hills.  On one of the higher hills, I spotted our new camp.  I immediately reached out to tap the hill. "That's us." Nodding, the tesla used our location as a frame of reference and pulled the image back. It didn't take much to spot the sprawl of a massive velkin base to the southeast, just north of the battered human base we had raided for supplies. "Bingo."  She said, highlighting the velkin installation.  She then used her fingers on the touch sensitive screen to draw a line between us and them, data appearing on the screen in response.  "Approximately two hundred kilometres distant to the southeast, sir." "Flag that location to have its image updated each time the bird swings over."  I instructed and, nodding, the tesla sent the commands via the uplink. "Bird is so tasked, sir. That done, I had her swing the satellite's camera back to our small camp so we could take a look at the surrounding territory.  I quickly found the road the velkin were using to the south, the one I had the wraiths watching.  Even as the camera fell on it, I spotted a cluster of enemy transports making their way along the fairly straight road. I pursed my lips thoughtfully at that.  They were going to be a thorn in our side there.  Time to do something about it. "Thank you, ladies.  Carry on establishing links to the other satellites in that list and keep me advised as to what they are looking at."

"Yes, sir."  The two teslas said with bright smiles.  Then I was stepping back out of the tent, mind working furiously. We had as part of our battle plan at Retribution the establishing of perimeters which we would then clear and defend.  With Retribution located out on the plains, to do so would've been a challenge.  Another reason why finding a more defensible location was paramount. Yet Retribution was also several hundred kilometres removed from any large velkin installation, which gave it a bit of a cushion in terms of need to act.  Not so here; with a main enemy transport route within visual of the camp, and a massive base within a single psyren teleport, the threat was immediate.  If we didn't establish a perimeter and defend it vigorously now, they would run us over, as they were in the process of doing to Jeremiah's camp. - Chi, can you get me the ballista that assumed command at the NADF base over the javelins and ballistas?  I didn't quite catch his name. - - No problem, sir.  I have his telepathic imprint from the battle. -  A heart beat later: - You are go for Justice, sir. -  Justice?  An appropriate tag for a hard hitting ballista, I'll grant him that. - Justice, it's Max. - - Yes, sir.  What can I do for you, sir? -  The familiar voice replied. - I liked the way you took command of the javelin and ballista sections during our supply raid on the human base.  I'd like you to take permanent command of those sections, if you would. - - It'd be my honor, sir. -  The ballista immediately replied, a hint of pride in his mental voice.  - I won't let you down. - - Good to hear, Justice.  You carried yourself well in that battle.  Were you military in your last life? - - Maybe in a video game, sir.  I was a quadriplegic, thanks to a childhood accident. -  Damn, this really was a second chance for this guy.  Now his name had a double meaning. - Then kudos to you for adapting so quickly and easily to your new role as a Transcended ballista.  Now, as your first task as section leader, I need you to find me two teams for a couple ops I want rolled out as soon as the wraiths give me their reports.  First, we need to establish a perimeter around the base.  A no-velkin zone I want rigorously enforced. - - That should be no problem, sir. -  Justice instantly responded.  - We certainly have the numbers to set up regular patrols in the woods around the camp.  I'll need to tap the animus though, for their improved night vision and animal comm abilities, to assist us with scouting. - Quickly adapting, indeed. - I can't see a problem with that, Justice.  Go ahead and utilize as many as you see fit. - - Thank you, sir. -  The newly christened ballista commander replied.   - You mentioned two ops, sir? - - Right.  This one is more active.  We're seeing velkin patrols moving on an established route just south of camp.  I want you, . . . - Before I could finish, Chi was chiming in. - Sorry to interrupt, Max, but I've got Whisper on broadband for you from Jeremiah's camp.  Says it's urgent. - I frowned at that.  We would've seen that camp getting hit by velkin, so I knew it wasn't an attack. - Patch them through, Chi. - There was a slight hesitation, then: - Give me a sit rep, Whisper. -  I sent. - Sir, you wanted to know if we saw anything unusual, like another massive accumulation of shambers at Jeremiah's camp. -  It was the Caucasian woman who, at my briefing, said my missions were doable.  - Well, sir, we're seeing that.  And we've just witnessed Jeremiah leading what looked like four human females into a small shack near the south end of the camp, close to where the shamblers are accumulating. - Bingo. I felt my face grimly tighten of its own accord. 'Now we've got you, you filthy piece of shit.' I thought darkly. - Whisper, your mission has now changed.  You will extract any and all living humans from that location immediately.  As soon as you are clear of the camp, you'll get a psyren port out directly to this location.  Do you copy? - - A recon turned to rescue.  Copy that, commander.  We'll have the heart beats outta that shack in a heart beat.  Once we are clear, we'll broadband for jump out. - - Acknowledged.  Be advised, Whisper: as soon as those humans are moved, you'll have both the incubus and the shamblers to worry about. - I got the impression that she smiled at that. - No worries, sir.  They won't even see us coming or going. -  She assured me, a hint of excitement in her mental voice.  Somebody was looking forward to the challenge, I think. - Copy that. Good hunting, Whisper. - - Thank you, sir.  Team One, out. - - Did you catch all that, Chi? -  I asked. - Yes, Max.  I already have a handful of psyren standing by to pull Whisper and her team clear as soon as they have the humans in hand. - - Those shamblers will cross the intervening territory to follow those humans and their life force.  We're going to need a psyren suppression team and summoners standing by for emergency reformatting. - - Copy that, Max.  Requesting a summoner team assembly now.  And I now have a suppression team also standing by. - Nodding, most to myself since I was alone, standing just outside of the command tent, I decided it was a good time to finish briefing Justice on what I wanted him to do. - Justice, you still online? - - Yes, sir. -  The ballista commander quickly replied. - Good.  Second mission is ambush and salvage.  I want you to put a team on the road and hit any patrol that comes by.  Any tech that we then recover will be moved to the teslas' R and D location, along with any usable metal.  You'll have animus and psyren support for your ambush team, and I want them on that road as soon as physically possible. - - Already putting the teams together, sir. -  Justice said.  - I'll have a roster and a rough battle plan for your review within a half hour.  We'll deploy as soon as we get your sign off. - - I'll be looking for it, brother.  Max out. - And now, I thought, to wait for Whisper to make the call for extraction.  I began to walk towards where the teslas were setting up the R and D location that I had referred to in Justice's impromptu brief, mind working over a number of possibilities.  I had gone maybe a handful of steps when: - Max, I've got Whisper back on broadband.  She says her wraith team has extracted nearly a dozen humans out of the shack, with the remains of several more present. - - Copy that.  Jump them out now, Chi.  And move the summoners into position near the base of the ramp leading into the camp.  The shamblers will rush there, as its the easiest way up the hill. - - They are on their way now.  Justice is providing a javelin escort, just in case the shamblers get aggressive. -  - Good idea. -  I turned towards the medical tent just as the humans winked into existence, a dirty, bedraggled looking bunch. "Well."  I muttered, as they stared at me, shivering and half naked. "Let's not keep our demonic friend waiting, shall we?"  And I began to walk towards them.

 

Chapter 11: Demonic Hunters

I was a little surprised that they didn't flinch and move away from me as I approached. Instead they peered at me with their pain filled eyes, holding their scraps of clothing close in an attempt to cover themselves. Then there were psyrens everywhere, suppression fields and barrier walls swirling as they put themselves between me and the humans. "Not a good idea, Max." Chi said as she stepped into view, keeping a wary eye on the knot of humans as she moved towards me. "Their brains are absolutely fried from pheromone bombs. They could go feral at any second and rip you to pieces." I snorted. "Try would be the operative word there, Chi. Or have you forgotten exactly what I am." "I, uh, . . ." Chi stammered into silence, her face flushing. "Right. Juggernaut. Sorry, Max." I chuckled as I looked between the psyrens at the humans. Dirty and unkempt, they already looked pretty feral to me. They returned my gaze unwaveringly, every one of them focusing all their attention on me. "No problem. Think you could send out a quick message over broadband to see if anybody was a doctor in their previous lives? I think the humans could use a look over. They appear beat to shit." "That I can do, Max." Chi said. Before she could do more than talk about it, one of the humans stepped forward and in a hoarse voice, she said: "J-jeremiah?"   I grimaced at hearing her raw, pain-filled voice.  Aw, damn, she was just a kid. Maybe fourteen or fifteen; that realization made my blood seethe with rage. That demonic piece of shit was going to pay for his perversion, . . . "No Jeremiah here, kid." I carefully replied, pushing my anger aside for a brief moment as I lifted my hands in a non-threatening gesture. "But we're all friends here. We mean you no harm." "No,...no Jeremiah?" Another stammered, also a girl in her teens. In fact, they were all teenage girls. ranging from fourteen to sixteen or seventeen, if I was any judge of human girls. It had been a very, very long time since I saw one. "Of course he's here, stupid."  That from one of the older girls.  She pushed through the younger ones in the front to come to a halt just a couple paces from the psyrens and their telekinetic wall.  She then pointed right at me. "There he is, right there." My eyebrow slowly lifted as some of the psyrens turned to look at me, quizzical expressions on their faces. "Hmmm."  I frowned.  "Not sure how to respond to that." "It's because incubi mimic real life."  Greta said, pushing her way through the cordon of psyrens.  And in doing so, she very nearly earned herself a telekinetic punch in the face as Chi and a couple of the other psyrens turned to face her, telekinesis flaring around them. "Probably not the best idea for you to be here, Greta."  Chi grated.  "You're already compromised by Jeremiah.  Who's to say you're not working to get these girls back to him?" Greta threw the psyren a hard look, then sighed. "You're right to suspect such a thing, considering it's already gone through my mind, which is telling me that if they're his, they need to be returned to him." A telekinetic field appeared around her, forcing the summoner to jerk to a halt or run into the shimmering wall. "So not what you should've said to stay a part of this picture."  Chi tautly pointed out.  I got the distinct feeling, as the petite Asiatic psyren stared Greta down, that Chi didn't like the summoner much.  That, despite the fact Greta helped to reformat her from shambler to Transcended psyren.

"Chi."  I quietly said, and she quickly threw a look at me over her shoulder.  "Let her talk.  Unfortunately she's the closest thing we have to an expert on incubus behavior right about now." Nodding reluctantly, Chi slowly eased back.  The telekinetic field, however, stayed in place. I moved my attention from the elfin psyren back to Greta, my thoughtful frown not wavering. "You got your chance now, Greta.  Speak your mind.  Tell us how incubi mimic life, and why these humans now think I'm Jeremiah."  I said as the humans began to shift restlessly.  As soon as they had appeared, I began to mentally count down to hearing from our teams at the base of the ramp about how they have spotted approaching shamblers.  It was just a matter of time, now, . . . Jeremiah, on the other hand, wouldn't come until after he had discovered his cache of little girls had been stolen.  Maybe a bit to figure it out.  Then he'd come to demand their return.  And I'd be waiting for him. Greta looked to the humans, then back to me. "Well, as I said, incubi are made to control large groups of human females.  In order to do that, they have to resemble a human male as closely as possible.  No Transcended eyes, no incredible abilities; just an example of a human male as close to perfection as possible, in their physical prime.  That would let him get close enough to use his biochemical manipulation to further bring them under his control." My frown deepened. "And what does that have to do with me?"  I wanted to know.  Greta turned and looked at me for a long time without saying anything.  Then: "Well, as I said, incubi are created to look like an ideal male.  You, Max, look just like what a woman would want a man to look like.  Broad, powerful shoulders, muscular arms and legs, chiseled abs, .  what was the term Mick used?  Ah yes: Greek god handsome.  If you didn't have those Transcended eyes, you'd be that ideal image that marks an incubus."  She hesitated for a brief moment. "In fact, you look far better, and are more appealing than an incubus.  That's why Jeremiah doesn't particularly like you.  You're a rival." If I'd been a living person, I probably would've blushed at that point.  Especially when Chi looked over at me and nodded in agreement. "She's got a point there, boss.  You are all sorts of OMG good looking." "You're not helping, Chi."  I growled and she flashed me a grin before returning her attention to a thoughtful Greta.  Something I also did. "So, Greta, let's see if I'm getting this straight.  These humans, who are pheromone hammered, are replacing Jeremiah with me in their minds, because of how closely I resemble an incubus?  Even though I don't emit pheromones." Greta nodded. "That's what I'm saying."  She further confirmed.  I grimaced. "I think I'm insulted."  Then an idea occurred to me. If these girls thing I'm Jeremiah, and thus master of their universe, I might be able to leverage that to both putting them on a much more productive path and healing their pheromone addiction at the same time.  It was a bit of a stretch, but it was worth trying. I waved aside the psyrens holding the barrier in place and stepped through the resulting gap.  Instantly the girls were crowding around me, calling me 'Jeremiah' and reaching out with trembling hands to touch me.  Some were so far gone, they could only croak as they looked at me with pleading eyes. "Use me next, Jeremiah."  "No, me, use me."  "I'm the one you want, Jeremiah.  I can please you like none of these other bitches can." It turned my stomach just listening to it.  'Time to see if this works.'  I darkly mused.

"Okay, girls, I have a new game we're going to play."  I began carefully.  Instantly all eyes were on me.  "And I need you to pay absolute attention to my words.  No talking back, no trying to touch me, none of that.  Just look at me and listen to my words, okay?  if you don't listen, pay attention and do as I say, you will be cut off from me forever."  At seeing them all shiver and hastily nod in compliance, some actually taking a step back so they couldn't touch me involuntarily, I breathed a slight sigh of relief.  So far, so good. "First, I'm going to change my name.  I now want you to call me Max.  Do you understand?  I am now Max.  Let me hear you say it." "You are now Max."  They all repeated in unison. "Good.  Now, I expect you all to no longer act like slaves.  That now bores me.  I want you to act like soldiers." "But Max, we don't know how, . . . " One began to plaintively say before I lifted a hand, the gesture instantly silencing her. "Do I need to send you to the shack?"  I said harshly and she shook her head so hard, her neck bones popped, tears flooding into her eyes.  Forcing myself to adopt an expression of disdain, I pulled my eyes off the girl's miserable face and looked at the others. "You will be soldiers.  I and my friends will teach you what you need to do.  But before I begin to teach you, I need to make some changes.  First, a soldier carries themselves with honor, pride, integrity and dignity.  You will show all of these things, or I will be disappointed.  You will be fit, in mind and in body, learning everything that you can, striving to be the best you can be.  You will be clean, you will be punctual, you will obey orders." By this point, some of the girls who understood what I was asking, were already crying softly as they realized they were doing none of these things.  I again had to force myself to ignore the pitiful sound and press on. "Beginning with personal hygiene.  Chi?"  And the petite psyren stepped forward.  "This is Chi.  She is a psyren.  Which means she can read your minds.  She will know if you disobey the things I want you to do.  She will show you where to get the things you need to be a soldier, including how to keep yourself clean.  I no longer care for this filth.  In fact, it sickens me.  You will be as clean as physically possible, cleaning yourself when you awake in the morning, and after any task that causes you to be dirty." "I will now let Chi take you to where you can obtain clothing and personal supplies.  I expect to see you back here in a half hour, clean, with clean clothing on, and ready to begin learning how to be soldiers.  If I like what I see, you will be, . . .rewarded." I then took a step back as the girls crowded eagerly around Chi, clamoring to be taken to where the clean clothes and hygienic supplies were found.  Using suppression fields and gentle telekinetic pushes, she began guiding them to where the camp's quartermaster was located. "You're playing a dangerous game, Max."  Greta said in a low voice, stepping up beside me to watch Chi lead the girls off, many of which kept looking over their shoulders at me and flashing me hopeful smiles. "Using their pheromone saturated senses to manipulate them into become soldiers.  What do you think you'll achieve doing this?" My face tightened as I could hear Greta's corruption coming to the surface with her questions. "Not that I need to justify anything to a Transcended who let herself become corrupted by an incubus."  I began, throwing her a hard look.  "I just happen to think their human bodies aren't locked into place, like ours are.  I think I can run them hard enough that they'll sweat the pheromones out and return to some semblance of normality."

I paused there, my expression softening somewhat as I thought about the possibilities. "By then they truly will be soldiers, fighting for Earth's freedom alongside the Risen.  And they will usher humans back into this fight!" - Sir, sorry to interrupt. -  That was Justice on the broadband.  - But we are seeing a wave of shamblers advancing through the forest at a staggered run.  Some are moving extremely aggressively.  I've advised the psyrens to move to the rear and the javelins to take up barricade positions.  Can we get a go, no go to fire on the more aggressive? - - You are go to fire, Justice, leg wounds only.  Just bring them down; I don't want casualties.  Shamblers or no, they're still Risen and we need to bring them all back.  Advise your psyrens to start dropping their suppression fields as soon as they are within twenty metres of the entrance.  And let your summoners know I am on my way! - After my arrival, it seemed for a long moment like we were caught in a bad zombie movie.  Wave after wave of shamblers would come awkwardly running out of the trees only to get dropped by precision shots from Justice's javelins.  Or they would stumble to a halt, caught in a psyren suppression field. For my own part, I was pulling goa out of the ground in nearly a steady stream as multiple summoners used me as a battery to convert shambler after shambler in almost production line steadiness.  The psyrens worked feverishly to keep the shamblers sedated, and a steady line moving into the knot of summoners for reformatting.  Another handful then would take the newly formatted second gen Transcended and rebalance their minds before sending them up the hill to get cleaned up and a change of clothing from the quartermaster. All in all it was nearly two hours before the stream of shamblers from the woods slowed to a trickle before disappearing all together. "That was some serious shambler action!"  Chi muttered beside me, having joined us about half way through.  I silently nodded in agreement, as close to exhaustion as a Risen could get, considering we weren't supposed to be able to get tired. This group of shamblers had been even larger than the original, and with their conversion, we had tripled our numbers.  Over 600 Transcended of all kinds now thronged the base at the top of the hill, an army in the true sense of the word.  All we had to do was hook up with the Risen I had left at Retribution and we would be a force to be reckoned with. "Sir."  Justice, a muscular Latin male with wavy black hair and a dimpled chin, pointed back into the forest.  "Looks like we've managed to draw the viper out of his nest sooner than expected." Following his pointing finger, I spotted a line of liches emerging from the trees, battered looking machine guns in hand as they carefully advanced.  And behind them, a visibly enraged Jeremiah. "Chi, secure Greta and the girls."  I said in a low voice.  "He's going to try to take them all back with him." "Right."  And the Asiatic psyren winked out of sight.  I then looked over at Justice, the ballista grim as he trained his weapon on the advancing incubus, his javelins taking his lich escort. "Only if they fire on us first, Justice."  I said in a low voice.  The ballista quickly jerked a nod, not wavering one iota from his ready stance. "Just what the fuck did you do with my girls?"  Jeremiah snarled as soon as he was within audible range. "You've forgotten your purpose, incubus.  We're here to fight a war, not keep humans as pets."  I bluntly pointed out. "Fuck you, you Transcended piece of shit."  Jeremiah barked, his face purpling with rage.  "You can't tell me what to do.  Just because of those purple eyes, you think you can go around taking other people's things,. . ." "First."  I interjected, cutting him off with a pointing finger stabbed in his direction, my voice hard and unrelenting.  "You're not a person.  You're Risen.  You were summoned back to fight a war against the alien invaders with the purpose of freeing Earth.  Second, they are not 'things', they're living humans, children of the Earth Mother.  You were holding them for your own perverted pleasure then letting them die of starvation and disease.  By all rights, I should let my ballista commander do what he wanted to do at the start, and shoot you as a murderer." "You have no right, . . ."  The incubus began to scream even as his escort of liches looked at Justice's javelins with a great deal of unease, since their weapons hadn't dropped a centimetre since they came marching out of the woods. "Wrong."  I barked, again cutting him off.  "I have every right to protect the Earth Mother's children from pieces of shit like you.  Jeremiah, demonic Risen, I hereby relieve you of your command and order you to return to the Earth Shrine where the Earth Mother herself will pass judgement upon you for your crimes against her children." Screaming incoherently, his rage at being so thoroughly thwarted finally becoming unmanageable, the incubus threw himself through his escort directly at me.  Only a signal from me stopped Justice from turning him into a sieve. Instead I ducked his clumsy swing and took hold of his sweater in a tight grip, jerking him close.  Where he promptly spat in my face, the phlegm stinking and foul. "Fight me, Transcended."  He hissed, his eyes wild.  "Man to man.  C'mon, fight me.  Or do you not have the guts?" "You hear that, fellas?"  I said, raising my voice.  "This child-raping, murdering piece of shit is asking me to fight him."  I looked at the javelins, many of them wearing grim smiles. "Do you think I should?" "YES, SIR!"  They roared as one. "Well now, Jeremiah, looks like you got yourself a fight." "No abilities."  He snarled and I laughed in his face, before pushing him away to wipe off his spittle. "I won't need any to beat your head in, pal." Snarling, he threw himself forward.  Again I easily stepped out of the way of his wild haymaker. "Let me guess."  I rasped as he staggered by and fought to keep his feet under him. "You're a lover, not a fighter." "I swear you'll pay for every mocking word you make."  Jeremiah raged before charging in again.  This time I didn't need step out of the way, his swing not even close.  I followed that up by stepping in close myself to hammer several hard shots to his midsection before a crisp uppercut with my left sent him reeling back.  I moved after him, not wanting him to get away. A hard overhand hammer fist sent him to a knee.  I promptly reached out and jerked him back to his feet so I could piston a couple more stiff rights into his face, holding him in place with my left, the blows crushing his nose and collapsing a cheek.  A left hook then shattered his jaw and again he went down.  And again I was quick to pull him back to his feet. "I think it'll be you making the payment, buddy."  I hissed into his battered face before stepping back to rock his tottering body with punishing blows that broke ribs and ruptured internal organs.  A final flurry of vicious punches and once more he dropped to the ground. Once more I pulled him to his feet. "This."  A smash to the face.  "Is for every little girl you raped and tortured.  This."  An elbow mangled what was left of his face, leaving him barely able to stand.  "Is for every Risen you got killed with your twisted and foul scheming.  And this."  I took a half step back before whirling around in a savate rear heel kick that snapped his neck so hard, his head twisted around until he was looking backward.  The head now disconnected from the rest of the body by the terrible blow, Jeremiah toppled to the ground, dead once more. "Was for betraying the Earth Mother and failing your purpose."  I finished before stepping forward and spitting on his corpse. "Paid in full."

 

Pieces of the Puzzle

I looked at Jeremiah's unmoving body for a moment, a thoughtful frown on my face. "Sir?"  Justice asked and I looked over at him.  Seeing the questioning look on his face, I nodded and he stepped forward and with a single blast from his summoned weapon, he destroyed what was left of Jeremiah's head. That done, I looked up at the handful of lich that were now quite literally shivering with fear. "You have a choice, my friends."  I said with a thin smile.  "You can return to Jeremiah's camp and carry on with one of your own taking command.  Or, you can abandon that camp and join with us.  We have a process where we can temporarily infuse greater power and ability into a Risen, granting them additional usefulness in the war against the velkin.  We call it upgrading.  If this sounds like what you want to do, then return to your camp, gather your fellows and bring them here.  What is left of the camp, I then want you to burn." "We,... we'll be back."  One of the lich stammered and together they turned and ran for the trees. Watching them go, I nodded in satisfaction before looking over at Justice. "Nicely done, commander."  I said with a grin. "Thank you, sir.  Well done yourself, sir.  The incubus got what he deserved."  Justice replied. "That, he did."  I grimly agreed, my smile vanishing.  "Let's move it back up the hill.  Considering how much those liches were shivering in their boots, I think we'll see them shortly.  We'll leave their former boss laying there overnight to remind them how serious we are about this shit." The camp was thronging with Transcended when we got back to the top.  Groups of summoners moved around the field hospital as a couple 'veterans' showed them where all the equipment was.  And by the command tent, a horde of teslas were working around a chunk of wreckage that the wraiths monitoring the road must've spotted and had brought up.  Beyond the wreckage was the frame of what looked like another building, partially constructed. An eyebrow lifted at that as my curiosity flared to life.  'Wonder what they're making over there?'  I thought.  Then I was forced to pull up as a squad of javelins marched by.  I watched them go by, a bemused expression appearing on my face.  With the glut in reinforcements, we now had a traffic problem.  We needed to put these Risen onto one of the three or four missions I currently had running, to get their feet wet and to get them off the hill. - Chi, it's time we put some order to this chaos.  I need you to take command of the psyrens.  It's a natural fit, as you were the first of the second gens that we got.  Then I'm going to make Dante and Zara project leaders for the teslas, Justice will command the ballistas and the javelins, with Chris and Mick his seconds and I'll take command of the handful of juggernauts we managed to make. -  Just thinking of those made me wince, as the all or none protocols left me completely drained on a number of occurrences during that reformat rush we had a few minutes ago. - Whisper I want to command the wraiths.  Now we just need somebody to take command of the animus and to oversee the summoners, . . . - To her credit, Chi didn't even mention Greta as a possible summoner commander.  Even with Jeremiah now out of the picture, Greta's mind was riddled with pheromone-leveraged suggestions and manipulations.  It would take a psyche rebuild by a psyren to return her to full status, and, with how the psyrens currently were feeling about her, I very much doubted I could find one willing to perform the procedure. - How about Helo to command the animus?  He's got a good head on his shoulders, and worked well with both Justice and Whisper on the two recent operations we had. -  She suggested.  I quickly nodded.

- Good call.  Helo is our guy for the animus.  Now, that just leaves the summoners. - - Vanessa was the first summoner reformatted from the first group of shamblers. -  Chi noted.  - She quickly stepped in to help finish converting the first group, and was there to reformat that shambler rush we had a few minutes ago.  She's competent and no nonsense under fire.  I'd recommend her. - - Again, good call.  Let's tap Vanessa to oversee the summoners.  Now, if I could have you gather those individuals outside of the command tent, I want to brief them on their new responsibilities. - As Kat, Twitch, Boost, Charge, Felix and Tovin had, the command team I selected to lead this second army of Transcended I was lucky enough to assemble, were quietly enthusiastic about their new responsibilities. "We will need to find someone with some level of human medical knowledge."  Vanessa adroitly pointed out as I brought my impromptu briefing to a close.  "Those human girls won't go without cuts and bruises for long.  Not with how hard you intend on pushing them, sir."  A no-nonsense Caucasian woman with long, auburn hair that she had up in a neat bun, she carried an air of competent professionalism around her that made her the hands down perfect choice to oversee the summoners. "Agreed.  Chi, let's poll the newcomers to see if we have any body with human medical experience.  Then we'll tap them as a medic in the eventuality of one of the girls getting hurt."  I returned my attention to Vanessa.  "And don't forget, Vanessa, that we'll most likely be pulling in shamblers for a few more days, with the humans in camp.  We'll need to keep a summoner team on standby for conversion and psyrens for suppression and balancing.  We can test those for medical knowledge as well as they come in." "I'll set up a rotating roster for that team, sir."  Vanessa indicated, jotting down some notes.  I nodded in satisfaction before looking over at Chi. "Catch all that, Chi?" As Chi nodded herself in confirmation as she also jotted down notes, Dante spoke up. "We also wouldn't mind some additional raw materials, sir."  He looked over at Zara, who nodded and picked up the thread. "We've got a project that, if completed, will take care of all our manufacturing needs.  But it needs raw materials to get finished." "You're talking about that building you're making on the other side of the command tent, aren't you."  I said and the two tesla project managers nodded.  "Okay, that's our next priority.  Thankfully, we've got something in the water already."  I looked at Justice.  "You have that roster and battle plan for me yet, soldier?" Nodding, Justice handed over a set of folded plastic pages. "I've already consulted with Helo and Whisper, sir."  The ballista commander said with nods to Helo, a square-jawed African American and Whisper.  "We're putting the teams together now and will deploy as soon as you're done your general address." "Ah, yes."  I smiled thinly, refolding the sheaf of pages I had begun to examine.  "The general address.  Might as well get that over and done with.  Chi, if you wouldn't mind sending out the general assembly request over the broadband, . . . ?" Thankfully the general address was as straight forward as the one at Retribution had been.  It wasn't difficult getting the Transcended second gens to buy in, and they accepted the people I had put in command without question.  I found myself smiling in satisfaction as the company slowly filed out of the space we had used beside the tent for the assembly.  Now, all I had to do was hook up with Retribution and kick-start this war into second gear, . . . .

As I walked away from the command tent, I pulled out Justice's sheaf of pages and gave them a quick scan in the fading day's light.  Tight, just as I expected from him. - Justice, I've reviewed your roster and battle plan. -  I sent out over the broadband, which I could feel was still active from the general address.  - They are both sound.  Based on that, I'm clearing you to deploy. - - Copy that, commander. -  Justice immediately sent back.  - Teams are moving out now! - Justice was as good as his word; even as I looked up from his brief, I watched teams of javelins, ballistas and animus jog by, fully geared and ready as they headed for the base entrance.  'Outstanding.'  I thought.  'Now, maybe we have just enough of a breather, . . .' - Chi, have a job for you. - - Sounds good, Max.  What is it? -  She instantly replied. - I need you to reach out to the southwest.  Another active Risen base is located out on the plains within a couple teleportal jumps of the Rocky Mountains.  I want you to see if you can pick up any Risen signals still there. - - You got it, Max.  Just so you know, that's a bit of a distance so it might take some time. - - No worries, Chi.  Do what you can.  I'm going to check in at the command center to see if I can spot Retribution, the old base, via satellite. - Dante looked up as I stepped into the command tent, the project manager working on no less than five screens simultaneously.  Four of the five were dominated by schematics of weapons, obviously his work.  The fifth had a strange contraption on it that I didn't recognize that he seemed to be paying considerable attention to. "What can I do for you, sir?" "I need a satellite to do some looking for me."  I said and he nodded. "No problem, sir."  He stood and leaned over the nearest workstation that had a tesla at it and started giving them instructions on how to establish a link to one of the orbiting satellites we had in our network. While he did that, I stepped forward and examined what he was working on.  And again my eyes found themselves travelling to the screen with the strange mechanism on it. "This doesn't look much like a gun, Dante."  I commented without taking my eyes off the curious schematic. "That's because it's not, sir."  Dante replied over his shoulder.  "It's an industrial 3-D printer." I frowned. "A what??" "An industrial 3-D printer."  The tesla repeated, turning away from the workstation he had been leaning over.  "To describe it with a massive oversimplification, the printer uses these applicators."  He pointed to dozens of what appeared to be mechanical arms attached to the side of a chamber.  "To apply any material, from plastic to liquid metal, layer by molecular layer according to a computerized design, gradually building up until the item in question has been constructed." "Damn."  I said with a snort of amazement.  "That's frickin' amazing."  I looked over at him.  "Think it could use zero-gap metal as a building material?" "Zero-gap, . . .?"  He began to say with a puzzled look.  Only to fall silent, his eyes widening as he pondered for a brief moment what I was suggesting. "How, . . . how do you know about zero-gap metal?"  Dante asked. "An ally back at Fort Retribution discovered it thanks to some alien technology we captured."  I replied and grinned at seeing the excitement appear on his face. "We've only been looking for a viable way to produce zero-gap metal for decades."  The tesla exclaimed.  "You didn't happen to see that tech, did you?  Enough that we could reproduce it?" "No, not really,. . ."  I began before stopping with a frown.  "Wait a minute, maybe I have." "Sir?"  Dante said, confused. "We captured some of the tech and our teslas managed to get a scan of the interior.  I looked that data over, but then passed it on to my project manager, Felix.  I wouldn't know what to show you anyway.  It made little sense to me.  But I have the image stored in my mind.  All we need is a psyren, and a psycrystal and you'll have your schematic." Her name was Angel, a beautiful African woman with soft brown skin and luminous eyes.  A slight smile danced on her full lips as she looked into my eyes. "And you want me to read your mind, find the image of the alien schematic and imprint it on this psycrystal?"  She asked, holding up a clear crystal. "Correct."  I grinned.  "Just don't look too deep.  It gets scary in there." Angel laughed softly, a warm, welcoming sound.  Then she nodded. "I'll see what I can do for you, sir.  If you could, please concentrate on the memory of the image.  That'll bring it to the surface and make it easier for me to extract."  Her eyes closed and I could feel her telepathic probe slip into my mind.  "This should take just a moment, . . ."  Angel's voice trailed off as she focused on what she was looking for. For my part, I worked hard on keeping my mind firmly focused on that data pad Jaks had used to store the scan he took of the millipede form K'ethik.  I was settling back to wait when: "Got it."  Angel held out the crystal, it's depths now swirling with the captured memory. Nodding, I took it with a smile of thanks before turning and handing it to Dante, who immediately slipped it into a crystal reader.  Activating the reader, he turned to the monitor and watched the complicated image unfold on the screen.  He softly whistled as it did, impressed at the level of complexity he was looking at. "Bio-mechanical."  He said, looking over his shoulder.  "That's a tidy piece of work.  Again, something the UEDF was working on before I retired.  There was just so much they wanted to do with machines they could grow." Nodding as I joined him, Angel standing beside me with a curious look on her flawless features, I pointed at the screen. "Can you make any sense out of those?"  I asked. Toggling between two screens, Dante didn't answer for a moment, obviously concentrating on reading Jaks' schematic.  Then he reached out and touched an image on the screen "That's some sort of intake, funneling raw materials for maintenance in from what looks like a mouth.  It would then make sense that it would feed through a processor then to, . . ."  The tesla let his finger run along first one line moving away from the intake, then another. "An extruder."  He tapped the image then sighed.  "Damn, that's a complex piece of machinery.  I'm not sure I could replicate even half of it."  Abruptly he laughed and looked over at me.  "But, then again, I wasn't supposed to come back from the dead as a Transcended either, was I?" Both Angel and I chuckled lightly at that. "None of us were."  I pointed out.  "And we wouldn't have, if the velkin didn't invade.  Let me know if you can make heads or tails of that, hey?" "Of course, sir.  You'll be the first to know."  Dante replied with a smile before he turned back to his diagrams, furiously scribbling notes on a pad he had on the desk. "I best get back to my training."  Angel said with a smile, and I thanked her. I turned to make my way out of the tent, meaning to go and find out how the humans were doing, now that Angel reminded me of training.  I'd get the image of Retribution's last location later.  Then as if thinking about it, summoned something: - Max, it's Chi.  I've managed to reach a psyren that says she's part of the Retribution group. - - Oh?  What's her name? -  I said, a thrill of excitement going through me. - She said her name was Tovin. -

 

Contact

Tovin!  I fought the impulse to laugh out loud in relief.  It had only been a day or two since my transport to this northern location, but it felt like I hadn't seen my team, my friends in ages. - Can you patch her through, Chi? - - Doing so now, Max. -  She said, then: - Max! -  It was Tovin, her calm nearly obliterated by an overwhelming sense of joy and relief.  - Thank the Earth Mother you're alive! - - Tovin!  Damn, it's good to hear your voice. -  I responded, laughing out loud with my real voice.  - What the hell happened there, at the end of that fight?  All I remember was a bright flash of light and burning! - There was a pause as Tovin considered that. - I'm not exactly sure, Max. -  She quietly confessed.  - I had to bring you and the others out one at a time, due to the interference from the orbital fire.  I had just jumped the echo out and was reaching for you when a bolt struck you directly. -  Again Tovin paused slightly. - In desperation I tried to snap you out of the way, but the EM surge from the bolt as it finished its trajectory must've changed my teleportal's polarity.  You were thrown away from me, instead of being pulled towards me.  And you went far further then I would've been able to jump you by myself.  The EM pulse must've also added extra energy to the re-polarized portal. - I found myself nodding.  Not knowing much about how psionic powers worked, it sounded fairly logical.  Pity it couldn't have saved me from getting toasted.  That shit hurt! - So you awoke hundreds, if not thousands of kilometres from Retribution. -  Tovin's characteristic calm had returned, with just an undercurrent of happiness.  - If I know you, you've found yourself more allies and built yourself a fighting force. - - Spot on, Tovin. -  I confirmed.  - There was a run down Risen camp in the area, with a handful of Transcended doing their best to keep it from getting destroyed.  The velkin in this area are highly aggressive.  As it turns out, due to the fact the Risen were being led by an incubus, who had a taste for human girls. - There was silence after that, Tovin clearly digesting what I just told her. - A demonic, keeping human girls for personal reasons? -  She asked, all trace of happiness gone from her mental voice, replaced by disgust.  - I expect you took care of that. - So much for Risen not fighting Risen.  There were lines that even Tovin wouldn't forgive being crossed. - As soon as physically possible. -  I confirmed once more.  - Leaves me with a dozen or so human girls and no way of taking care of them.  Do you think you can make a quick survey of the Retribution forces to see if any have medical experience from their previous lives? - - Of course, Max.  By that question, can I assume you plan on keeping these girls close?  I feel I must warn you, that'll make you a target for both velkin, who will actively hunt them.  And shamblers, who will surely be attracted to their life force. - I couldn't help the smile that quirked my lips up at that point. - Yeah, we've noticed that. -  My smiled vanished.  - We have to leverage the humans back into this fight, Tovin.  One way or the other.  While using demonics is a possible method, I've just witnessed how disastrously wrong that can go.  These girls will be our ambassadors to the sanctuaries.  Hopefully we can recruit enough that haven't yet given in to the hopelessness to make a difference. - I sighed, shaking my head. - We need them, Tovin.  We need the humans.  When we win this war, it won't be Risen repopulating the world.  It'll be them.  And they can't very well do that, if one, they're all wiped out.  And two, if they're not wiped out, but no longer have the fight to stay alive burned into their bones.  If I learned one thing from my encounter with Gavin a few weeks ago, it was that.  Humans need to learn how to want to live again.  These girls are going to help us do that. -

- A bold move. -  Tovin noted quietly.  - I would've expected nothing less from the catalyst.  Besides finding a doctor for the humans, what do you want us to do? - With that question, all my short term plans on attacking velkin travel routes and gathering raw materials vanished.  In their place arose a singular idea, one that pushed aside all others. - What do I want you to do??  That's easy: get on your psionic horse and ride your asses over here.  We've got ourselves a velkin base to destroy! - Jump in an hour or so later was almost like a homecoming.  I couldn't wipe the smile off my face as face after familiar face appeared with a wink of light and a rush of air.  First was Charge, who laughed out loud as he gave me a big hug.  Then Boost who wore a smile so big, I thought his face would permanently go that way. Kat hurled herself into my arms, trembling as she held me tight for a long moment.  Then she was stepping back after giving me a quick kiss, laughing as the crowd around us cheered and clapped.  Felix was, of course, his restrained self, his eyes twinkling merrily as he solemnly shook my hand.  Hannibal too, wore gravitas around him like a cloak as he came forward to clasp my forearm in an ancient style greeting, nodding with respect to me. Jen hit me at almost juggernaut speed when she winked into view, along with the rest of the Retribution juggernauts.  Thankfully I braced myself or she would've knocked me onto my ass.  She sobbed quietly as she clung with desperate strength to me. "I, . . I thought you were dead."  She stammered in a hoarse whisper.  "I died too, when I thought that was true.  When I learned you were still alive, . . ."  She leaned back and I could see actual tears in her eyes as she stared at me.  Then she was kissing me deeply and passionately, and I was kissing her back.  The depth of our emotion and the power of our passion was enough to make the crowd around us cheer furiously, in celebration of life. "We need to have a proper reunion."  I said quietly when our lips finally parted.  "Later and in private."  She nodded happily, a broad smile on her face as she wiped away her tears of joy.  Staying close, she held my hand as the rest of the jump in carried on. Finally the jump in was over as Tovin and her psyrens appeared, rolling up the chain of psyrens they had used to cover the distance.  I smiled as she floated serenely towards me.  And I smiled even more broadly, when she lightly dropped onto the ground to step forward and hug me tightly. "Good to have you back, Mr. Niekro."  She whispered in my ear with undisguised joy.  Then she was stepping back and rising into the air once more, again the calm and serene ultimate psyren. As she did, I lifted my hands and the cheering and clapping slowly went quiet. "Now that the first two serious camps of Transcended are together, we need to do a little housekeeping to avoid confusion."  I said, looking around.  We numbered over a thousand soldiers now, and some additional structure was needed if we were to work smoothly together. "Those that were at Fort Retribution, you are now the Risen First Regiment, with the commanders in place as company commanders.  Those that were here at Fort Hill, are now the Risen Second Regiment, with the commanders we selected earlier today, as company commanders.  We will be issuing shoulder badges shortly to help make that identification.  Upgrades will be issued additional badges to further identify them as some of the most flexible and useful troops in our midst." That elicited a brief round of applause from the handful of Upgrades from Retribution.  I didn't want to set them apart from Transcended by making them feel less capable.  So I made my impromptu statement and saw smiles appear on their faces.  Mission accomplished.  That done, I went on.

"Now the reason we need a bit more order, is that we're going to need additional order to carry out Operation Rhino."  I pointed to the northeast.  "In that direction, less than 100 kilometres away, is probably the largest velkin base in central North America.  It doesn't house hundreds of hunters, it houses thousands.  And they are actively hunting Risen, taking any they find and removing their heads." I paused to let that sink in, mostly for the benefit of the troops coming over from Retribution.  And it did, many of them murmuring in low voices between each other as they discussed that. "That's right, they are hunting us down like vermin, taking us out one at a time."  I said.  "Such is their arrogance, their hubris that they think they are strong enough to do that without using their ships in orbit.  I say good!  You know why?  Because it gives us the chance to show them just how fucking wrong they are!" The entire hill top erupted with wild cheering.  I let them go on for a moment before: "And I'll tell you why."  I said as the cheering died down.  "We don't eat, we don't sleep.  You shoot us up, we just put ourselves back together again.  We keep coming and we just don't die!  We exist for one reason. and for one reason only.  And that reason is?" "TO KILL VELKIN!"  The crowd roared in unison and I smiled as they cheered some more. "Damn right.  To kill velkin!"  I shouted over the cheering.  "We're going to kill those bastards until every last hunter is gone, every last ship is destroyed and our skies are free of their presence.  We won't stop until we kick them off our planet so hard, they'll need a thousand years just to forget the pain!" I took a quick walk around, eyes hard as I stared at them. "Are you with me?"  I cried. "Yes, sir!"  The crowd shouted back. "I said, ARE YOU WITH ME?"  I snarled and the ground shuddered with their response. "YES, SIR!!" I smiled. "Good.  Let's go kick some velkin ass." As the crowd cheered, I waved all my commanders close.  "Alright, you guys, the clock on Operation Rhino begins now!  I want every unit properly fitted for a frontal assault.  Once you have confirmed the equip status, I need to see all of you in the meeting area in the command tent for the mission brief.  Everybody got that?  Good!  Let's move, people, move!" Thankfully Tovin had one of her psyrens make sure our supplies from Retribution made it to Fort Hill, as I had taken to calling this new camp.  Hopefully we would be here only long enough to assault the velkin base then we'd be off to the Bat Cave, which Twitch and her wraiths were still looking for.  Amongst those supplies were the white boards I had used to sketch out the plan of attack against the velkin presence in North America. I pointed to the one where we had sketched objectives and troop movements, after setting it up in the command tent meeting area and waiting for the commanders to arrive. "Our target."  I said, tapping the circle representing the big velkin base as I took a quick look around at my commanders. As expected, they had grouped together according to their disciplines.  There was Charge and Justice, going over pages of formation layouts.  And over there was Felix, Dante and Zara pouring over the K'ethik diagram as Felix explained the odd point to them, with Hannibal looking on.  Whisper had joined Kat and Helo, the three of them looking at maps of the surrounding area as they discussed the pros and cons of frontal assault versus graduated attack.  Chi and Tovin were just behind me, Tovin hovering and Chi standing patiently waiting.  And finally Boost and Vanessa were going over the Upgrade protocol that he had written down on a data pad.

At the sound of my voice, they all looked up. "Spread out over hundreds of kilometres, with constant perimeter patrols and a steady stream of traffic to and from no less than four warships hanging in orbit above it."  Again I tapped the circle.  "And we're going to do our best to blow the living hell out of it.  First things first, though." "The ships in orbit."  Charge said with a grimace.  I nodded. "Right, those ships in orbit.  As I discovered, to my chagrin, they will open fire to neutralize an opposing force on the ground, be it K'ethik or Risen juggernauts.  So I've little doubt that once they are convinced this base is compromised, they'll glass it from orbit with the big guns."  I paused to point at the teslas.  "That's where you three come in.  I need their com traffic and active sensors blocked just long enough for us to smash everything in sight, then get the hell out.  Then I want to make sure Fort Hill stays in their blind spot." Felix looked at Dante, then Zara, then back at me, slowly nodding. "We'll initiate the hack right after this meeting."  He said, the other two project managers nodding in agreement.  "It'll take a few minutes, but we'll make sure they won't see a thing." Great."  I looked at my covert people.  "In the meantime, Kat, Helo, I need the animus to sweep the entire area in and around the south and south west approaches.  If the aliens have any passive systems in place, we need to know about them, and get them out of the way." "We've already got a scouting plan sorted out."  Helo said, Kat nodding in agreement.  "We'll deploy as soon as we can make up our teams." "Outstanding.  Whisper, I want the wraiths to go with them.  As soon as the perimeter is secure, penetrate the outer fence and locate the main power grid.  Lights, sensor systems, networking; I want it all cut at the moment we hit the camp." Furiously jotting notes down on a pad, the wraith commander nodded. "That's doable, sir."  She replied with a smile when she finally looked up. "Excellent."  I looked over at Charge and Justice.  "When the lights go out, that'll be your signal to move in.  I want a three pronged attack, spearheaded by Upgrades on your roster.  That way they'll get in their fighting before their timers pop off.  They deserve a kick at this can as well.  You'll hit the generators, the communications nest and the transports as close together as possible." The both of them also taking notes as I spoke, Charge looked up when I finished talking. "And your juggernauts, Max?" I grinned. "Oh, we'll be doing what we do best: knocking shit over."  My grin disappeared.  "We'll deploy with your javelin and ballista teams and will act to soften up any hard targets we run into before you cut them to shreds.  We have enough juggernauts now between the two brigades that each element of the assault will have a team dedicated to your objective." I then looked back over at my two psyren commanders. "As for you ladies, you'll be doing double duty."  Chi and Tovin exchanged a quick look before both of them nodded. "We'll be ready, Max."  Tovin quietly assured me.  "What do you wish us to do?" "You need to both keep an eye on the warships in orbit.  If they start getting frisky despite Felix, Dante and Zara's lockdown, we'll need to get evacuated to our fall backs.  If they go from dead silent to full on shooting, your second task will come into play.  I want to see if your telekinetic shields are strong enough to deflect orbital fire." "Damn, that'd be handy if it could."  Charge pointed out. "It would be."  Chi agreed, before looking at Tovin.  "Have we tried to stop velkin weapon fire with our shields before?" "Small arms, and we deflected, not stopped."  Tovin replied, her attention swinging on to me.  "We may need to dedicate more than one psyren to each shield then.  Perhaps as many as three or four, as orbital fire is considerably more powerful." I didn't have a problem with that. "Use as many as you need, ladies.  If such shields could extend our capabilities out in the open, despite orbital support, it'd go a long way to granting us some superiority on the ground." "Then we will dedicate ourselves to making it work."  Tovin assured me and I smiled.  That was as good as a promise, coming from Tovin.  I turned back to the others. "And that's Rhino in a nutshell.  Straight forward and to the point.  And we will be deploying animus and wraith scouts as soon as this meeting is over, so you all need to move quickly on however you want to set up your teams.  Chi, Tovin, activate broadband, if you would, please and stand by to jump the animus and wraith within five kilometres of the fence line.  Once they are placed, we'll wait for the animus to signal all clear, before deploying the javelins and the ballistas.  As soon as Justice and Charge are on site, we'll wait for Whisper and her teams to cut the power then it's go time.  Any questions?  No?  Boost and Vanessa, prep for casualties.  The rest of you, good hunting!" I stood, arms folded as my commanders left the tent.  This was it, our next big step in the war against the aliens who would steal our world.  I could only hope it wouldn't wake the sleeping giant represented by the main fleet sitting outside of lunar orbit. Not yet, at least.

 

Loose Ends

Jen joined me just outside the command tent, along with the rest of the juggernauts from both brigades.  As she stood close, holding my hand, I quickly outlined our role in the upcoming engagement. "We need to make our attacks quick and precise."  I said, my eyes taking in each of them.  Brin, Simon, Firinne; they all made their way before my eyes.  "We'll move in with the strike teams, each of you assigned to specific elements and you will act to soften up any hard targets with judicious use of speed and strength."  I quickly consulted a list in my hands. "Jen, Hammer, Tumult and Firinne in element one.  Simon, Dack, Aria and Violet in element two.  And Brin, myself, Bojay and Pan in the element three.  We'll have the echoes moving with us, . . . which reminds me."  I patted at my pockets for a second before I remembered with a grimace that my original K'ethik communicator had died when I got hit from orbit. - Anybody on broadband close to where Hannibal and the other echoes are? -  I sent.  There was a slight pause as the question danced around the telepathic network.  Then: - I am, sir. -  One of Chi's psyrens answered.  - He's having a small meeting with them close to the tesla proving ground.  Shall I refer him to your location? - - Please do, and thanks. -  I sent back. - Of course, sir. - It didn't take long for the silver and black echo and his comrades, all dressed for combat, to join us. "Max."  He said with a silvery smile, extending his hand.  Taking it, I gave it a firm shake. "Thanks for coming, Hannibal.  I would've called you on the communicator, but I seem to have lost mine when I got shot by a warship in orbit." The echo made a sound curiously like laughter as he produced another one of the tiny communication devices. "I was wondering."  Then he sobered.  "How would you like my colleagues and I deployed on this newest endeavor of yours?" "Straight up.  Two echoes per element, joining with the four juggernauts that I've assigned to each element."  I answered.  "And it might be a good idea if each of my juggernauts has one of these commlinks so they can maintain contact with the echoes in their elements." Hannibal nodded at that as the other echoes stepped forward, offering commlinks to the rest of the juggernauts. "Done and done, commander."  Again Hannibal flashed a silvery smile.  "This is going to be quite the throw down, yes?" I chuckled at the echo's use of the old human phrase that he predated by thousands of years. "I certainly hope so!"  Was my earnest reply. It was after we dispersed and I was doing a final check on some of the supplies that I strode by the base's field hospital.  Several stretchers had been set up in anticipation of casualties during the operation, bright lights throwing them into stark relief in the darkness of mid evening.  In that light they were shown as empty.  All, except one. Frowning, I stepped towards the tent.  How could we have a casualty already?  We hadn't seen any combat since the Retribution troops had arrive, not even by the handful of javelins we had parked on the road to take out velkin patrols passing too close to the base.  So who would be curled up like that, unmoving and silent on a stretcher, the bright light of a nearby stand lamp allowing me to discover no further detail. As I drew closer, eyes narrowed as I searched the unmoving form under the white sheet for something I recognized, I caught a flash of red hair and felt my stomach sink as I realized who it was.  Magda.

"After all you went through, . . ."  I murmured, feeling distinctly unhappy as I came to a halt standing beside her bed.   It wasn't fair that the Earth Mother changed the red headed psyren so she could look into the future and see what we would face and didn't change her back.  And when I questioned her, all the Earth Mother would say was something vague about me being the catalyst. A sigh hissed out my nostrils as I gazed down on Magda's unmoving form.  'As a catalyst, I should be able to change things.'  I darkly thought.  'So why can't I change the fact that you've been turned into a vegetable, so the rest of us could see the future?' Though I knew Jen wouldn't like it, I couldn't help reaching out and tenderly stroking Magda's hair.  Thanks to goa, it was soft and supple, as if newly washed.  I paused, idly wondering if her skin was warm as well, instead of cold in reflection of how pale she was.  I reached out, intending to brush the back of my knuckles over her cheek to find out. I wasn't sure what happened next.  All I knew was that in one second I was gently touching her cheek with my fingers.  And in the next, with the loud snap of lightning-like discharge, I was flying backwards through the air and out of the tent to hit the ground several metres away with a jarring crunch, my vision dancing with afterimages. "What . . the hell, . . "  I began, my thoughts muddled for a moment. Everything instantly cleared, however, as I watched Magda abruptly sit up. "Magda?"  I managed to say and her head swung around to regard me with wide eyes. "M-max?"  Smoothly she hopped off the stretcher as if she hadn't just spent several days in a coma so deep, we thought she had been summoned back to the Earth Mother. "What happened?  Why are you, . . sitting on the ground?"  She paused to take a quick look around.  "Wait a minute, this isn't Retribution." Goa rushing through me to repair whatever damage I had gained, thanks to my truncated flight, I climbed back to my feet and walked towards the bewildered psyren. "No, this is a new Risen camp, that I've named Fort Hill."  Then I was standing beside her, laying a calming hand on her shoulder.  "Do you remember that vision of the future?" Staring at me, Magda slowly nodded. "Well, that vision was so powerful, it altered the structure of your brain beyond Boost's ability to repair.  You fell into a coma, and you've been in that coma for several days." "A coma?"  She whispered hoarsely and I felt her instinctively touch my mind with her telepathy to see if I was telling the truth.  And what she saw there, made her put a fist in her mouth to keep from crying out. "Whatever happened."  I pressed on, knowing that she had seen not only her own collapse, but the subsequent battle and my near death from being hit by the ship-gun blast.  "It's over now.  We've built a new base while we wait for Twitch and her wraiths to find a better, underground facility in a number of nearby cities.  And that base is incredibly close to a massive velkin base.  Almost out of self preservation, we're going to attack it, and we're going to need every soldier we have to help us." I paused to give her shoulder another reassuring squeeze. "Are you, . . able to help us?"  I quietly asked.  My answer was an armful of trembling Risen woman, Magda hugging me so tightly I almost instinctively went juggernaut to avoid bruised ribs.  Then I was gently stroking her hair as she began to cry, great, wrenching sobs that released all the pain and tension dumped on her upon waking from her induced coma.

I let her cry for a long moment, holding her while she worked it out of her system.  Only when the sobs began to quiet and her trembling began to calm, did I speak again. "You okay?"  I gently asked and she quickly bobbed a nod. "Much better, thanks."  She took a half step away from me to use her sleeve to rub at her face, managing to shed real tears even though she was undead, the power of her emotions allowing her goa to make tears for her.  Magda then gave her head a little shake and favored me with a brilliant smile. "I think I needed that.  Both from Campton and from the vision."  She finally let go of me to run both her hands through her hair as she cleared her throat.  "I, I think I'm ready now." "Outstanding."  I said with a big smile of my own.  "Let's get you brought up to speed." Tovin silently held out a hand to Magda when I brought the redhead to where the psyrens were finishing their preparations.  And just as silently Magda took it, the two psyrens communing for a brief moment as they gazed into each other's eyes.  Then Magda was lifting into the air, pulling her all-covering hood into place as she joined the rest of the psyrens in their meditation circle. Nodding in satisfaction, I turned back to my quick inspection.  A smile now occupied my face, a piece of tension deep inside, hidden until now, easing itself loose with Magda's return.  Now I was ready to commit some mayhem! Night was well upon us, when we finally got the signal from Kat, Helo and Whisper.  The southern approach was clear. - Alright, guys. -  I broadcast as the camp erupted into furious activity.  - This is it!  Psyrens to your jump out points.  All commanders, stand by for jump.  Soldiers of the Earth Mother, Operation Rhino is a go! - Psionic energy swirling around them like a glowing fog of green and blue, the psyrens stood in a loose circle at the jump out point as team after team ran towards them, weapons ready.  Only to wink out of sight, hurled dozens of kilometres at the speed of thought, to appear in the scrub and trees of the southern approach to the velkin base. Being in one of the first groups to jump in, I frowned as I peered through the trees at the distant lights of the alien base.  Now and then a set of lights would lift into the sky with a roar of thrusters, or drop out of the sky to settle on the landing deck behind the massive communication and command center.  If I was to make a comparison, I would say this base was nearly an order of magnitude larger than the hub we had hit last.  And we wouldn't have K'ethik assistance this time. - All units, this is Tovin. -  My old team mate quietly announced over the broadband.  - Initiating heads up display and active tracking. -  And I watched as a small square of light appeared in the upper right hand corner of my vision, outlining the map and our currently location.  - Primary support, take your positions.  Shield units, stay close to command group. -  There was a slight hesitation, then: - All units are on the ground and moving forward, Max.  Command is yours. - - Acknowledged, Tovin. -  I replied as I continued to ease forward.  To my right was the solid form of Bojay, the big juggernaut moving as easily and silently as an animus scout through the brush in contradiction to both his function and his size.  On his other side was Brin, the co-ed, and on my left was Pan, a slender Asiatic woman in her first actual combat action.  If she was nervous, however, she didn't show it.  Instead she moved just as stealthily as Bojay did, filled with ready energy that was extremely focused on the task at hand. A quick glance along my line of juggernauts yielded a quick series of nods from the other three.  A look over my shoulder at Caesar and Corraidhan, the former Roman and the Celtic warrior maiden working seamlessly together as they moved quietly through the brush behind us.  At catching my eye, Corraidhan flashed a quick ready signal and I nodded in reply. - All ground units, advance. -  I ordered and we quickened our pace.  We had perhaps four kilometres now to cover before we reached the perimeter fence.  According to the heads up, which used active telepathic tracking to tell us where our friendlies were, the animus and wraiths were scattered along the fence, waiting for our arrival. - How are we looking, Felix? -  I sent. - All active sensors have been blinded, communications between the installation and the warships has been pipelined and passive sensors have been misdirected. -  The tesla commander quietly reported over the broadband.  - We have everything locked down.  And we'll keep track of any loose signals, like the ones at Retribution that called in the orbital strike despite our jamming. - - Copy that. -  I said, the camp considerably closer ahead of us.  We had started to lightly jog as soon as Felix had indicated the velkin sensors were blinded.  And now we were within two kilometres of the installation perimeter. - Whisper, you are go for insertion. - - Copy that, command.  Wraiths are moving in. -  And I watched on the HUD as the glowing dots that represented Whisper and her wraiths pushed through the line marking the installation's fence line.  - We are in and moving on primary targets. - - Copy that.  We are two kilometres from the fence and closing.  You are on the clock. - - Acknowledged, command.  Wraiths are going ninja. -  And I watched the dots flicker as the wraiths engaged their cloaks before steadying once again, the psyrens' telepathic lock on their locations solid. I split my attention between the HUD detailing the wraiths' progress and our own approach.  If the stealthed Risen couldn't achieve their goals on time, we would have to slow up to readjust the battle plan for a much more direct approach.  It meant more risk, and most likely greater numbers of casualties. Thankfully Whisper was proving as skilled and capable as Twitch.  I watched as she systematically lead her troops into take each target with barely a ripple of activity.  And then we were at the fence. - Felix? -  I asked. - You are clear to egress, command. -  He instantly replied. - Copy that.  All elements, you are cleared to move within the target's perimeter. -  I then turned and pointed at the echos before waving them forward. Without hesitation Caesar and Corraidhan stepped between the juggernauts and the tips of their fingers flared with blue-white light.  Then they were cutting through the fence like a hot knife through butter, using their fingertips like Twitch did, to burn through the fence's organic metal. As soon as they had an opening wide enough for two soldiers to step through, shoulder to shoulder, they stepped inside and took hold of either side of the opening, to keep it from growing back together. "Company, double time!"  I hissed and javelins, ballistas and psyrens began streaming into the velkin base, weapons ready.

 

Chapter 12: Dogs of War

I kept the juggernauts close while we waited for the rest of the element to press through the hole in the fence.  While I did that, I also kept a close eye on my HUD to see how the other two elements were faring. Then the last soldier, a slender ballista that looked like she meant business, was through and I waved Caesar and Corraidhan back.  The echoes let the edges of the fence go and it immediately began to grow back together. "Saddle up."  I said in a low voice as I jogged up the bunched line of just over three hundred soldiers.  "Psyrens to your stations, summoner medics to the rear and juggernauts and echos to point.  Our goal is the the large building to the right, the primary power generator."  I pointed with two fingers at the mass of the generator building, the size of a city block.  "As soon as we go dark, we hit it."  I paused to take a quick look at the element. They were grim and determined, from the psyrens and summoners to the javelins, and ballistas.  Every one of them ready to rock.  I found myself grinning tightly.  "Let's move out, double time."  I growled and we began jogging towards the generator building, weapons ready.  A quick glance at the HUD showed the other two elements were advancing as well, one heading towards the landing port, the other hitting the communications building.  If things were going according to plan, Whisper would also be watching her HUD and would've started her count down as soon as the last soldier cleared the perimeter line. Knowing that, I had started my own count down.  Five, four, three, two, one, . . and I smiled as the lights all over the base abruptly went out right on time, throwing the installation into total darkness. "Juggernauts, punch it!"  I barked as the entire element charged forward at a dead run. Two steps and the sound barrier shattered with a snarling 'boom', my enhanced hearing catching three more booms on either side of me.  Two more steps and I was almost on top of the building.  I braced as my shield tightened up in anticipation of the impact.  'Knock, knock.'  I thought.  Then I was smashing through half a metre of reinforced metal and shielding and into the building's interior. Almost immediately I spotted what looked like a knot of hunters muttering to each other as they worked around a control panel of some sort.   Beyond them the bulk of a massive reactor was visible in the gloom, silent and unresponsive thanks to the wraiths' sabotage. I shifted slightly to aim at them and blasted forward.  'Hello there.'  I thought as they looked up at the sound of my entry just in time to have me cannon into them as the building lit up with ballista fire. Metal shrieked and alien death cries filled the air as my fellow juggernauts piled on in, their irresistible force shredding hardened metal like tissue paper.  Smashing aside the last of the hunters I had faced, their bodies like broken toy soldiers on the ground behind me, I whirled around and aimed at the reactor.  'Let's see if we can keep this place in the dark!' Metal whined underfoot as my boots dug in with my surge forward.  Then I was ripping through the reactor's armored outer sheath.  Using some sort of cold fusion, the reactor glowed with an eerie light inside as it waited for the trigger energy to restart its processes.  Most of that light was from residual energy from the reactor's recent rapid shutdown.  It was so thick, I could feel it warming my skin even though I was full juggernaut and my shields were at maximum. Then I spotted what I could only call an intermix chamber, into which the massive tanks of reactants, grouped in a circle around it, would pour along with a surge of energy to trigger the fusion process.  'That looks like a good thing to break.'  And I took aim. The reactor component shattered with satisfying abruptness, pieces flying in every direction as I ripped through it.  Then I was making short work of the reactant tanks, fluid and pieces of hardened metal spraying in impact cascades away from my churning form.

Punching back out through the reactor's sheathing, I spotted what looked like step down transformers and storage units on the reactor's other side.  All around them armored hunters were in furious fire fights with javelin and ballista units, the air humming with the nearly constant discharge of goa-forged weapons and plasma rifles.  I darted forward through a knot of hunters, a number of them in the midst of falling with javelin holes in their armored bodies, to smash into the first of the transformers. Built of even more heavily reinforced material than the reactor sheath, with layer upon layer of step down conduits, the transformer resisted me as successfully, shattering as I hammered into it before exploding with a wild release of stored energy.  The building began to shiver in response to multiple explosions as my fellow juggernauts joined me, each of us carrying a shock wave in front of us as we streaked through the heavy machinery, ripping it apart and filling the air with the sound of the generator dying. - Generator is down. -  I tersely reported as I skidded to a halt to turn at right angles to slam into a squad of hunters that had just arrived to reinforce the velkin already in the building.  Bodies flipped in every direction, broken and mortally bent as I went through them.  Then I was running through a hail of javelin fire as I approached a handful of my people who had dug in behind one of the destroyed transformers to pound more velkin reinforcements that were trying to shoot their way inside. - All third element units, begin your withdrawal in order to engage enemy units outside of the building now. -  I ordered, passing through the javelins to rip through another squad of hunters before skidding to a halt to look back into the building's interior. It was chaos.  Flames and secondary explosions marked where my fellow juggernauts and I had ripped through the vast space, crushing and smashing velkin machines like they were made out of egg shells.  And sporadic plasma rifle fire bore testament to how hard the javelins and juggernauts had hit the hunters manning the building's facilities.  Even as I spotted them, the rifle fire halted, the last pockets of resistance snuffed out. Nodding in satisfaction, I pressed my K'ethik communicator against my jaw and hit the stud to activate it. "Caesar, Corraidhan, time to pull out.  This place is history." "Indeed, general."  Replied a smooth, cultured voice.  "Your bold blow against these punic barbarians has been well struck.  I dare say I couldn't have done better myself.  I am departing via the building's west exit.  Caesar out." "And I'm following that Roman mac na bèiste out."  A woman's voice quickly followed Caesar's, carrying just a hint of something close to an Irish brogue.  "We are clear, my lord." "Excellent."  My eyes narrowed as several squads of javelins ran past me, intent on getting out. - Third element psyrens, we clear? - - Yes, commander. -  A quiet woman's voice replied.  - All units, except yourself, have now cleared the building. - I nodded as several large explosions ripped through the building's heart and pieces of the walls and roof began to fall into the flames, the building tearing itself apart. - And now so have I. -  I reported, turning to dart out just as a particularly massive explosion obliterated what was left of the fusion reactor. With the generator building dying behind me, I stepped out into even more mayhem as the element was now tangling with several dozen hunters that had come too late to reinforce the building's complement.  Though lights had not been restored, it didn't matter as blue-green light mixed with plasma's actinic flashes to throw the battlefield into brilliant illumination.

Shielded behind flaring telekinetic barricades, the javelins and ballistas had once again dug in to send slashing javelin fire or punching ballista bolts at the hunters, who were crouched behind ruined transports for cover.  I watched as I came to a halt, several hunters get struck, spinning away from cover to flop on the ground, smoking holes in their green metal armor.  At the same time several Risen were down, many with holes right through their bodies, others missing arms or legs.  Summoner medics moved quickly to repair what they could to put the soldier back into the fight, reattaching arms and legs and closing those holes that would've killed a living person.  I let a sigh ease out my nostrils at the sight.  As long as my guys got up and theirs didn't, it was all good.  Then I was exploding forward like I was shot out of a cannon, legs churning.  As I did, I let my eyes take a quick survey of the battlefield as a whole. By this point, the entire base was a seething mass of killing light, the elements striking hard and fast at their separate targets.  Like the generator building, the main communications building was on fire, explosions rippling through it as equipment inside erupted in gouts of flame and energy.  Several fire fights raged around its perimeter, the first element cutting through the velkin resistance with grim determination.  It looked to be one helluva fight, on par with the one raging by the generator building. But by far the greatest battle was being fought on the landing pad.  Streaks of fire marked juggernaut attacks as powerful weapons on the space-going transports threatened to pin several groups of javelins down.  To make matters worse, some of the big ships had lifted off the ground, taking them out of juggernaut range, energy shields flickering as they deflected the hail of javelin fire trying to punch through.  Even ballistas had to focus for longer than normal to penetrate those shields, leaving them vulnerable to counter attack from the bigger weapons.  Telekinetic shields flared over and over as the element's psyrens tried to deflect the greater part of the counter attack. I grimaced at seeing that, changing my angle to slam through several hunters, destroying their cover at the same time so whatever survived, got cut down by javelin and ballista fire in a heart beat.  I then headed towards the landing pad at a dead run, covering a dozen metres with each step. - Bojay, you got the fight outside of the generator building? -  I sent. - Yeah, it's pretty much handled, boss.  Why?  You off somewhere? -  The big African-American juggernaut asked. - The second element's got itself pinned down on the landing pad.  Simon, Dack, Aria and Violet have taken out some of the big ships.  But a bunch managed to lift off, out of juggernaut range and are using their heavy guns to hammer our people on the ground.  So I'm going over to see if I can help them out. - - Ah, shit. - He hissed in return.  - 'Kay, we'll mop up here and join you over there as quickly as possible. - - Copy that. -  Then I cracked the sound barrier and tore off towards the hell that the landing pad had become. Plasma blasts that were nearly the same size and power of the orbital shots, rained around me as I crossed the pad's outer perimeter.  Nimbly dodging them, and hopping over the craters they were leaving in the ground, I ran out onto the pressed concrete-like material making up the pad. As I did, I looked at the three or four ships my team managed to disable before the others lifted off. Wait, was that one close enough to, . . .? Racing towards one of the destroyed ships, I used it as a ramp, racing up its side. Then, as I reached maximum velocity, I threw myself off the end. For a heart beat I hung in space. A blink of an eye and I was smashing into the side of one of the hovering transports. Metal shrieked as I tore my way into the vessel. Then it was legs down and running, shields up tight as I powered through the ship's engine compartment, tearing it apart. Then I was out the side, and hurling towards the next nearest one before the first even knew it was mortally wounded. Thankfully they were relatively close to each other; again I hung in the air for the briefest of moments before I was smashing into the side of the next one. And again metal died with a vicious scream, hunters tumbling out of the way and firing wildly at me as I pivoted tightly and headed into the engine compartment. Shields tight, I shed the plasma fire easily, taking a step and smashing my way through the transport's engines. This time I could feel the transport lurch in space as it abruptly lost thrust and power.  Grimacing, I took a hard right and blasted out into the air.  Unfortunately no transport awaited me on the other side and I dropped the ten or so metres to the ground like a falling star, shields still glowing from the twin effect of shed plasma fire, and smashing through the engine's reactor core.  Stone fragmented all around as I hit hard, driving nearly half a metre deep before I stopped. Shaking clear my head, I flipped over in my personal crater in time to watch the second transport drop heavily out of the sky, the first one already down and burning.  The ground shuddered as the huge vessel slammed into it, breaking up and collapsing as the weight of its body overcame its skeleton's ability to keep it in one piece. Then I caught sight of another flare of light, as one of the first element's juggernauts used the first downed transport, the hulk burning merrily, as a ramp like I had to assault one of only two remaining transports.  Like a energy blast, they launched off the highest point at top speed, moving so fast even my enhanced vision saw them as a blur.  Then they were ripping through the engine compartment of the third transport, who's engines had gone to full burn in an attempt to get out of the way. Instantly the third transport slewed to the side, its engines flickering and spurting sporadically instead of steadily burning.  And that put it on a collision course with the last one, which turned its guns on its fellow in the hopes of destroying it before they struck. With a flare of light and a shivering bubble of explosive compressed air riding the shock wave, the two vessels collided and exploded, showering the landing pad with car-sized pieces of wreckage.  Then the bulk of the tangled wrecks was slamming into the ground even as the greater part of the element was pulling back to a safe distance. "Enjoying the view, sir?"  Violet, the brunette juggernaut's fatigues still smouldering from tearing through the third transport's reactor core, said with a smile on her pretty face as she hunkered down beside my crater. "Better than fireworks in July."  I replied with a grin, before I accepted her hand so she could pull me to my feet.  "That takes care of our high ground problem.  Now, we should, . . " - Command, be advised.  - Felix's voice tersely spat into my mind, interrupting any further words.  - We have reached communication saturation from the individual hunters' communication rigs and several have penetrated our suppression cloud to reach the warships on station over the base.  We are reading weapon system power ups on all four. - I glanced skyward to see distant specks of light appear overhead to swiftly grow larger. - You have incoming ordnance to your location! -

 

Sometimes You Get the Bear

I grimaced as I watched the massive blasts of superheated gas and energy burn their way through our atmosphere towards us. 'Here we go again!'  I thought darkly. - All units, be advised.  We have incoming orbital fire.  Psyrens, to your shield posts.  Unit commanders, we are now under the Firebreak protocol.  I repeat, we are now under Firebreak rules.  Let's move it, people!  We still have a job to do here! -  I then thumbed on my K'ethik communicator and repeated the command to Hannibal and his crew.  Then Violet and I were dodging heavy blasts that rained all around us as we made for what was left of the main communication building at full speed. "How long do you think we have, sir?"  Violet shouted over the wind of passage.  "Before the warships glass this whole place?" "Ten, maybe fifteen minutes."  I shouted back.  "With Felix and Dante blocking their active sensors, they're firing blind.  They'll be forced to blanket the whole area in order to defeat us.  If they're smart, each ship will pick a perimeter point and they'll work in from there, firing everything they've got."  I paused with a wince as a blast hammered into the ground right in front of me, shards of stone bouncing off my hardened body as I was forced to leap over the crater. Feet already moving by the time I hit the other side, I continued my charge forward.  A eye blink later I heard Violet's feet hit the ground just behind me and once again she pulled up beside me, head down and running hard. "I just hope they're not that smart."  I finished my thought out loud, even though I could already see that they had done just that, four separate hails of fire marching towards the installation's heart from the points of the compass. "Sir."  Violet said after a second or two of full out sprint.  Following her gesture, I saw the large group of hunters she had spotted advancing on a unit of ballistas that were pinned against one of the wrecked transports from the first wave of the attack.  Psyren telekinetic shields were in place, but were steadily darkening under the veritable avalanche of plasma fire the hunters were throwing at them.  It wouldn't be long before they broke through.  Not to mention, the velkin were firing almost continuously, forcing the ballistas to keep their heads down in favor of returning fire. Nodding, I followed her as she angled off to intercept the hunters.  As we ran, I went back on broadband. - Tovin, scavenger snap protocol, go! -  Might as well take advantage of being here to get Dante and Zara some of that raw material they needed for their equipment. - Copy that. -  The veteran psyren replied and I watched several pieces of wreckage wink out of sight.  Then she was back on broadband. - All psyrens not engaged in shielding, stand by to initiate emergency evac under the Firebreak protocols.  Ladies, we are on the clock.  Ten minutes to full evac and counting.  T-minus nine minutes and fifty five seconds. - Again I repeated Tovin's words over broadband to the echoes.  Then Violet and I were slamming into the hunters, nearly a hundred strong, sending bodies in every direction with thin, high-pitched squeals of pain.  The rest paused to regroup, twisting around to fire at us.  And that gave the ballistas the space they needed.  I almost laughed out loud as the space around the velkin company was filled to overflowing with crossing beams of green-blue light that sliced through armor like a hot knife through butter. Within seconds the hunters were down and we turned to head to where the ballistas were hunkered down.  And I grinned to see Justice there, the big ballista commander grim and dirty even as he slapped his fellow ballistas on the shoulders and told them how great of a job they had done. Skidding to a halt underneath the psyren shield his team was under, I smiled. "Nicely done there, commander.  Don't think I've ever seen that many velkin get cut into that many pieces in that short of a time."

Justice returned my smile with a tired one of his own. "They had it coming, that's for sure, sir." I nodded in agreement, then abruptly frowned as something occurred to me. "The landing pad has been taken, Justice.  Why haven't you withdrawn your team?"  I wanted to know.  "Putting yourself up against this wreck only makes you vulnerable to getting pinned down, just like you almost were before Violet spotted your situation." "This is why, sir."  Then Justice was standing in a circle of no less than six more ballistas, each of them standing with one hand on the shoulder of the Risen beside them, and one hand on the Latin ballista commander. "Give me a target, Ell!"  He cried and one of his shield psyrens nodded as she looked skyward. Immediately my HUD was joined by a targeting oculus, the four ships in orbit small lozenge shapes floating near the center.  Frowning, I was about to ask Justice what the hell was going on.  And found my words freezing in my mouth as, with his arms outstretched, I watched him summon a massive construct of goa-forged substance. With Justice as the base, I could only describe the barrel as a cannon, nearly three metres long, and a metre in diameter, a giant version of the shoulder-mounted cannon the ballista normally used.  It looked so big, it should've been impossible for any Risen, outside of a juggernaut, to lift it.  Yet there was Justice, moving it around as easily as he would his regular weapon.  Twisting in place, he pointed it at the sky and I watched the targeting oculus shift with his motion. For a second it wavered, a small circle with a dot in the center of it moving back and forth as Justice made adjustments to his placement.  Then the circle stopped over one of the ships and the dot moved to the center of the circle where it froze. "I've got a lock!"  Justice snarled.  "Firing!"  What?  Firing??  Then I was staggering back, momentarily blinded by the brilliance of the blast Justice sent skyward. "Target struck, lower quarter."  The psyren Justice had named Ell, reported as she still stared up into the sky.  "Damaged thrusters, a number of shield emitters offline.  She's drifting off station." "Copy that."  Justice said through grit teeth.  "Battery Two and Three, form up and initiate your firing sequence."  And I watched as the rest of his ballistas assembled themselves into similar formations as he and his seven comrades were in, each joined by a psyren who was somehow able to use her abilities to see across the vast distance between our position and the orbiting warships. "Fire as soon as you have lock on, Battery Two and Three."  Justice rasped.  Then he was following his own advice as the oculus locked back onto the ship he had hit first even as two more oculus appeared below them. This time I managed to get an hand up to protect my eyes as first Justice's battery fired again, then the other two got off their first shots. - Command, what the hell is going on over there? -  Felix's voice shouted into my mind over the broadband.  - Comm traffic between the four ships holding station has just jumped off the charts!  Translation algorithms are saying that they are reporting taking fire?  From the surface?? - - Confirmed, C and C. -  I quickly fired back.  - The ballistas are testing an attack protocol on air borne and space borne targets.  They are the ones firing on the station keeping warships. - - Well, tell them to knock it off!  The warships may have their sensors disabled by our suppression field but they are now using visual scanning to identify your location.  All four ships have been ordered to target that spot with all guns! -

Aw, damn.  I didn't need to look skyward to see that the volume of orbital fire had abruptly tripled in our immediate vicinity.  The hulk behind us began to rumble and squeal as blasts began hammering into it.  And then the shield psyrens were dropping to their knees as the overhead shield took a ship blast spot on, nearly collapsing it.  Thankfully it held. "Alright, kids."  I grated.  "Fun time's over.  All ships in orbit are now targeting this location.  Time to go!" "Yes, sir!"  Justice immediately replied, his cannon disappearing in a swirl of goa particles.  The other two batteries came down just as fast and I sent them all running towards our battle lines by the burning communication building. Violet and I joined them, jogging beside the sprinting ballista as we scanned the sky above.  Already the hail of superheated gas and energy had narrowed its scope and was systematically pounding the burned out transport and the spot where Justice had set up his batteries, into glass. I grimaced at seeing that, then sighed.  At least it left the rest of the base clear for a few minutes, giving us time to finish what we came to do: destroy the installation.  Still, it would've been nice if Justice had given me the heads up on his plan to try out his new super cannon.  Which, no denying it, was super frickin' cool. - T-minus two minutes and counting to full emergency evac. -  Tovin's voice announced in my head, abruptly bringing me back to the here and now as I relayed the count down to the echoes. Psyren shields flared as we moved back into an active battle zone, with plasma and focused goa blasts lacing the air from every which direction. - Boss, the area around the generator has been secured. -  Bojay reported.  - And our psyrens are jumping out anything that isn't bolted hard onto the ground, and some stuff that is.  I'm initiating a pull back to the perimeter in anticipation of Tovin's evac. - - Copy that. -  I replied.  - Good work, Bojay. -  I reflexively ducked as three ballista bolts met in the middle on a transport that was making a run for the fence, ripping it apart in a ball of flame.  Its death sent shards of red hot metal showering in every direction. - You too, boss.  I saw you take off like a bat out of hell there and bring down those two transports.  That was frickin' spectacular! - I chuckled softly at that. - Thanks, man.  It seemed like a good idea at the time.  I'm just glad it worked out. -   Then I was grunting as Jen ran into me, her arms going around my neck before she pulled me into a long and delicious kiss. - Can we consider the landing pad secure? -  Simon wanted to know.  - First element has pulled completely off the field now that it's been hard core glassed. - - It's secure. -  I replied without taking my lips off Jen's, my body tingling everywhere she had her incredible form pressed against it.  - The communications building is also pretty much secured.  We should prep to withdraw.  Unless, of course, Tovin and her psyrens beat us to it.  In fact, if my counting is correct, . . .- - All psyrens, initiate emergency evac jump outs. -  Tovin came onto the broadband to say and I smiled against Jen's soft and supple lips.  Feeling me do that, she broke the kiss just long enough to look up into my eyes. "She does have an incredible sense of timing, doesn't she."  The beautiful brunette huskily pointed out as clusters of Risen began disappearing all around us. "That she does, sweetheart."  I agreed.  "That she does!"  Then the ruined installation disappeared with a wink of light. I nodded in satisfaction as I looked down at the massive heap of velkin debris that was piled in a designated spot at the base of the hill.  It was a veritable mountain of smashed metal and ruined technology that even now the teslas were climbing all over with excited shouts as they picked out this piece or that, all done by the light of several powerful lamps.  Hopefully they would recover something useful.  Barring that, Dante's 3-D copier now had plenty of raw materials to use to build whatever he and Zara could design.  And with Hannibal and the echoes here, they may even manage to incorporate zero-gap metal into that building process.

It was nearly an hour since we had completed our evacuation of the velkin installation.  And, judging by the light in the distance, they were still pounding the site from orbit with everything they had. "I don't think they liked the fact that we shot back."  Jen quietly commented, her arm around my waist and her body molded to mine.  With my arm around her shoulders to keep her close though I knew she wanted to be nowhere else, her free hand holding onto my fingers, I nodded. "Not one bit."  I agreed.  "Now, even more than before, it's essential we find that underground location we can move the base into, before they start visually identifying Risen targets and pounding them from orbit in earnest."  I sighed and, with a final squeeze, slipped my arm off Jen's shoulders. "Speaking of shooting back, I need to have a word with Justice about his new protocol.  A heads up would be nice for next time we get in the shit and he decides it's a good time to start testing a new weapon!" The ballista commander was grouped around several large sheets of plastic with Charge, Chris and Mick nodding as he explained something.  All four came to attention when they noticed me walking towards them. "I'm sorry, sir."  Justice immediately began as I came into audible range.  "It was an idea that I came up with on the battle field.  I didn't have time to brief you on it." "Really."  I deadpanned, fixing him with a hard eye before I turned to look at the three javelins.  "And did any of you know about it before Justice fired his cannons into space, thereby bringing all of their attention to one spot and nearly getting him buried under an avalanche of orbital fire?" "Sure didn't, Max."  Charge said with a shake of his head, his expression sincere.  It was copied on Mick and Chris' faces.  I let my gaze linger on Charge a bit longer than on his fellow javelins since I knew he had knowledge of the future and how they used combo weapons in the battle before the siphon. But as his expression remained one of sincere denial, I sighed and returned my attention to Justice. "I have half a mind to remove you from command, Justice."  I growled.  "A stunt like that almost got that entire ballista team killed.  Not to mention your shield psyrens.  And while I can't argue against the results, since it showed we could hurt the enemy even in orbit, I can't agree with your methods.  You get another knock-brain idea like that on the battle field, you best run it by me before you do anything else and let me make the call as to whether we deploy or not.  Then maybe we'll avoid cooking a bunch of your unsuspecting fellow Risen like eggs, hey?" "Yes, sir!"  Justice barked in reply, stiffening as if I was a drill sergeant working him over on the parade field. I sighed. "At ease, Justice."  I pointed at the sheet which seemed to show various formations of javelins and ballistas grouped together to summon combo weapons, including the six and one formation I had just seen Justice use to good effect during Operation Rhino. "You teaching these three how to make combo weapons as well?" Justice nodded. "Yes, sir.  As you said, it proved effective.  But efficacy can only be improved by duplication of innovation."  As my eyebrow lifted in curiosity at that, he went on to explain.  "The three batteries I deployed, I did so because of something I saw you and the summoners do during the shambler rush earlier today." "Which was?"  I asked. "Using you as a goa battery to extend their capabilities during the reformatting process."  He said.  "It got me to thinking.  While a juggernaut has the ability to draw goa directly from the Earth Mother herself, other Transcended do not.  We only have enough to fuel our individual capabilities.  But what if we linked together, like the summoners linked to you.  Then one ballista could draw on the goa of others to create a larger, more powerful weapon." I snorted softly at that, unable to find a fault in his logic. "Unfortunately the only way I could find out if it worked, was try it.  And since the idea came to me as we began our withdrawal off the landing pad with the orbital bombardment, I thought now was as good a time to try it.  I quickly briefed the ballistas I had with me, sent the javelins ahead to assist in securing the communications building, then pulled the shield psyrens tight as I ran through a couple formations to see what would create the best amount of goa transference.  And whether I could pull goa from another Risen at all." "As it turned out, the six and one was the best formation and I can only pull goa from other ballistas.  And only during the formation and firing of the combo weapon."  He went on to explain.  Justice then pointed at the pages with their formation sketched out on them.  "Smaller formations, like four and one, and two and one, always for an odd man total, produced smaller weapons with less draw and less hitting power.  But greater than a single weapon by itself." He tapped a series of drawings with slight variations in their formation. "Right now, I know it works for ballistas but I'm not so sure it works for javelins." "That's why I asked him to show us what sort of formations he was using."  Charge interjected.  "If we can build bolt slingers more powerful than a single bow gun, then it's be pretty useful in fixed position battle."  And with him saying that, I knew exactly what kind of battle he was referring to.  The attack on the siphon featured combo weapons using both ballistas and javelins. I pondered what Justice and Charge had said for a moment.  Then, with a sigh, I nodded. "Alright.  Nothing you two have said here has made me think this is a bad idea.  So go ahead and teach your commands the formation methodology and protocols.  But this time, if you intend on deploying in battle, include it in your battle plan.  Then I can position your batteries for maximum efficacy." "Yes, sir!"  "You got it, Max." "Good.  Carry on; I've got a tesla to talk to about a giant 3-D printer!"

 

And Sometimes the Bear Gets You

All seven echoes were present as Dante and Zara's machine, finally finished with the influx of raw materials and extra teslas to help out, slowly began to hum.  Standing close to the command tent, I watched with arms folded, a thoughtful Felix right beside me. "Think it'll work, man?"  I asked, glancing over at my friend.  The wiry tesla shrugged. "The concept is sound and they were building fairly large 3-D replicators when I was alive.  But nothing on this scale."  He conceded.  "A replicator large enough to construct a flight-capable transport in one pass?"  Felix's thoughtful look deepened.  "But if they can get it to work with the zero-gap metal, that would put us orders of magnitude ahead of where we were." I snorted softly at that.  Boy, would it.  Right now we had no aerial support, nor physical ability to move troops and supplies, and certainly few options against targets in orbit. Then I was forced to focus on the replicator, as the dozens of arms began moving into place.  A control pad in her hands, Zara wore a thoughtful frown as she watched the articulator arms move, a number of displays telling her what her feeds were doing, along with the availability of raw materials.  She then looked over at Hannibal. "Are the extruders at full power, Hannibal?"  She asked and the echo stepped to one of the panels on the double car garage-sized building's exterior. "They are, Zara."  He reported a moment later.  "Conversion is at 120% and you have sufficient raw materials to form a full replication." "Thank you."  The tesla engineer said as she focused once again on her control pad as she carefully walked around the partially open space that was the replicator's interior.  "If everyone could step clear, please?  I am initializing the full replication sequence." Even nearly ten metres distant, I had to fight the impulse to take another step back as the arms began to smoothly move through a start up sequence, indicator lights flashing.  Then, with a soft audible alert, they moved into the space, the extruders as close to the front part of the replicator chamber as possible.  Then they were blurring into motion. Frowning, I switched to juggernaut mode in an attempt to keep up with the arms as they moved in ballet of viper quick motion.  Then, with a sigh, I gave up as they moved beyond even my enhanced vision's ability to follow. The front of the vessel appeared first in the characteristic black of zero-gap metal.  There was a slight change in materials as it worked over the cockpit area.  Then back to zero-gap to form the body with smooth, flowing lines, swept back wings and vectored thrusters in the place of tail fins.  And then, less than ten minutes after it had started, the replicator's high hum began to drop as the arms slowed and moved away from the sleek shape that now sat within the replicator's bay. With a forward mounted cockpit, a blunt nose and lines that looked like they'd be better underwater than in the air, she nevertheless looked fast and menacing. Zara smiled broadly as she ran through a quick diagnostic on first the replicator, then the aircraft.  She then turned to me. "Commander, may I present the Tiger Ray, an all environment fighter bomber, with extra atmospheric capability, velkin and K'ethik, or VK for short-based tech, and zero-gap armor.  Combined with a cold fusion power plant, a magnetoplasmadynamic main drive, vectored thrusts with VTOL, and omni-directional LIDAR, you have a fighter that can go anywhere, anytime to deliver her ordnance and complete her mission." Zara paused to look back at her sleek creation. "To keep the Tiger Ray safe, I've added regenerative multi-phasic particle shielding to her zero-gap armor and airframe.  And to give her punch, she's got twin nose-mounted plasma pulse cannons, wing mounted directional particle beam emitters and bays for tactical nuclear warheads, along with a full VK electronics suite for sensing, jamming and comms."

I found myself nodding in appreciation even as Felix quietly said: "Damn, that's impressive." "Sure is."  I agreed then abruptly frowned.  "The question is: who the hell will to fly it?" As per usual, it didn't take long for Felix to come up with the answer.  He grinned as he looked over at me. "Vipers."  He said and my frown immediately deepened. "Vipers??  Why them?"  The more lightly armored and hitting melee Risen had seen action in our battle at the big velkin base, but nowhere near the level of involvement they had during Bullrush. "They've got the reflexes and the shielding to protect them from g-force acceleration.  Although I'm sure they won't need it as Zara most likely has inertial dampening built into her planes.  You can add that they're a small, fiercely independent group, with a tendency towards arrogance and superiority." I found myself laughing. "Damn, you're right."  I said.  "They do sound like pilots!"  - Tovin, can you get a hold of Davinder?  I have a proposal for him. - To say the lead viper was excited about becoming a pilot was a gross understatement.  He actually panted as he slowly walked around the Tiger Ray, his hands gliding over her smooth lines, eyes wide as saucers as he drank in every detail. "So, I'm guessing that's a yes."  I said with a smile. "More like a hell yes."  Davinder replied, with a light laugh.  "When can we start?" "How about now?"  Zara stepped forward with a smile of her own to hand the viper a data pad.  Eagerly accepting it, the East Indian Risen quickly began going through the information on the pad as Zara began filling him in on the Tiger Ray's capabilities. Turning away from the viper and his new tesla tutor, I reached over and gave Felix a congratulatory slap on the shoulder. "Nicely done, my friend."  I said.  "That's killing two birds with one stone.  Not only did we find a place for the vipers to fit in.  But now we have pilots to fly the fighters and the transports Zara's replicator will shortly build for us." "That's not the only thing it's building, sir."  Dante smoothly interjected as he approached us.  In his hands was a completed Reaper, which he handed to me. "One pass with the replicator and I have twenty of these.  And a pass takes approximately two minutes.  The only bottleneck will be the power cells, which I'll have to manufacture the old fashion way.  Thankfully, I had that process going since you and I talked about building these and I've already built up a considerable supply." I nodded as I looked over the completed weapon.  More elegant and functional than the heavier velkin-based plasma rifle that Felix had reversed engineered, it fitted nicely in my hands, with good weight and balance for easy use on the battlefield. "A new rifle?"  Felix said with interest, stepping closer to take a look.  I nodded and handed it to him and a smile appeared as he turned it over to examine it.  "Very nice!  I see the similarities between the velkin rifle and this one, but it's gone in a completely different direction.  Hmmm, double barrel emitters, triple power packs for extended range, nice weight and balance, good fit in the hands."  He looked over at Dante. "This your work, son?" "That it is, Felix."  Dante replied with a nod of pride.  Nodding himself in appreciation, Felix turned his attention back to the Reaver.

"Sure is handy having an actual weapons engineer around.  Unlike a pretend one, like me."  Felix said with a self deprecating smile as he finished his examination and handed the rifle back to me. "Hey now, don't be so quick to dismiss your own accomplishments, my friend."  I quickly asserted.  "Without your efforts, we would've been severely outgunned for Bullrush.  You gave power and capability to the wraiths and the animus." "Exactly, Felix."  Dante agreed.  "I only reach as high as I do, because I am standing on the shoulders of the giants that went before me.  If you hadn't of cracked the code, and re-engineered the first pieces of velkin tech, then I wouldn't have known it could be done." "Exactly."  I said.  "And now, you helped Zara by designing her electronics.  Thanks to you, the Tiger Ray flies.  Or will fly, when we get Davinder and his vipers trained up a bit." "Okay, okay."  Felix said with a laugh, holding his hands up in mock surrender.  "You have successfully convinced me I'm useful.  Can we move on, now?" I joined him in laughing as I tossed the rifle back to Dante, who smoothly caught it. "Moving on.  Dante, make sure we produce enough to equip all animus, wraith and echo units we have on the roster.  Preferably before the sun comes up.  And while you're at it, I'd like a side arm as well, for extremely close encounters." "On it, sir."  Dante said with a grin and a smile before turning and jogging back towards the replicator.  I watched him go for a moment before turning back to Felix. "We now have a couple irons in the fire."  I said with a wry look.  "With the velkin nicely stirred up from us hammering their base and taking a couple shots at them in orbit, they're going to come looking for us, loaded for bear.  We need to get those transports ready and Twitch seriously needs to find that underground location already." Felix nodded, his expression of thoughtfulness intent. "We also run the risk of the velkin becoming alarmed enough, that they call in the rest of their fleet.  If they decide it's no longer worth the risk in attempting to tap the Earth Mother's energy core, they could glass the entire planet and this fight will be over, quickly.  Because I'm sure they got more in their arsenal than plasma cannons." I grimaced as I digested that.  Not because I thought Felix was being an alarmist, but because I believed him. "Let's not find out.  We need, . . ."  My voice trailed off as a thought occurred to me, eliciting a look of concern on Felix's face. "We need, . . what?"  He pressed.  I glanced at him, my expression thoughtful as I tossed the idea around a bit to see if it made sense. "We need a distraction, something to keep them occupied while we make our move.  Something that won't have them calling for help."  I smiled tightly. "Let's see if we can give those ships in orbit a bug infestation problem!" Tovin hovered in a thoughtful silence after my question.  All around us psyrens were practicing with shield casting and snap portals, whipping objects from one location to another without maintaining exact line of sight.  And when I started to think she wouldn't have an answer, she began to speak. "I think it's possible, yes."  She finally answered, her voice thoughtful.  "I saw how a pulse of energy from an exploding plasma bolt amplified my portal, enabling it to throw you thousands of kilometres beyond my furthest range.  And we also saw how shield psyrens working with Justice's ballistas rode the energy from incoming plasma fire to enhance their distant viewing enough to actually visualize the ships in orbit with sufficient accuracy to fire on them."

I felt her attention focus on me squarely. "It then seems to be a matter of amplification."  Tovin noted quietly.  "As evidenced by Justice utilizing the goa of six other ballistas to summon an even more powerful weapon, it's logical to assume a psyren can utilize the goa of other linked psyrens to enhance her ability to teleport objects, even over great distances." "I say we test that assumption."  Felix said.  "Let's head back to the command center.  We'll pull up a satellite shot of the station keepers and we'll see if Tovin and a group of linked psyrens can actually move something that far away." "Good idea."  I looked back at Tovin.  "How does that sound, Tovin?" "I'll gather a team right away."  The psyren commander immediately replied. It took a few moments for us to find a satellite that had a clear image of the four ships that were hanging over the ruined base we had attacked over an hour ago.  And when we did, we found the space around them a veritable swarm of activity, especially around the two ships Justice and his cannons managed to damage. "Move in closer, if you can, Felix."  I said and the veteran tesla nodded as his fingers danced over the controls, sending commands to the bird hanging in orbit high above us. There was a shift in the view on the big monitor in front of us, then it leapt in close to the nearest one, the massive vessel nearly filling the monitor from side to side. "A step in further, if you don't mind."  I frowned as I peered at the screen.  "With all that activity buzzing around those ships up there, I want to make sure we still have enough K'ethik around to do what we want." Felix's fingers danced again and again the view blurred before leaping in even closer.  And I grinned as I saw the familiar shapes carefully moving around the hull, easing their way towards a number of different targets including a big gun and what looked like a shield emitter. "Perfect."  I then looked over my shoulder to where Tovin was waiting, along with over a dozen of her sisters.  "We have you a target, Tovin." Nodding, the psyren floated forward just enough so she could see the screen.  Then, at a silent signal, six more psyrens, a mix of First and Second brigade girls including Chi, Magda, Jazz and others, moved in as Tovin lightly dropped onto the ground.  Assuming the formation Justice had used to summon his cannon, Tovin lowered her head.  After a brief pause, four more stepped forward to insert themselves into the formation, all with one hand on the shoulder of the psyren beside her, and one on Tovin. Again the veteran psyren lowered her head.  This time there was no pause. "I have a lock on one of the K'ethik.  I just need a location to jump it to." I looked back at Felix, who was furiously splitting his screen to access the velkin network and bring up a schematic of the massive warship. "It's got to be a space the K'ethik can use to move around the ship."  I pointed out and Felix leaned in close, his finger tracing a number of lines on the diagram. "Access corridor, twenty metres from the hull."  He said, looking over at Tovin.  "Did you get that, Tovin?" "Twenty metres in."  Tovin repeated in a whisper, her head still down as she used the additional power from the formation to move telepathically through the ship. "Got it."  And Felix and I watched one of the K'ethik wink out of sight.  "K'ethik is placed and I'm using it as a resonance point to locate other possible locations." I felt a grin turn the corners of my lips upward as all of the K'ethik on the screen abruptly winked out of sight.  Then the tesla that was monitoring communications on the velkin network popped up. "We've got a spike in communications.  Alerts are being sounded on one of the ships." Tovin looked over, peering at the screen through slit eyes. "Move to another ship."  She commanded, her voice sounding strained.  Nodding, Felix moved the view to the next ship over and, without little hesitation, we watched the K'ethik on the hull there, also wink out of sight. "Now to the third."  She said and again Felix moved the view.  And again K'ethik vanished, teleported into the ship's interior. Then the psyrens were sagging to their knees, the collective draw on their goa finally reaching a breaking point.  I quickly moved to them, kneeling beside Magda and Chi, who had been standing together. "You okay, Chi?  Magda?"  When they both nodded, I then reached to touch Tovin on the shoulder.  "Tovin?" "I am alright, Max."  The psyren commander quickly indicated before carefully rising to her feet.  "The draw to move that much, over that distance, was considerable.  But we were successful."  She let her eyes move over each of the psyren that had been in formation with her, obviously thanking each one at a time telepathically. "We will, however, require a few moments to restore our goa levels." "No problem.  I said with a smile.  "Thank you, ladies.  You all performed spectacularly!" "I'll say."  Felix added with a smile of his own as he looked at a screen where alerts were flashing fast and thick across the velkin network.  They think the K'ethik got in via a hull breach from one of Justice's cannon shots.  And now they are completely freaking out."  He chuckled when one of the alerts abruptly went dead.  "And there, the K'ethik have jammed their communications so they not only can't talk to the main fleet, they can't even talk to each other." "Damn."  I said, my smile becoming a grin of delight.  "That's going to get messy, fast!" "You said it."  Felix pointed at several lines of alien text streaming across the screen.  A tap activated the translation algorithm and I watched as they became frantic calls for help.  "The K'ethik aren't wasting any time cutting them to shreds.  They didn't even bother trying to figure out how they got inside.  They just went to work." "Single minded bastards."  I shook my head.  "I hope we can continue staying out of their way."  I threw my head back and laughed.  "Hot damn, that worked way better than I even hoped it would!"  Then I abruptly sobered. "Now, all we have to do is hear from Twitch so we can move as soon as possible into the Bat Cave!"

 

To the Bat Cave!

I let a long sigh ease free as I stared at the ceiling of my tent.  Outside, the sun was just climbing above the horizon, announcing a new day.  It was almost a shame I couldn't appreciate it.  My thoughts were too busy churning themselves into a storm to see the beauty in the colors and sounds of the dawn. We were victorious against the enemy yesterday.  We beat them and beat them hard.  Yet, what did we have to show for it?  A heap of trashed tech and shattered metal??  We didn't take the territory, we didn't loosen the aliens' grip on our world.  We didn't even have a body count we could wave before our detractors to show them how good we were.  That thought put a wry smile on my face.  Talk about a flash from the past; as if we'd have a news scrum to defend our unilateral actions to a doubtful media.  We were all that was left.  And none of us doubted our mission. Jen's hand moving over my torso and up onto my chest, accompanied by her soft lips kissing my shoulder only served to temporarily distract me from my grim thoughts.  She cuddled close as I continued to stare out my tent's high window, which now let the morning light spill inside. "Careful, my love."  She murmured throatily.  "Your impatience is showing." "I can't help it, Jen."  I replied, turning my head to look into her flawless features.  "I want this war to be over.  I want the velkin dead and gone." She reached out to tenderly touch my lips with the tips of her fingers. "Yet once this war is done the Earth Mother will return us to the cold ground."  She quietly pointed out.  "Do you hate this new life she's given us so much that you want it over so fervently?" My mouth immediately opened, ready to say that I did want it over, so I could die again and have my spirit travel to paradise where I could be together with Abby forever.  Thankfully the Earth Mother restored most of my brain along with my body and I quickly reconsidered saying that in light of who I had currently snuggled against me.  I let my mouth close again and I stifled the urge.  Tovin made me promise to stay in the here and now and fight this war until it was done.  And that was what I was going to do.  And since Jen was in the here and now, I was going to be with her and not insult her or demean her feelings for me by telling her the reason I wanted to die again was to be with my long dead wife. "No, Jen, I don't hate it."  I finally admitted as her fingers continued their tender exploration of my face.  "To have a second chance at making things better, to be with an amazing and beautiful woman like you; these are all things that I will eternally be grateful for."  I grimaced. "I just want those bastards off our planet so we can get on with our lives, undead ones or otherwise!" Jen's smile blossomed radiantly as she smoothly moved on top of me, leaning in to kiss me deeply with her velvety soft lips.  She then carefully re-engaged us before leaning back in. "I know how much you miss Abby, Max.  And that, in itself, is an excellent reason to want to move on.  But to express your willingness to stay, to fight this war, . . . and to be with me, makes my heart swell so much I can't hold it in."  She gently kissed me.  "I love you, Max." I smiled as I looked into Jen's beautiful face.  Before I could reply, however, Tovin was speaking into my mind. - Sorry to disturb you, Max, but I have Twitch on broadband for you! - I pulled my tunic on as I strode towards the command center.  Beside me, Jen was neatly putting her hair up as she walked. - So where are you now, Twitch? -  I asked.

- A small suburb east of the former Canadian city of Winnipeg. -  Twitch's voice was faint but clear, a sign of just how far away she was.  - It appears as though the locals were mining into the old rock of the Canadian Shield.  There are extensive underground tunnels and corridors a good 100 to 200 metres below the surface, with several large enough to accommodate an aircraft carrier! - - Buried that deep, we should be safe from prying velkin eyes as well as any weapons they may send our way. -  I noted. - Definitely, big man. -  Twitch agreed.  - Short of a full on nuke strike, we'd indeed be safe here.  It's the best site we've found in the dozen or so we've checked. - - Copy that.  Hang tight, Twitch.  Sounds like you've found our Bat Cave.  Just going to throw it past the team and once we get the thumbs up, which I'm sure we will, we'll start moving everybody there. - - Okee dokee, boss.  I'll pull in my other teams and we'll sit pretty 'til you get here. - - We won't be long.  Max out. -  By that point I had reached the command tent  where Felix was occupying his usual spot in the nest of work stations and monitors.  "Felix; looks like Twitch has us a site just east of the old Canadian city of Winnipeg.  Can you get satellite imaging on that?" "No problem, Max."  The tesla commander's fingers were already moving as he spoke and several images of the city, mostly in ruins, and the surrounding territory appeared on the monitors. "Here we go.  Winnipeg, central Noramerica city, population at the time of the velkin invasion approximately 3.5 million.  No defenses of note, and thus was an easy target during the aliens' initial cull with the city being completely depopulated in about thirty minutes.  Ah, what is this?"  Felix leaned closer to peer at a screen detailing the territory east of the city. "That's the Canadian Shield, made up of some of the oldest, hardest and deepest rock on the continent.  It starts about here."  He said, drawing a line east of the city.  "And it covers a good chunk of territory in the northeastern part of what was once the United States, and a good two thirds of what used to be Canada, before the two united, along with Mexico, to create the nation of Noramerica during the Unification Period about two hundred years ago.  There are similar shields on just about every continental mass, serving as repositories for vast deposits of metals and precious gems."  He looked over at me. "You said Twitch was east of the city.  That puts her on the Canadian Shield.  So I'm guessing she's found some sort of mining operation." I nodded in confirmation. "Not sure what kind of mine it was, but it has deep corridors and chambers, with some reported big enough to house city blocks, and some as deep as two hundred metres.  Twitch thinks this is a good location for the Bat Cave, and by her report and yours, I'm agreeing with her."  I turned and began walking out the tent, Jen beside me.  As I did, I spoke over my shoulder.  "Keep that data up on the screen if you don't mind, Felix and we'll get the rest of the command team to take a look at it.  If they're happy with the location I'll jump over with Simon, who was a civil engineer in his living days so he can take a look at its structural integrity.  If he gives it the thumbs up then we'll roll our gear in and set up Fort Retribution the sequel in there." As expected, the command team was pretty happy to get off the exposed Fort Hill site and to somewhere a bit safer.  So, after hearing the report of Twitch's find, they quickly okay'd it and Tovin, Simon, Chi, Jen and myself were jumping out to take a look. Several jumps later, we were carefully walking in a loose group down an overgrown mining road, looking around us at the fairly dense pine and mixed hardwood forest on either side.  Interspersed amongst the trees were outcroppings of weathered granite and basalt, characteristic to the terrain on the Canadian Shield.

"I always liked visiting this part of the country."  Simon said with a smile, inhaling deeply of the fragrant air though, as a Risen, he didn't have much of a sense of smell.  "Great fishing and camping; awesome to just get away from it all.  Nothing says remote wilderness better than going out onto the Shield and getting lost for a week or so." "Bah, you can keep it."  Chi said with a grimace.  "I never did like camping.  The city was just fine for me.  The smog and pollution kept the bugs down to a minimum." I chuckled at that.  Walking close to me and holding my hand, Jen smiled as well.  Tovin, of course, said nothing as she floated silently and serenely along the road.  Which quickly peaked Chi's curiosity. "How about you, Tovin?  Did you like camping when you were living?" "I was born with severe deformities including Down's Syndrome and a defective heart."  The veteran psyren quietly replied.  "My health was too frail for me to live anywhere but in an institution and my brain wasn't developed enough to be curious about what existed beyond the hospital's walls.  I died before I reached puberty and never experienced the outdoors until I was summoned back as Risen." The quiet confession was enough to stun us all into silence, even the normally exuberant Simon. "I, . . I'm sorry, Tovin.  I didn't know."  Chi said, embarrassment and chagrin in her voice and on her face. "Don't be troubled, Chi."  Tovin said, turning her hooded head just enough to bring her attention to bear on the other psyren.  "What I experienced while I was living has only given me the strength to want to experience more as Risen.  I have left my existence as a living person behind, to concentrate on what I am and do now."  Oddly I felt that was somewhat aimed at me.  "And so I don't make what I was common knowledge so people will know me for what I am." "An excellent attitude to have."  Jen said with a nod and a smile as she looked at Tovin.  "I, for one, know you as the most powerful and accomplished psyren in North America.  And I'm grateful for everything that you've done for the Risen." As Tovin gracefully inclined her head in thanks towards my honey-colored companion, I found myself smiling.  I knew Jen wasn't just offering lip service.  She truly was thankful.  Because if Tovin hadn't stabilized her mind after I nearly died reformatting her, she wouldn't have become who she was now.  And Jen seemed very happy indeed to have another chance at life; one with more freedom and opportunity than she could've dreamed of in her old life. Further conversation was held as we then stepped free of the trees and into an artificially cleared space.  I paused to give the old buildings clustered at the clearing's far end a quick look.  Ramshackle and battered, paint peeling and plastic faded, they had obviously been in place a lot longer than the Risen had been fighting the velkin. "I am in contact with the psyrens Twitch took with her."  Tovin quietly announced.  "They have taken up station in that tall building there, which covers the entrance to the main mine shaft." With the building telepathically highlighted for me to more easily pick it out from the jumble around it, I spotted it in seconds and nodded. "Let's hit it!" A pair of wraiths were standing watch at the door as we approached, plasma rifles at the ready as they peered past us at the tree line. "Expecting company?"  I casually asked as we stepped in through the knocked in door.  It was Twitch that answered, the Wraith commander stepping from the shadows cloaking the antechamber's back half. "We're all a little nervous after passing through Winnipeg."  She said, flashing me a quick smile of greeting before waving at Tovin.  Simon she favored with a nod, and Chi got a look of curiosity before she returned her attention to me.

"It was one of the cities hit the hardest by the velkins' initial cull.  Aliens were eating people in the streets like fast food, spitting out their bones as they went.  Reports that survived the slaughter said the streets were rivers of blood."  Twitch sighed, shaking her head.  "We got to see the evidence of that slaughter, man.  There are literally mounds of bleached white bones everywhere."  She looked at me and I could see she was visibly bothered by the experience.  "While we're undead and the velkin won't eat us, it still shook my people up a bit to see that."  Twitch frowned.  "It was almost like we could hear the echo of their screams." I reached out to give her shoulder a squeeze. "I can imagine it was unnerving."  I said reassuringly.  "I've seen some shit in my life that turned my hair white and it took me a while to shake it off.  You know what did it?  Safe haven; somewhere I could relax without feeling threatened.  You've found us a nice hideyhole here by all appearances.  Tucked in here, I'm certain the velkin won't give us any trouble whatsoever." Twitch managed a weak smile at that.  Seeing that we needed a change in subject, I squeezed her shoulder again and gave her a big smile. "C'mon, Twitch.  Time for the nickel tour.  Let's see what kind of Bat Cave you've found for us!" A short climb down a broad shaft brought us to the first level a hundred metres underground and the first open space.  Created as a parking area for large machines, the space hewn from the raw granite truly was vast, easily the size of a couple of football fields placed side by side.  It's furthest reaches were even beyond the ability of the handful of lamps the wraiths had set up to illuminate.  Wielding a hand spotlight, I looked up at the great, arching stone roof, nearly twenty metres up and regularly braced with a combination of heavy native stone and concrete and steel columns.  It looked like there would be sufficient volume for a dozen humans to breathe down here without any need for air circulators.  However, I planned on setting them up anyway in anticipation of establishing some sort of human training and support network for when we fully bring them into the fight with us. A flash of laser light caught my attention and I turned to watch Simon taking measurements with a calibrated laser.  He had managed to find a couple pieces of surveying equipment in the logistics pod back at Fort Hill and he was now putting it to good use, taking measurements of the cavern size and the thickness of the roof.  As he did, the Native American juggernaut jotted notes down in a small notebook, making calculations as he did. "What do you think, Simon?"  I said, walking over to join him where he stood near one of the massive brace columns.  Taking another measurement with his laser, he paused just long enough to make another quick calculation. "Well, I'll tell you this, Max."  He began, looking up from his notes with a grin.  "Whoever excavated this cavern over fifty years ago, knew exactly what they were doing.  The columns are perfectly cut to support a percentage of the roof, the space is viable for a variety of large projects and the roof is thick enough to withstand a direct strike from a nuclear weapon.  Even if there are bigger and deeper caverns, we wouldn't need them.  This one is perfect!" I returned his grin as I felt his enthusiasm. "Outstanding!"  I said.  "Thanks, Simon." "My pleasure, boss."  He said.  "And thank you for giving me the chance to return and do something I loved doing, while I was a living person." "Any time, bud."  I gave his shoulder a slap.  Then I was hopping on the broadband. - Tovin, advise Fort Hill that the Bat Cave has been cleared for use.  Have them initiate camp breakdown for transport to the new site.   And patch me over to Zara, if you could. -

- You are go for Zara, Max. -  Tovin reported. - What can I do for you, sir? -  Zara's voice, as precise and efficient as her real one, spoke into my mind a heart beat later. - I know you're focused on the Tiger Ray project at the moment, Zara.  But we've just cleared the Bat Cave for relocation of the base and I want to test our logistics capability.  So I need you to switch over to making transports.  Can you do that for me? - - Of course, sir. -  The tesla project manager quickly replied.  - I'm retasking the replicator even as we speak.  With the materials on hand, I can have four transports ready in about 15 minutes. - - Excellent.  Now, do we have enough vipers trained as pilots to get them, and the Tiger Rays flying? - - I have four Tigers built. -  Zara reported.  - Davinder, Lee, Macro and Nysin have all checked out on the Tiger's flight specs and have made test flights.  The other vipers however haven't yet been checked out .  They should be sufficiently trained to fly the transports though, which rely much more on the guidance systems and electronics to fly than the more demanding Tigers. - I grimaced hearing that.  If only we had one of the psyrens be a former pilot, or able to tap the memories of a former pilot to speed up the process.  My expression tightened.  Maybe we'll get lucky with our next batch of shamblers. - Well, we don't have much choice, Zara.  Have the four that are checked out, take command of the Tigers with instructions to stealth the entire way here.  The rest will have to pilot the transports, also on full stealth.  Please have the transports fuelled and loaded as soon as they replicated.  Tovin will give you the destination. - - Will do, sir. - - Thanks, Zara. -  And I broke the connection. I let a long sigh ease out my nostrils as I slowly turned to stare into the vastness of the cavern as it stretched out away from me. 'No turning back now!'  I grimly thought. Twitch was giving instructions to her wraiths when I returned to top level. ", . .  and I want you to stay stealthed, day or night, if you're in an exposed position.  The enemy will have their active sensors blocked but that doesn't mean they won't go to visual observation if they have to."  The diminutive wraith commander instructed and the handful of her people she was addressing, quickly saluted. "Yes, sir."  They chorused in unison. "Good.  Now get your asses out there.  I imagine the big man wants to begin moving Retribution here as quickly as possible and I want eyes on the entire time." The wraiths nodded and slipped out the door, stealthing as soon as they crossed the threshold.  That left Twitch alone, her expression pensive as she stared at the dark trees in the distance. "Hey."  I said, more to announce myself than anything and she looked over her shoulder at me.  Seeing who it was, she smiled. "Hey boss."  She said, turning towards me.  I smiled. "Shit looks good downstairs, Twitch.  You did a good job picking it out.  We could fit five Retributions down there."  I continued to say and she nodded in satisfaction. "Good.  Just made more sense, you know?  A deep hole in natural rock versus one made from concrete and steel."  She paused to glance around the room.  "The Earth Mother hasn't steered us wrong yet.  Relying on her strength in the midst of all that rock won't be the start." "Sure won't."  I agreed.  "I overheard you giving instructions to your pickets.  And you're right: I've made the call.  We should be seeing transferees shortly.  Along with some additional equipment we've managed to build in the few days you've been on your mission." "That's not the only change, is it."  Twitch adroitly pointed out.  "That new psyren, what was her name?" "Chi."  I supplied. "Right, Chi.  She's not from Retribution, is she." I shook my head. "Shortly after you guys jumped out, Charge's mission to gather raw materials for a project the echoes were working on triggered a velkin response.  We had to evacuate the camp and did so, just before they attacked." "Holy shit!"  She breathed, eyes wide.  "Was, . . was anybody hurt?" I smiled at the question, knowing the only person seriously injured was me, though you wouldn't know it to look at me. "No, we didn't lose anybody.  But some of us were forced to a second site, which I called Fort Hill.  There we had to take out an incubus who was ruining a Risen camp with his poor leadership, and threatening their survival by keeping human girls as personal slaves." "No."  Twitch hissed tautly, her expression suddenly hard.  "I hope you took care of that asshole properly." "Oh yeah.  He's not coming back from where I sent him."  My smile was tight.  "The girls, of course, attracted a massive influx of shamblers which I managed to get reformatted, bringing additional Transcended to the table.  And those Transcended had some ideas, blah, blah, blah, and now we have some fighter planes." "Ha!"  Twitch grinned broadly, all evidence of her early mood gone.  "Fighters??  How frickin' cool is that!  How many?" "Four, for now, with plans on using the vipers as pilots.  They have the reflexes and the attitude to make damn good fighter jocks."  My grin became playful. "Now, the reason I'm telling you this is that they'll be flying in here, along with four transports loaded with gear.  And I don't want your wraiths to think they're velkin and start shooting at them." "Flying??"  Twitch took three or four steps to the door to stare excitedly up at the sky.  "You have them flying in here?" I chuckled softly. "I'm guessing you were one of those kids that bugged their dad into going to the airshow whenever it was in town."  I said with a smile. "Hellz yeah."  Twitch said, literally bubbling with enthusiasm.  "I love flying!  Jets, prop planes, gliders; it's all so damn cool, I could just piss myself thinking about it." "Whoa there, settle down, nelly."  I laughed then cocked my head as I caught the soft whistle of something moving very fast through the air towards us. - Bat Cave, this Tiger One on approach. -  Davinder's voice spoke into my mind, carried on the local broadband by Twitch's wraiths.  - Do I have permission to land? - - You are cleared to land, Tiger One. -  I replied.  - Your landing spot will be marked by the wraiths! -  Then I was saying out loud: "Well, what are you waiting for, Twitch?" "Show those fellows where to land!"

 

Chapter 13: Tiger by the Tail

The first appeared out of the blue sky like a diving hawk, a shadowy shape that I wasn't quite sure I was even seeing as it seemed to dance and shimmer when I tried focusing on it.  Even when it was joined by three other shapes, I couldn't make my eyes stay on them. - Bat Cave, this is Tiger One.  We are on final approach. -  Davinder's voice spoke into my mind and the four shapes abruptly resolved themselves into the Tiger Rays, their shape-blurring stealth cloaks dropping as they went to hover mode for landing purposes. Blasts of focused magnetized ions were pillars the four fighter craft used to stabilize their positions in the air and lower them to the ground, dust spraying everywhere as the landing thrusters blew clear their targeted locations.  Silently landing struts extended and with barely a bump, the four Tigers were down. Like tongues lolling out of the mouths of panting dogs, slender doorways in the front of the craft dropped down, the pilot's seat perched on the end.  When the doors were fully extended, the seat then swiveled at 90 degrees to allow the pilot to easily step out onto the ground after disengaging from their safety harness.  As Risen vipers, with body shielding protecting against G-force stresses, and not requiring oxygen to breath, the four pilots were dressed in their combat fatigues instead of helmets and flight suits.  Slipping out of their harnesses, they walked to where a visibly thrilled Twitch and I were standing. "Welcome to New Retribution, Davinder."  I said, extending my hand to the tall East Indian viper.  "How was the flight in?"  Smiling, Davinder took my hand and gave it a hearty squeeze and shake before letting it go. "Thank you, sir."  He said.  "The flight was fantastic, actually.  The Great Plains, with the rolling grasslands and scattered forests, were beautiful."  Then Twitch was pushing impatiently forward. "What's it like, flying one of those?"  She asked, almost hopping up and down in her excitement.  Davinder chuckled quietly. "Well, let you me tell you, it's like nothing I've ever done."  He began and I quickly took a step back when I saw my enthusiastic wraith commander was about to take up a lot of their time talking about their planes and how they flew. "I'll let Twitch talk your ears off for a bit, while I figure where to park your rides."  I said with a smile and Davinder nodded. "Sounds good, sir." As it turned out, there was a smaller chamber just twenty metres under the surface to the south of the larger one I had selected as the new base's core.  A quick look at it was enough to determine that it'd make a perfect hanger.  All it needed was an access port cut into the roof then the Tigers and the transports could use their VTOL ability to move in and out of the space with little difficulty. Thankfully the first jump ins were happening at that point and I quickly found a handful of ballistas and psyrens and took them over to the spot I had designated for the hanger. "Okay, ballistas, I need you to use steady beams cut out some stone to lift the ceiling by about five metres."  I said, pointing to the spots with my hand held spot light where I wanted them to cut.  "Psyrens, you'll project a telekinetic field to catch the falling rock, teleporting it immediately to a dumping point just outside where I brought you in.  Once you've made the roof a little higher, I'll have you cut an access point through the rock to the surface that our craft will then use to enter and exit this chamber." Just then several javelins arrived with the stand lamps I had asked them to bring. "Thank you."  I said with a smile.  "Could I get you to set them up on the spots I've marked with a red 'X', please?"  Nodding, the javelins began turning the lamps on and placing them in the spots I had selected.  Each, after it had a final adjustment made, threw a bright circle of light up onto the ceiling, giving the ballistas plenty of illumination to work with.

After seeing the lamps placed, I turned back to the waiting ballistas and psyrens. "Okay, team, you know what I need you to do.  Any questions?  Good.  Here's a diagram of what I'm looking for, that you can refer to.  Have at 'er.  I'll check back in a bit to see how things are progressing."  - Tovin, can you have Simon come to my location?  I'd like him to double check some numbers for me. - It didn't take long for the juggernaut to sign off on what I was doing. "You've got an eye of structural engineering, Max."  The west coast Native American Risen said with an appreciative nod as we watched the ballistas using steady beams to carve out big chunks of rock before the psyrens teleported it away. "You have the ballistas moving just enough rock to give you that maneuvering room you were looking for without sacrificing the integrity of the roof arch, which has to support the weight of 15 metres of rock on top of it."  He used his measuring laser to make a few quick measurements and calculations.  "I'm afraid 15 metres won't be enough though to stop a direct nuclear strike on the hanger.  Especially if you breach it with a large access port." Simon pointed the laser at the roof and made a couple quick measurements. "You planning on putting a straight in hole?"  He asked, looking over at me.  I frowned as I thought about that. "Is there a better option?"  I asked in reply. "Well, if you want to keep the entrance hidden from eyes in the sky, I'd suggest one cut at an angle.  It'll require the pilots to use a bit more skill and attention to bring their craft in, but it'll reduce the need to protect the base's location from prying surveillance." Huh, I hadn't thought of that.  I nodded as I considered that. "Makes sense.  Thanks, Simon.  I hadn't even thought of that."  I smiled as I looked over at him.  "Think you could give me some measurements and calculations to make that work?" Simon's answering smile was broad and enthusiastic. "I would love to."  He replied. As it turned out, the rock we were removing from the roof worked very good to camouflage an entrance cut at an angle into the ground above.  With the measurements and calculations Simon provided, I had the ballistas cut an angled entrance into the hanger area. By this point Zara and the transports were beginning to arrive, carrying the bulk of our equipment and supplies that hadn't made it out of the pods.  They were the first to try out the new angled approach, easing down the sloping entrance before dropping the final few metres into the hanger space. Already busy with ballistas and psyrens finishing the final touches to the hanger roof, the space became a whirlwind of activity as Zara and a group of teslas began to unload the transports as soon as the vipers piloting them could touch them down. "Down through there, please."  Zara was directing traffic down the enlarged ramp that we had cut from the previous passage linking the main chamber with this one when I approached. "How many more trips will you have to make to clear Fort Hill, Zara?"  I asked as I stepped close.  In response she quickly consulted a data pad. "At least two more, sir."  The tesla project manager replied after a quick look at her inventory status read out.  "That is, if we don't have psyrens jump it over." "Which will take multiple jumps and multiple psyrens."  I noted.  "Let's stick with the transports.  Speaking of, how are the vipers as pilots?"

"Good, good."  Zara said with a nod before pausing to direct another group of teslas and javelins carrying several armloads of equipment down the ramp.  "I mean, the transports are pretty much self flying.  The vipers are just there to monitor the computer and they were competent at that.  We'll still need to train them up and get them signed off on flying the Tigers." "Sooner versus later."  I said with a nod.  "I have plans for those planes, the least of which is to establish a patrol around our location to keep our skies clear of enemy transports." "I'll need more raw materials for the replicator as well, sir."  Zara pointed out, once again consulting her data pad.  "I used up what materials we got in our strike against the velkin base to construct our transports.  We'll need approximately that amount of material tripled, if possible, to create enough planes for every one of our vipers." I felt a thoughtful expression appear on my face as I considered that.  With four planes, we'd need another eight to have one plane per viper.  At twelve planes, we'd have a tactical squadron of three divisions of four, if I were to apply American military designations to our groupings.  Even then it wasn't hard and fast, with each branch of the military having its own way of dividing up groups of planes. Abruptly I shook my head and grimaced wryly.  What the hell was I doing??  I had more important stuff to deal with than how to count damn planes. "We'll get you those raw materials, Zara, no worries."  I assured her with a smile.  "And we'll leverage the Tigers into that effort to get them truly battle tested." "I'd appreciate that, sir."  She said with a smile of her own and, giving her a nod, I made my way down the passage and into the heart of New Retribution. If the newly anointed hanger area was busy, the massive space that made up the heart of our new base, was several orders of magnitude worse.  I had teslas, javelins, psyrens, wraiths and animus running in every direction as they worked to set up living areas, the command center, the medical facility, the teslas' testing and manufacturing center, the quartermaster's and the exercise compound.  A couple extra things, but I had deemed them all required in the new base for maximum efficiency and effectiveness.  Once we got the hanger operational, it'd have a command center as well for flight control and a maintenance center to keep our planes and transports running at peak efficiency. Stand lamps were quickly being replaced by massive overhead spots, lifted into place by telekinetics to pre-drilled holes done by ballistas before being sealed in with precise shots from javelins.  With micro-nuke infinity power cells keeping them lit, they would shine for the better part of 500 years.  Already a central spine of them was in place thanks to a hard working crew Chi had put together, the resulting light filling the vast space with near sun-like brilliance.  With our not needing to sleep, they would give us sufficient illumination to work twenty four hours a day, seven days a week without stop. The buildings housing the various centers were also much more permanent than the field tents we were using, the materials coming out of the logistics pods we had rescued from the NADF base.  Instead of the pliable sheets of plastic stretched over a frame, we now had actual walls, pillars, braces and supports that clipped together to form single story structures that were as sturdy as an actual building. The largest of the building clusters being constructed belonged to the command center and the medical facility, both expected to see high volume traffic during active combat periods.  I angled towards the sprawl that was the command center, to see how Felix and Dante were sitting in terms of getting the network up and running. I had crossed perhaps twenty or thirty metres from the entrance to the hanger when somebody called my name.  Looking around, I spotted one of the young human girls we had rescued from Jeremiah's clutches.  Looking considerably better than that scraggly thing that we had pulled out of that shack at the back of his camp, she was running smoothly towards me, smiling as she did.

"Max!"  She said, breathing a bit heavily as she came up to me, her blue eyes sparkling as she drank in the sight of me.  A pretty girl, if I wasn't comparing her to Jen, that barely reached my shoulder with the top of her head, I would've put her at maybe fifteen.  Her body was just starting to fill out and her long, blond hair was pulled back into a functional tail.  Oddly enough, the fatigues that she was wearing seemed to suit her, fresh faced looks and all. "Hello."  I said as she fell in beside me before hesitating slightly. "Kassie."  She supplied and I nodded. "Hello, Kassie.  What can I do for you?" "I, . . I know it's only been a couple of days since we've begun our training but I just wanted to say I am so very excited to be learning what I'm learning."  She rushed out breathily in the way teenage girls talk when they're truly excited about something. I smiled in response. "That's excellent, Kassie.  I'm glad to hear that.  Of course, I expected nothing less."  I said and she bobbed a quick nod. "I know, Max, I know.  And I'm working so, so hard to please you!  But I was wondering, . . ."  She hesitated and I looked over at her. "Yes?"  I prompted. "Well, I was wondering if I could do something special, like be a wraith like Whisper.  She was my teacher this morning and the things they can do, I want to do." I frowned as I considered that.  Actually, considering what I wanted her to do in the very near future, it was a fairly logical request. "You know of course that Whisper and the other wraiths have those abilities as Transcended Risen.  You as a human won't have access to them." "Oh."  Kassie's face instantly fell.  "Can I then assume that I won't be able to do anything any of the Transcended can do?" "Yes, you can assume that.  All Transcended were brought back by the Earth Mother to fight in the war.  And to make them better soldiers, the Earth Mother gave them all special abilities.  Like Whisper's ability to cloak in invisibility, walk up walls and cut things with her finger tips.  You however were born as a natural human, blessed with whatever abilities your genetics and upbringing gave you." The disappointment was now palpable around the young human and she nearly stumbled as it threatened to overcome her.  Seeing that, I found myself feeling sorry for her.  To be torn from her family by a monster before she could make anything of herself, then told after being rescued that she didn't have any special ability was obviously affecting her.  It was as I pondered that, a possible solution hove into view in my mind's eye. "But perhaps we can work around that."  I said and Kassie threw me a hopeful, wide eyed look.  "The equipment we rescued from a ruined NADF base a few days ago may have something we can use to temporarily give you abilities like a wraith.  Let's go take a look and see." "Okay!"  Kassie said happily and she almost skipped with excitement as she followed my turn towards the quartermaster's building. The quartermaster's was a beehive of activity, as I suspected it would be, with Transcended of all types working together to identify and categorize our inventory of rescued supplies.  In the back they had constructed a warehouse, similar to the one we had found on the base, a place to store pods that were unopened.  And in the front it had been set up very similar to a store, with items divided into essential and non-essential, and sizes and gender target marked on each storage bin. In all, it was an extremely efficient and tidy set up.  I found myself nodding in appreciation as I made a mental note to pass on a congratulatory message to whoever organized it thus.  Then I was focusing on what I was looking for, eyes scanning each bin we walked by.

In my days as a SOCOM Ranger, my company had spent more than its fair share behind enemy lines.  And to remain undiscovered we relied on a combination of skill and equipment, most specifically the ghillie suit.  A mesh that could be supplemented with objects from the environment like leaves, branches and grass, a ghillie suit was the camouflage of choice for snipers and covert soldiers across the world. Assuming that military technology had evolved in the three hundred years I was in the ground, they should of come up with something far superior to the ghillie suit that we could use to give the human girls some stealth capability.  They had discussed developing infrared masking, light bending stealth suits even back in my time, so I could imagine what they were working on before the velkin invasion. Unfortunately the front of the Quartermaster's was just standard equipment and clothing, material most often used by any soldier.  Specific gear, like a stealth suit, wouldn't be displayed here since wraiths wouldn't need such equipment.  Time to look in the back. "C'mon, Kassie."  I said, heading towards the door I spotted leading to the warehouse.  "I'm not seeing what I'm looking for in here." Drawing back from looking at a number of tunics in different camouflage patterns, Kassie nodded and quickly put herself in my shadow as I stepped through the door and into the warehouse.  Here, on great metal racks assembled from the logistics pods, other pods were stored according to content and need.  So pods with more clothing and every day items were in the front, and those things deemed remotely useful, like stealth suits, were put in the back. Kassie stayed close to me as I worked my way through the throng, several times almost reaching for my hand when a non-Transcended Risen, like a lich, ghoul or vampire, got a little too close.  Thanks to the survivors of Jeremiah's camp joining us before the move to the Bat Cave, we now had more than a handful in the base, helping out while we waited for the base to be set up before assigning them to their upgrade companies.  Included in that number were the handful of Lost I had first seen when arriving at Jeremiah's camp; broken and desolate Transcended who's minds were overcome by memories of their own deaths.  Locked into a cycle of self-torture and consumption, many of them tried to destroy their Risen bodies so they could return to their cold slumber. Thanks to Tovin and her vast and growing knowledge of the human mind they had found balance and purpose, their minds restored.  First generation Transcended, two wraiths, two javelins, an animus and a summoner were recovered from the Lost and returned to duty.  Already they had thrown themselves into their new roles with the conviction and energy of the recently summoned, proving to be an asset to whatever unit they were assigned to. Finally we were through the press and near the back, where traffic was fair lighter.  Kassie heaved a sigh of relief and stepped to where I was reading labels on a couple of pods that caught my attention. "Is what you're looking for in there, Max?"  She asked, stepping just a bit closer than she needed to be; close enough that if I were alive, I could've felt the warmth of her body through our clothing. As it was, she was a presence I could feel nearby.  One I could easily ignore. "I believe so."  Seeing what I wanted on the second pod label, I pressed the release studs and opened it up.  And immediately found myself smiling at what I saw inside. Stealth suits: crafted from a material that not only absorbed and redirected energy across the spectrum but bent light around it to render the wearer invisible, they were the pinnacle of military stealth technology as of fifty years ago.  Pity Earth's soldiers didn't have the chance to actually use them against the velkin or they might have lasted a bit longer than under an hour in direct combat. "Here we go."  I said, pulling out one marked for female.  Turning towards Kassie, I handed it to her. "Put this on." Nodding, she began taking her clothes off, obviously thinking she needed to, to fit the snug looking suit over her body. "No, no."  I said as she pulled her tunic over her head to give me a flash of a military issue bra holding her breasts in close to her chest.  "Put the suit on over your clothing.  It's sized for an adult female and you're still a bit smaller than that." "Oh."  Kassie wiped the disappointment off her face, clearly unhappy that she wouldn't get to take her clothes off in front of me, and began climbing into the suit. As I suspected, it easily fit her even with her clothing on, wrapping her in a sheath of dark material that included a hood and mask to cover her face.  While she dressed, I went through the manual on a data pad included in the pod.  Once she had the hood on, her hair tucked in and her face covered, I looked up. "Okay,you should feel the suit's control surfaces pressing against the back of your neck.  Do you?" She nodded as she reflexively lifted a gloved hand to her neck to lightly touch where she could feel the metallic surfaces against her skin. "Good.  Now, think of yourself as invisible."  I instructed and smiled as, in the middle of her nodding her understanding, she faded from sight.  I could just see her with my peripheral, a strange shifting that marked her suit bending light around it. "Perfect."  I said with a smile and Kassie immediately shifted back into sight. "Did, . . did it work??"  She asked breathlessly and I nodded. "You were nicely stealthed."  I replied then handed her the data pad with the user's manual on it.  "Your homework.  Don't engage any of the suit's capabilities until you've read the manual end to end.  Then have Whisper test you on your mastery of it.  Is that clear?" "Yes, Max."  She said, joy suffusing her voice as she carefully began climbing out of the suit.  "Thank you so much!"  The suit off, she continued removing clothing.  "Please, let me thank you, . . ." "Not now, Kassie."  I said, holding up my hand before she could get her underwear off.  'Damn, that was close!'  I thought as she reluctantly let her hands drop from the fastenings on her bra.  It looked like Greta was right about this effort to wean the humans off their pheromone addiction.  It was fraught with peril.  I needed to stay on top of it or it would get ugly, . . fast.  I truly had a tiger by the tail here.  If I let go, it's going to bite me. "Remember, I said you would be rewarded once you prove yourself capable soldiers to me.  It has only been a few days and I am not yet convinced." "Of course you're right, Max."  She said, blushing deeply as she began pulling her clothes back on.  "I need to work harder to show you I can be a very good soldier.  And this suit will help me do that." "It sure will."  I agreed with a smile as she finished pulling the last of her clothing on before scooping up the suit and data pad.  "Now, let's go find your comrades and get them on board with the additional equipment and material in the tactical pods, hey?"

 

Taking Care of Business

After getting the girls sorted out, I turned my attention back to my primary goal: getting New Retribution ready for the fight.  Ever since I had been summoned it had been going from one fight to another, one crisis to the next.  So I wanted to get the base in order as quickly as possible in the hopes of getting it done before the next crisis arrived.  With that in mind, I threw myself into the effort to convert the old mine into a viable military base.  Every ounce of energy I had, every second of time I could spare, I ploughed back into making Retribution work. And so I found myself both a bit frustrated when, after two weeks of working around the clock we finally finished the conversion of New Retribution, the place we had started calling the Bat Cave.  And a bit relieved that the next crisis decided to wait until we were done to appear. It wasn't that things weren't going right.  Just the opposite, actually.  Everything moved into place just as we anticipated it would.  But, like every other major project undertaken with the goal of producing something significant, what took the most amount of time was getting the details right.  Power supplies from central batteries, conduits carrying data from sensor and communication arrays, lighting, ventilation, heating; all of these had to be attended to in order to make the base livable not only for Risen but for humans as well. Speaking of humans I was able to use those two weeks to get some distance between me and the girls, the non-stop nose to the grindstone putting me out of their reach.  Which, frankly was a relief; even my undead senses were starting to picking up their levels of increased arousal every time they were around me.  Hopefully the humans had used the two weeks of constant exercise and training to get themselves closer to being rid of their pheromone addiction.  I pondered that for a moment before turning my attention back to the screen Felix had directed my attention to. "So we have several elements of the alien fleet geosynchronous in orbit, usually over one of their facilities, right?"  He said, tapping a diagram that outlined warship positions around the globe, the touch on the screen commanding it to zoom in the view to an animation of ships moving in orbit.  "And we have several that orbit in what I would call a patrol.  The K'ethik that dropped in on us at the transport hub were off the patrolling warships."  Another tap zoomed the view back out for a moment.  "Now, considering we have no geosynchronous ships in orbit in our location I think we can safely assume there are no permanent velkin bases nearby.  However, the patrol goes right over top our position once every three days." "Well, that's damn inconvenient."  I growled and Felix nodded. "That, it is."  He agreed.  "That's why I had extra effort put in to make sure none of our arrays or entrances are visible from orbit.  But that's not the only problem."  Another tap on the screen brought up a representation of the velkin computer network.  And I watched as a section of separate symbols and images moved onto the screen, connected to the network for a moment as it continued moving through, then disconnected just before moving off the screen. "Apparently the patrol doesn't stay constantly linked to the alien network."  He explained upon seeing my mystified expression.  "Only when they fly close to another cluster of ships, usually the ones that are parked, do they link up and exchange information.  Which is both good and bad." I frowned as I thought about that for a second. "Good, because they won't always be aware of something that's being moved around the network."  I finally said.  "So their response time might be exaggerated." "Right.  And bad because that means the worm we have constantly scanning their network to keep the ships in orbit blind, may or may not make its way onto that transient, autonomous network from the main system."

My face tightened as I realized what that meant. "So they may, or may not be blinded by the worm."  I hissed and again Felix bobbed his head in confirmation. "Good thing you decided the twenty metres or so of rock over our heads wasn't sufficient and you put up all the EMF absorbing insulation you found in the tactical pods."  He dryly noted.  "With the alien sensor capabilities largely unknown to us, it's difficult to determine whether they could see us even though all that rock, or not.  Those baffles might lend us just enough protection to, . . ." Before Felix could finish, a soft peep from another one of the work stations in the cluster he occupied captured his attention.  Frowning, the veteran tesla slid his chair over to that station and let his fingers dance across the control surfaces for a moment. "No way."  He breathed, sitting back with a look of astonishment on his face. "Your systems found something?"  I wanted to know and he nodded, looking over at me. "Our missing vampires!"  He said and my eyes shot wide open. "What??" He quickly called up several images, looking like they were taken with high res cameras from orbit. "You asked me to look for them after the animus failed to track them down, right?"  Felix said, zooming a number of the images in and pausing them.  I nodded. "I remember that." "Well, the original Retribution got shut down before I could get a real good chance at locating them.  So as soon as we rolled into this location I set up a search algorithm and put it secondary priority on all our surveillance birds that passed over central North America.  And it looks like we got a hit.  Several, in fact." "No shit."  I leaned in closer to peer at the first image, eyes wide. It was grainy as was expected from an image taken from orbit.  But it was clear enough to make out the distinctively twisted forms of the three corrupted vampires as they carefully approached a velkin foot patrol.  As I watched, the vampires appeared to be saying something, catching the aliens' attention.  As expected, the half dozen hunters brought up their weapons but the vampires must've been making sense to them because they let them approach to within five metres where apparently they had some sort of conversation, both sides gesturing and pointing as they carried on. "A negotiation, you think?"  Felix asked, his expression thoughtful as he too watched the scene unfold. "It would seem so."  I said.   Then I felt an eyebrow climb in surprise as one of the vampires abruptly charged the nearest hunter, knocking it down and yanking off it's helmet to begin siphoning off its life force.  As if that were a signal, the other two also attacked and within moments their enhanced speed and strength overcame the half dozen hunters with little difficulty. "A negotiation that obviously didn't go the way those vamps wanted it to go."  I grimly stated. Now visibly larger, the stolen goa continuing the corruption they had began back at Retribution, the vampires moved out of the scene.  Only to be picked up by another satellite several kilometres north of their previous position.  That was quite the jump.  Only one way that was possible: "These are obviously delayed images."  I looked over at Felix.  "What's our lag here, Felix?" After consulting a time tag on the image, he looked back at me. "Twelve hours on the first one, sometime late yesterday afternoon."  He said.  "The second one is about two hours after that." "Damn, these bastards can move."  I stared at the second image which showed the vampires running like apes down on all fours, their grotesquely elongated limbs making normal running nearly impossible.

"The question is, where are they moving to?" Again the vampires left the image and we turned to the third one.  This one was in the dark and the satellite was forced to use motion sensing and ultraviolet scanning to detect the three vampires as they moved through the frame. "Six hours ago."  Felix said with a gesture at the darkened screen before turning to the last one. This one showed what appeared to be a Risen camp, fires and torches lighting the perimeter as well as the camp's interior.  No Transcended seemed to be visible, mostly ghouls, liches and vampires.  Guards with slug throwers were posted around the perimeter at fairly regular intervals and it seemed to be a place in decent order. Without warning the vampires rushed the gates, the guards firing steadily and with some skill directly at them.  But, filled with stolen goa, the vampires were able to shrug off the defenders' determined efforts and they began to grab them, siphoning off their goa in surges before throwing their withered bodies to the side.  I felt the muscles in my jaw clench as again and again the vampires attacked their own kind, slaughtering the Risen in a strange mimicry of the velkin, replacing the aliens' human prey with undead prey of their own. In a few minutes it was over, the three vampires too powerful for the Risen in the camp to defeat, their slug throwers worse than useless against their corrupted foe.  Sweeping the camp to make sure they hadn't missed anyone, the corrupted vampires left, again heading north. "That was an hour ago."  Felix husked, subdued by what he had just witnessed.  I nodded, feeling a little sick to my stomach myself, even though it shouldn't be possible. "We need to find out where those bastards are heading."  I said hoarsely, forcing myself to relax.  We had them in our hands, damn it, and we couldn't close the deal.  And now we needed to clean up that mess by taking them out before they did any more damage. "We need to find them and drop them in a hole." "Agreed."  Felix attacked his control surfaces with a vengeance, bringing up a roster of available satellites that were in the right time and place to see the general area the corrupted vampires had been heading into.  It didn't take him long to find something important. "Damn."  He husked and I immediately leaned forward, eyes intent. "Do you have them?"  I hissed. "No.  But I have their next target."  He answered and I watched as the satellite he had tapped into to scan the area, zoomed into to what looked like another Risen encampment. This one, however, was easily four times the size of the first one the vampires had attacked.  A decent palisade protected its perimeter, its interior well lit and neatly organized.  A number of different Risen were visible, including a handful of Transcended. "That's Fort Kicking Horse."  Felix grimly noted.  "I spent some time there about five years ago.  It's close enough to strike against several culling camps and is fairly effective."  He looked over at me.  "But they are nowhere strong enough to resist those vampires for long, if that's where they're headed." "It has to be, unless the culling camps are closer.  Then they could feast on either velkin or humans.  And while I don't mind aliens dying, I'd like to avoid any more humans getting eaten in the near future."  I said in a low, intent voice. Felix did a few quick calculations and measurements. "If they follow in a straight line from our last sighting, it's definitely Kicking Horse."  Felix sighed and shook his head.  "The vampires will be on the camp before we can jump there to stop them."

"That's why we're not going to jump."  I informed the veteran tesla in a taut voice.  - Tovin, call the vipers in.  We're scrambling the Tigers for a run against a target to the west! - As I jogged up the ramp to the flight deck, I could hear the Tiger Rays' power plants spin up with throaty rumbles.  Using magnetic fields to channel ionized gas as thrust, the Tigers were far more quiet than the fighter jets I had experience with during my time as a soldier.  The main drives were virtually silent.  The forced pressure thrusters they used for vertical take off and maneuvering, however, were a different matter. Dust was already swirling around the flight deck by the time I reached deck level, all twelve of the Tigers powered up and two lifting off the ground.  I looked to the right to the enclosed flight center we had built, glassed in to protect the work stations inside against the blow back.  And through the window I saw Zara, our impromptu flight leader, leaning forward as she watched the squadron prepare to leave. - All pilots, your target coordinates have now been uploaded to your onboard data cores.  Keep it tight; you'll be flying close to no less than five culling camps and a transportation hub.  If you come under fire, you've been authorized by Command to defend yourselves.  But no going after enemy targets on your own.  This mission is to intercept those corrupted vampires and prevent them from attacking Fort Kicking Horse.  Are we clear on your ROEs? - There was a quiet murmur as the pilots reported into to their flight leader, Davinder in Tiger One.  Then he was speaking on broadband. - Tiger Squadron acknowledges the ROEs and mission requirements, Flight.  We'll find those three sons of bitches and drop 'em in a hole!  Tiger Squadron reports all ready to fly.  Are we cleared for departure? - Spotting me through the window, Zara flashed a thumbs up then thumbs down, a question on her face.  I quickly gave her the thumbs up. - Tiger Squadron, you are cleared for departure.  Good hunting! - - Thank you, Flight. -  And the first of the Tigers lifted up through the portal in the flight deck's roof with a snarl of maneuvering and take off thrusters. I reached ground level just in time to see the last four plane division leave the angled ramp leading out from the flight deck.  Now using their main drives, all that I could hear was a low hum as the Tigers catapulted almost faster than the eye could see from the access ramp; dark raptors of grim intent darting skyward.  One after the other they came, streamlined shapes that moved silently through the air. And then the last one was clear, the squadron forming up in a flying formation several hundred metres up before they rapidly flew out of sight. - Magda, it's Max.  Can you piggy back Davinder's visual cortex for me? -  I asked. - Of course, Max. -  The redheaded psyren immediately replied and my vision blurred before I found myself looking through Davinder's eyes. With the Tiger's clear canopy and heads up displays, the pilot had an excellent view of any battlefield.  A quick glance to the left and right showed the sleek shapes of the war planes on either side of Tiger One, which had taken point.  Then a look over the readouts and controls yielded the craft was operating at maximum efficiency. "Heads up, Tigers."  Davinder's voice spoke into my head, an echo of what he was actually saying over the communications link connecting the squadron together.  "We should be in the target area in five mikes." "Roger that, Tiger One."  One of the other vipers said, her voice clear and precise.  That would be Lee, the Asiatic viper who had a bullwhip as her primary melee weapon.  Roster had her as Davinder's wingman. "Commencing scan of the area now." I watched as Davinder's hands reached out and triggered his own scan and a topographical map appeared on his HUD. "There's Fort Kicking Horse, but I don't see, . . ."  Began Macro, the viper with a two handed axe as his weapon.  "Wait, wait, there they are.  Three large humanoids, moving at approximately twenty kilometres an hour right at the camp!  They'll reach the perimeter in about ten minutes at that speed." "No, they won't."  Davinder tautly replied.  "Tiger Five, Tiger Six, you are go for a run on the target." "Roger that, Tiger Leader."  Another voice I didn't recognize, said.  "We are weapons hot, targeting scanners active." Davinder turned his head and I watched two of the Tigers drop out of the formation.  A heart beat later: "On the deck.  Got visual.  No lock though; whatever's twisting them up like that is preventing a clean electronic lock, Tiger Leader." "Go LOS."  Davinder growled.  "Don't let that freak get away!" "Roger that.  Cannons firing.  And clean strike to the head of the bogey in the middle.  We are by." "Roger, Tiger Six.  Seven and Eight, you're up.  Confirm we got a target down on your way in." Roger that, Tiger Leader."  And I watched two more planes drop out of formation, this time on the other side.  Again it wasn't very long before: "And we are on the deck.  Confirmed, one target down.  Got LOS on remaining two.  Firing.  Second target down, but third was missed." "Roger, Tiger Seven."  Davinder reached out to adjust a control as the remaining planes came around, their speed having taken them a considerable distance beyond Fort Kicking Horse. "Nine and Ten, . . ." Before Davinder could finish, his particle shielding flared as several bolts of plasma dropped out of nowhere to slam into his craft.  And for a moment his fingers danced across the controls to steady her. "Tiger Leader, we have incoming bogeys.  I'm reading eight, nine, . . no, fifteen small velkin transports vectoring in from eleven o'clock high!"  A voice tautly reported into the cockpit. "Damn it."  Davinder growled as his HUD split to continue showing the ground and a dome of space around his plane as well.  It didn't take long before several bright dots appeared in a loose formation, bearing down on them from above. "Looks like we may have interrupted a velkin attack on Fort Kicking Horse.  Nine and Ten, finish the mission: drop that last corrupted vampire.  The rest of you, scatter.  Stick to your wing man and stay frosty.  Pick up your visual scanning.  Keep comms to a minimum."  Then he fell silent for a second before: - Flight, this is Tiger One.  We have encountered enemy craft north of the Risen encampment. -  A glance at his HUD showed another wave of craft appear, and another.  He growled when multiple dots appeared on his topographical display as well. - And we are reading massive numbers on the ground.  We are outnumbered at least 10 to one.  But if we bug out, Kicking Horse is history.  Please advise! - - Magda, disconnect. -  I ordered tautly and I watched the broken plain that was the parking lot fade back into view.  Then I was sprinting for the access door. Zara looked up as I stepped into a frantically busy flight center, teslas everywhere feverishly working their stations as they pulled down satellite imagery and particulars from the evolving battle. "Report!"  I barked as I tore my eyes off a screen that showed dozens of alien flyers swarming the Tigers, plasma and particle beam fire everywhere. "Tiger Squadron has intercepted what looks to be a massive ground and air assault on Fort Kicking Horse."  The tesla tersely reported.  "They are taking heavy fire from all quarters but so far are holding the velkin away from the encampment."  Her face tightened.  "The Tigers are tough, sir, but they can't take the kind of pounding they're currently taking for long.  What, . . what are we going to do?" I tightly smiled.  The answer to that was simple. Time to kill some velkin!

 

Way of the Tiger

Dust sprayed in every direction as the transport's thrusters spun up to full power.  Holding on to a stanchion by the door, Charge looked over me and shouted. "Are you sure this is going to work, boss?  I mean, there's no damn pilot!" Packed in tightly, the Risen around me still managed to find enough room to turn their heads and look at me.  Including a curious Magda, the redhead standing directly in front of me.  She twisted to look over her shoulder at me, an eyebrow lifted gracefully.  Unfortunately that slight twist only served to further press her rather incredible behind into my groin, making me grimace.  If I had to deal with that all the way to Fort Kicking Horse, . . . "Zara will be remote piloting all the transports, Charge."  I replied, loud enough to be heard over the thrusters.  Which meant everybody else in the open compartment could hear me too.  With enough space to hold twenty soldiers standing, the open compartment was similar to transport helicopters in my time where the doors had either been removed, or moved aside to allow easy access to the compartment. Which also meant, if we did any hard banking or maneuvering, we ran the risk of falling out.  Being undead, a fall from height wouldn't kill one of us per se, but it'd still hurt like hell.  No wonder Charge was nervous, being right beside the door and all. Then all talk ceased as the transport lifted off the ground and began to smoothly make its way for the access port in the roof.  A quick glance back towards the ground yielded the other two transports were also in the air, their cargo compartments as tightly packed with troops as this one was. Beyond them the ramp leading up from the main part of the complex was crowded with soldiers, geared and ready for battle, as we were.  With a flight time of approximately fifteen minutes, forty five minutes could see us put 120 veteran Transcended troops on the ground, hitting the enemy right in the mouth. - All personnel, this is Flight.  Stand by for rapid acceleration as soon as the transport has left the access tunnel. -  Zara's voice said over the broadband. Not needing bulking utility vests like most of the Transcended crammed into the transport, I was relatively unburdened.  And so was Magda, who immediately pressed back against me yet again at Zara's warning. 'You keep doing that, Magda, and we might have a problem.'  I mused wryly within my mind only to feel her wiggle that amazing bottom against me, snuggling it even closer if that was possible, making me twitch in reaction. - Hey, aren't you supposed to have rules against casually reading people's minds? -  I sent in her direction.  There was a soft, sensuous giggle into my mind in reply. - When they're so close to the surface and dealing directly with me, it's hard not to read them. - Magda quietly confessed, her telepathic communication much more personal and intimate as I could feel her essence slip into my mind. - Not to mention, you're in direct physical contact with me.  Without shielding to protect your thoughts, they're leaking everywhere. - Awesome.  So now on top of everything else, I had to watch what I was thinking in certain circumstances.  That, or figure out how to shield my thoughts. Then any further  thought ceased as the transport cleared the tunnel and Zara hit full thrust, sending the vessel streaking through the air.  That forced me to brace myself to prevent getting thrown into the Risen behind me, and to avoid having Magda bowl me over. We spent the next few minutes fighting to keep our balance and not fall out of the transport's open doors.  Then: - All units, we are approaching the target area.  Stand by for insertion. -  Zara tersely informed us.

I looked out the open door and my eyes narrowed as I caught sight of heavy weapon fire, both on the ground and in the air. - Magda, LOS snap ports of squads to the ground, twenty metres ahead of the advancing velkin forces.  Go now! -  I tautly ordered and the transport began emptying by squad, each team snapped from the transport to the ground in a wink of light and air.  A heart beat later javelin and ballista fire began slashing at the massive velkin column. "Here we go!"  Charge muttered then he and his team winked out, leaving the transport to Magda and myself. "Emptying the other transports now, Max."  She said quietly, still close enough to touch me.  The redhead psyren had turned slighly so the curve of her right hip joined her buttock in pressing against me, her arm slipping possessively around my waist. "Good work, Magda."  I said, doing my best to ignore the delicious sensation of her curves pressed against me.  "Have a safe flight back."  Then I was slipping free and throwing myself out the door before she could say anything. For a long moment I hung in space, starting from almost five hundred metres up.  Then, as my absolute density went to maximum and my shields went up, I dropped with a vengeance.  The ground shuddered with my impact a few seconds later, my ultra dense body sinking to mid thigh with the force of my landing.  Then dirt and rocks were spraying in every direction as I churned free to dash towards the seething corona of light in the near distance marking where we had drawn our line in the sand. I was a laser beam, cutting through the heart of the velkin column, sending hunters and vehicles flying in every direction as I ripped through.  As I finished my run and prepared to turn around, I was staggered by an extra powerful blast striking me right between the shoulders.  Shrugging it off, I turned just as a pair of Tigers made a relatively slow strafing pass overhead, their pivoting particle cannons slicing through several hunters before they were out of range.  They then punched their main drives to climb rapidly back into the swirling dogfights that dominated the sky over Kicking Horse. Following the Tigers up for a brief moment, I watched the sleek craft shrug off several plasma blasts of their own as they continued to climb before they cut upward through a swarm of enemy flyers,  fixed plasma and pivoting particle cannons both blazing.  Energy shields flickered and collapsed before the velkin craft were ripped apart by weapon impacts and secondary explosions, their deaths sending blazing wreckage dropping out of the sky like falling stars. An extra powerful blast striking me dead on with enough force to make me grunt with the impact recaptured my attention and I dropped my eyes back to ground level.  And watched two heavily armored vehicles rumbling towards me, over-sized plasma cannons mounted on moving turrets aimed right at me.  'These sonuvabitches have tanks?'  I grunted again when another pair of blasts slammed into me.  Not for long. My first strike ripped the lead tank in half, its collapsing power cell consuming it in a thunderous explosion.  The hunters in the second tank were good; even as I skidded to a stop to take aim at them, they had already managed to get the cannon back around to pepper me with heavy shots, each hammering into me with considerable force. Resetting even as the air abruptly filled with javelin and ballista fire, I prepared to charge forward again.  The appearance of goa fire meant the Risen on the ground had caught sight of the heavy vehicles I was taking on and were now firing to cut down the hunters that were clustered around each. Blazing into motion once more, I killed the second tank and took out a line of transports at the same time.  Pieces of vehicle and hunter fountained in every direction, shattered and twisted in their interaction with my unstoppable body.  Yet, for every tank I took out, there seemed to be three taking its place, for every hunter I killed a dozen marched forward to replace it.  This column was far larger than we had first anticipated.

- Zara, how about those reinforcements. -  I sent over the broadband.  - We're taking a pasting here.  We sure could use the help. - - Transports are just reloading now, sir. -  Zara quickly replied.  -  We'll be on site within ten minutes. - I grimaced as I changed my angle to attack a new wave of hunters and transports that appeared out of the dust of the battle.  I wasn't sure we had ten minutes.  I was starting to think we had bitten off far more than we could chew.  Then I got a transmission that chilled my undead blood in my veins. - Max! -  Charge sounded seriously concerned as he came onto the broadband.  - We cannot hold our position.  The velkin have just too many hunters and vehicles coming down on us!  I am taking heavy casualties.  I need to fall back! - Shit.  And with reinforcements still nearly ten minutes away.  I twisted and darted along an angle to my original path to tear through another tank that was ignoring me to pound the javelin line with heavy blasts.  My impact cut it in half and flung the two halves in opposite directions, the massive pieces crushing any hunter not nimble enough to get out of the way. Skidding to a halt again to reset, I watched in dismay as the tank was replaced by nearly a dozen more, the thickly armored vehicles moving forward on shimmering levitation fields, their cannons blazing almost non-stop.  This attack wasn't just to hurt Fort Kicking Horse.  It was meant to crush it. - Get your guys out of the line of fire, Charge. -  I tautly commanded before slashing forward to cut through two tanks on the leading edge of their line.  - We'll have to use skirmish lines until we get reinforcements and psyrens to give you guys cover. - Silence greeted my command.  Damn it!  Rocks and dirt sprayed as I dug in and came to a halt. - Charge!  Answer me, man! -  I looked over at our line and saw the fire had dwindled to a trickle as the tanks continued to pound their position.  - Anybody?  Anyone left standing over there? - I stumbled as a pair of blasts slammed into me from the side.  Regaining my footing, I again looked over at where Charge had dug in.  And found it silent as a handful of tanks rolled through, hunters grimly shooting at any fallen Risen they came across in the head. "Charge, . . ."  I husked, stunned.  My friend, . . .  I fought the overwhelming sense of loss that swept over me which nearly dropped me to my knees as grief, hot and violent, crashed into me like a battering ram.  I had seen plenty of death while I was a soldier.  But this was supposed to be different.  We were undead zombies.  We're supposed to be unstoppable.  Weren't we?? What the hell had gone wrong?  Then I flinched as the tanks on the leading edge began to bombard the distant Risen encampment, clearly their goal from the very beginning of this encounter.  And in that moment I had my answer. I had trusted in our victories, in our skills and abilities to overcome the odds.  They had in the past.  But now, now we faced seasoned troops, soldiers that thanks to constant encounters with the Risen of Kicking Horse, understood us and knew our weaknesses.  I had attacked with our normal aggression, thinking we would once again sweep an unprepared foe off the battlefield.  Only to find ourselves outnumbered and outclassed. A glance skyward yielded a brief positive: the Tigers had cut the velkin aircraft to ribbons without a single loss.  Even as I caught sight of them, the slick shapes were dropping out of the sky to strafe the tank column, several tanks exploding as the double punch of the plasma and particle cannons overwhelmed their shields and ripped them apart. I flinched as a tank near me exploded, pieces of its armor bouncing off my shielded body.  And for a long moment I simply stood there, letting the chunks of smouldering metal hit me and fall to the ground, my eyes half closed.  Then, abruptly, like a switch was thrown, grief became all consuming rage and I was screaming incoherently as I stormed forward.  They were going to die.  They were all going to die!

I quickly lost track of it all.  Of how many tanks I smashed, how many transports I destroyed and how many hunters I crushed.  I even lost track of where I was, as it all resolved into a blur no matter where I looked. Then finally it was over.  There was nothing left to smash.  No more enemies left to kill.  Staggering over to the broken line of javelins and ballistas that had made their last stand to hold the enemy back a mere kilometre from Kicking Horse, I found Charge.  He was amongst the crushed and burned bodies of his command, his body broken and charred, his head gone. "No."  I moaned, falling to my knees beside him and hoarsely I began to sob, the grief pouring out of me like a river. I don't know how long I was there, crying over my friend's body.  I barely acknowledged Jen's arms suddenly folding around me, both Tovin and Magda's voices in my head, trying to console me. "What the hell happened?"  I heard Bojay ask from nearby, his voice subdued. "The velkin were here to kill Fort Kicking Horse, and brought the whole armory to do it."  Firinne replied in a voice just as quiet.  I could feel her and the other juggernauts close by even as Jen cradled my head against her bosom, tenderly stroking my hair as I slowly began to master my grief. "Over two hundred tanks, five hundred transports, aerial support and nearly five thousand troops.  They wouldn't have stood a chance, if Max, Charge and the vanguard didn't jump in and try to stop them." There was a pause as she let the muscular juggernaut absorb that.  Then: "Davinder said our guys barely slowed them down.  The tanks rolled right over top of them.  It was like they knew we would be here and they were ready for us.  Max was the only thing that stopped them, in the end.  Once Charge and his command were down, Davinder indicated all he could see was streaks of fire slashing back and forth, cutting the velkin to ribbons." I took in a slow breath through my nostrils, useful only to further the calming process as I no longer needed to breath and slowly began pushing the grief into the back.  Time for payback.  Time to kill some velkin. "Max?"  Jen asked, worry in her voice as I then pushed away from her to rise to my feet, roughly scrubbing my tears off my face with the back of my sleeve.  Then massive tendrils of goa were snarling as they arched out of the ground to slam into my body. "Max?  Baby, what are you doing?"  She asked, this time with no little alarm in her voice as I took a step back to suck in as much goa as I could hold from the tendrils. "I have a job to finish."  I growled.  "And some culling camps to destroy." She must've seen something in my face.  Heard something in my voice that struck a cord.  Because, before I could move, she was. "No!"  Jen screamed, stepping in front of me.  "You are not going to sacrifice yourself to destroy those culling camps out there.  No!" "Out of my way, Jen."  I grated, fury scouring any grief or remorse out of my body.  I was a juggernaut.  Nothing was going to stop me from killing them all.  "Those bastards are going to pay for every Risen they killed today." "No."  She repeated, stepping closer to put both her hands on my chest, her touch making fat sparks of unleashed goa fly everywhere.  "Charge was a soldier.  They all were.  They knew the risk they'd be taking jumping in here against such odds and they did it anyway.  It was their job.  It's not your fault." "Of course it is."  I snarled, pinning her with a hard look.  To her credit, Jen didn't flinch.  "I was the one that just had to hit the velkin here.  I was the one that ordered us into battle against overwhelming odds when we should've just let the Tigers do the job.  I was the one that got my friend killed." "You and Charge saved Fort Kicking Horse."  Firinne stepped in to gently say, reaching out to lay a light hand on my arm.  "Your sacrifice saved almost five hundred Risen."  Then Bojay's big hand was descending on my other arm as he too stepped close. "We know you're hurting, brother.  We all are."  He rumbled.  "Charge was our friend too.  But you can't blame yourself for his death, man.  That'll poison your soul and eat you up inside.  And if we're going to win this fight, we need you whole and with us.  Not churning with the need for vengeance." I returned his concerned look with a cold stare of my own.  If I had to, I would go juggernaut and knock them all out of the way.  I just needed a little more goa and, . . - No, my juggernaut. -  The Earth Mother's voice was soothing in a way the psyrens could never be, my anger almost instantly evaporating.  - I will not lose you today as well.  There is still too much to do!  Charge and the others have been returned to their rest, their souls allows to go to the next world, their duty done.  They did not fall because of you.  They fell because they faced a relentless foe that you must help me stop. - There was a slight pause, then: - I need you, my catalyst.  I need you now more than ever.  Do not abandon my children, your brothers and sisters for the sake of your anger and vengeance.  Take from this failure knowledge and experience, and use those things to become better. - And then she was gone, leaving my body echoing with her presence.  I sighed, then let the summoned tendrils go.  As always, she was right.  Damn it. "We need to fall back to the Bat Cave and regroup."  I husked, the anger's evaporation leaving me feeling drained despite holding almost as much goa as physically possible. "Now that we know that they know we're here, we need to prepare.  We need to train, we need to become disciplined."  I let my eyes go from Jen, to Firinne then over to Bojay.  "No more gunslinger bullshit."  I hissed. "It's time to become soldiers."

 

House of Cards

The late spring rain storm pounded the Bat Cave, a deluge that poured from heavy clouds and went on for hours.  But I felt none of the cold rain dropping out of the sky to soak me to the bone as I stood and stared at the memorial marker that we had erected for the fallen at Fort Kicking Horse.  All I could feel was anger.  Anger at myself, for racing in without waiting for reinforcements or a better assessment of the situation, and for my arrogance that saw not just Charge killed but 60 good Risen, men and women, as well.  And anger at the velkin who had killed them. One by one the others came by to pay their respects.  Twitch, Kat and Felix, Boost, Justice, Whisper, and Hannibal; each filed past to put a hand on my shoulder, or give me a hug in shared misery.  Tovin stood with me for a long moment, the two of us in silence as the rain soaked us both, lost in thought.  And Magda, stepping close to slip her arms around me and her mind into mine, trying to will my pain away. Finally the juggernauts joined me, when everybody else had paid homage to Charge and his fallen command.  Jen put her arms around me to hug me tight on one side, Firinne on the other, the rest grouped around me as we stared together at the polished metal plaque set into the ground a few paces from the base's main entrance. "So what's the move, big man?"  Bojay quietly asked after what seemed an eternity of standing together in the rain. "Something I should've done from the start."  I just as quietly replied.  "We build our numbers, we train and equip our soldiers to the best possible level, and we prepare to take back what was taken from us." And, for the first time in hours, I finally lifted my eyes from the plaque that had my friend's name on it to stare into the distance. "Only then will we be ready to fight this war like we need to.  Only then will we truly win." Finlay was waiting for us when we stepped into the command center a few minutes later, each of us dripping wet. "Max."  He greeted me, flanked again by his two succubi.  This time, however, there was no sarcasm or bitter wit.  Only thoughtful consideration as he watched us file into the control center. "I heard about Charge.  You have my deepest condolences, of course." "Thank you, Finlay.  What do we owe for the pleasure this time?"  I asked, also keeping my voice level and professional.  The succubi I ignored even though their hopeful smiles and lust-filled stares raked over me.  I had more than my fill of demonics to last me a lifetime, thanks to Jeremiah and his perversion. "Besides paying my respects to the fallen, I'm here to carry the Earth Mother's official congratulations for bringing New Retribution online as a fully equipped base."  He said with a respectful inclination of his head.  "She also hopes you'll send out emissaries to other Risen bases throughout North America, and eventually the world, with your plan to equip and train a more powerful Risen military." "That was the intention."  I replied.  "Perhaps to that end you can ask her to temporarily direct every shambler in North America here for reformatting." Finlay nodded, his thoughtful expression deepening. "Although, as you've already discovered, shamblers are merely placeholders; animated bones and not much else.  There isn't enough there for the Earth Mother to command them in great numbers.  She may not be able to reach them enough to have them all converge on New Retribution." I shrugged. "No matter.  I just thought I would ask.  It would've saved a great deal of time and effort.  If she can, outstanding.  If not, we have to range out from the base to obtain raw materials to continue building vehicles and equipment anyway.  We'll do our formatting wherever we can find shamblers in great numbers."

"Fair enough."  Finlay replied.  "The Earth Mother is also pleased with how you've recovered the Lost." I nodded. "They just needed balancing; something we're well aware of thanks in part to the Upgrade Protocols.  We'll make sure we have plenty of psyrens on hand to insure no more Transcended will be Lost, or Forgotten."  I said. "Outstanding."  Finlay noted.  "I'm also to advise you that your upgrade option for vampires pleases the Earth Mother, but it isn't something she wants forcefully done, as you and I previously discussed.  I read the report your Tiger commander, the viper Davinder submitted and I'm glad we burned down the last of the corrupted vampires.  That we know of, anyway.  But, as all Risen are, you're to give any vampire you encounter the benefit of the doubt with regards to whether they've been corrupted or not.  You won't be going around upgrading or destroying vampires against their will." I felt a rather frosty smile appear on my lips. "That must've been a bit of a relief for you, hey, Finlay?"  I half expected a tart response and was surprised when he merely shrugged, his thoughtful expression never wavering. "To tell you the truth, I was intrigued by the prospect of becoming a Transcended, if only for a few hours at a time."  He admitted with a sigh of resignation.  "Now, one last piece of official business then I'll be on my way.  The Earth Mother knows you have human girls here and she is curious as to what you intend to do with them." My eyebrow lifted at that. "Does she also know how they came into my company?"  I wanted to know, abruptly annoyed at the rather offhand manner the vampire had asked about them.  I was only slightly mollified when Finlay, without hesitation, nodded. "She is working on dealing with the handful of demonics that were summoned, to avoid any more situations like the one Jeremiah had created."  The vampire added with barely a glance at the two demonics currently on his arm.  "We won't see a repeat of that." "I certainly hope not."  I said with more fervor than I thought I would have.  "As for the girls, I intend on using them to infiltrate the sanctuaries and convince the local humans to put aside their apathy and throw their lot in with us.  When this war is over, we're going to need to rebuild the human population and as undead, we won't have the ability to do that.  It'll be all them.  But they won't, unless we convince them to fight.  Both for Earth, and for their own right to exist as something more than some alien's entree." Finlay again nodded in understanding. "The Earth Mother will be pleased with that plan."  He said.  "She indeed wishes her children to find themselves once again.  However, she wanted me to tell you not to be so quick to dismiss any possible role the Transcended will have in that effort." As I frowned in confusion at that, the vampire blithely went on. "Anyway, that is all I had in my official capacity as liaison.  If you don't mind, I wouldn't mind taking a quick look at New Retribution myself.  It's one thing to read about it in reports, and entirely different to see it with one's own eyes." "Of course.  Do you need a guide?"  I asked and the vampire shook his head. "I think I'll see quite a bit more if I just wander around."  His thin smile was the warmest thing I ever saw appear on his face.  "Now, if you'll excuse me, I'll be about that tour."  He hesitated slightly before once more inclining his head. "And again, you have my condolences on losing not only a valuable comrade, but a friend."  Then Finlay and his two succubi were stepping past us and out of the building.

"What a curious exchange!"  Firinne said with a frown. "You're telling me." Violet said, looking over at me.  "Sorry, sir, but I was under the impression that we weren't getting along very well with the Earth Mother's vampire liason." I stared after the vanished vampire and his friends for a long moment, my frown not wavering. "We weren't."  Then I was dismissing Finlay from my mind.  We had too much to do in a short period of time to spend effort wondering what the hell that vampire was up to. "One thing that stood out from our experience at Kicking Horse was the lack of balance."  I said, turning to face the other juggernauts.  "I thought having dedicated companies of the same type of Transcended would work in our favor.  However, we saw success with mixed companies during our last raid against that major velkin base.  Now, I'm not saying having wraiths, animus, summoners and psyrens with Charge's company would've seen them defeat that massive enemy force.  But it will see us have success in the future." I paused to let my eyes scan over the faces of my fellow wreckers, each of them looking as resolute as I felt. "And I'll begin by splitting the juggernauts up, much like we did on our last raid.  While any action from this point will see two or more of us on the battlefield at any one time anyway, I want to make sure each company has at least one juggernaut with them at all times.  And which ever company is going into battle, the juggernaut in the company will be attached to that action.  So no matter what we do, the juggernauts are going to be hitting the velkin right in the frickin' mouth." That triggered a low murmur of appreciation, several heads nodding. "Now, I'm going to pull in all the company commanders and start breaking things up to balance the brigades out, based on my original team structure with each team getting at least one animus, one wraith, one summoner, one javelin or ballista and one psyren.  As soon as that's done, I'll let everybody know where you've been reassigned."  A slight hesitation then: - Tovin, could you call all the commanders to the meeting room in the command center, please? - The next few steps made me wish I had memorized the various manuals and guides that had been pushed at me every time I was promoted.  That way I could've easily given our two tactical brigades the structure they needed. First came the name change from brigade to battalion.  It made more sense, the structure loosely based on the US Army where I served the greatest amount of time.  That gave us approximately 700 Risen per battalion.  With the numbers we currently had, that gave us three battalions instead of two tactical brigades.  Each battalion then would be further subdivided into approximately four companies.  Companies were divided into platoons and platoons into squads.  All three battalions were then folded into the Risen First Brigade, of which I had overall command, HQ, First and Second Battalion. Which, of course, brought up the question as to who would command at the various levels.  Names were submitted then voted on for squad commanders, platoon commanders, company commanders and battalion commanders.  Boost and Vanessa I left out of the combat structure.  While summoners were assigned to each squad, I needed chief medical officers outside of the standard line of command to address the necessities of patching up our people without needing to go through the combat chain of command.  They would head up the First Summoner Company, HQ Battalion.  For the same reason I made Tovin and Chi my co-chief psionic officers, psyrens also being assigned to each squad but needing a separate chain of command to more efficiently function.  So First Psyren Company, HQ Battalion became their bailiwick. Felix I put in charge of HQ Battalion's First Tesla Company, the tesla companies the only unified company I was maintaining outside of the HQ Battalion.  Dante I put in command of First Battalion's First Tesla Company, and Zara in command of Second Battalion's First Tesla.  Twitch and Whisper both refused battalion and company level commands for obvious reasons: wraiths were too specialized to act as generalized commanders. So I formed a Risen Special Operations Command, or SOCOM, putting all the wraiths under that command.  They'd have joint command there, with the ability to second soldiers from any other company for their SOCOM operations.

That left my battalion commanders; Justice I put in command of HQ Battalion, Kat took command of First Battalion and Helo Second Battalion.  I left the selection of their company commanders to them.  And wasn't surprised to find some of our earlier commanders, like Abbas finding their way to posts of responsibility. The conference room was empty some time later as I sat and stared at the revamped command structure laid out in several briefs in front of me.  First Brigade, composed of HQ Battalion, First and Second Battalions, with each battalion having an HQ company, a tesla company and a first and second company.  Each company then had three to four platoons, which further broke down into a platoon consisting of four to five squads, our base unit.  Each company would have its own quartermaster, which would pull from central stores. I sighed as I finally sat back to rub at eyes that weren't really tired, but I figured they should be with all the staring at ranks and organizational charts I had just done.  'I knew there was a good reason why I hated this stuff when I was an actual soldier.'  I wryly mused then sat back.  'I just hope I'm not building a house of cards which will fall over at the least little trouble!' At least it was done, no turning back now.  And the various commanders were out in the base right now, making the changes necessary to see the structure put into place.  Now, on to the next step. - Tovin, can you get Zara on broadband for me?  I have some materials requests I need to submit. - Those were pretty straight forward.  I wanted her to expand her production facility from one industrial 3-D printer to four, 12 Tigers to 36, and four transports to fifteen, with a third of those be over-sized for cargo, the rest specialized troop carriers.  Then I put Dante on the hook to make sure every soldier had a standard issue kit, including rifle, side arm, K'ethick zero gap armor and K'ethik commlink along with their uniforms and effects.  There would be no exceptions; even the javelins and ballistas would be issued rifles and side arms as fall backs in the case an overextended Upgrade falling below goa threshold and reverting to their base state, or a Transcended becoming exhausted.  Psyrens too would have a standard kit issued to them, although I left it to Tovin and Chi's discretion whether they would enforce its use in combat. Then I pulled Justice, Helo and Kat back in and we worked out a rotation for patrols, materials gathering raids into nearby Winnipeg and other locations and training/ drills I wanted to run to keep our soldiers at perpetual combat readiness.  Next I met with Boost and Vanessa and we worked out the ratio of templates we wanted to run for the next few rounds of reformatting shamblers to give us the pilots and additional personnel we needed to make the structure work.  And finally I spoke with Tovin and Chi about sending out representatives to all the nearby Risen encampments, as well as checking on the status of our humans.  If they were ready, I wanted to insert them into any nearby sanctuaries as quickly as possible to give us as much time as possible to gather human troops for any big push we had planned. "There's an excellent chance that all you'll get will be teenagers."  Chi pointed out after she gave me the status report on our little group of refugees.  "They'll target their peer group when they first return.  And teenagers, from what I recall, most often question the status quo as part of their development.  They'll be the ones that won't yet be resigned to their fates." I frowned at that. "I don't disagree, Chi.  However you have to remember sanctuary humans aren't set up like the humans we remember being."  I pointed out.  "The demographics are heavily skewed towards younger populations with the need to reproduce as quickly as possible before they are culled at around twenty years.  This need produces teenagers that are already parents.  How Jeremiah managed to sneak a 17 year old out of that continues to baffle me, but I'm fairly certain she was already a mother before she left."

"That will create a logistical problem."  Tovin quietly noted.  "If our emissaries do manage to convince their peers to leave, without themselves being forced into a reproductive role, then they may bring families with them." "Damn."  I sighed.  "I didn't even think of that.  There's no way we have the supplies to keep a human population that will be constantly growing, alive." "Maybe we should forgo inserting the girls as emissaries and target the cull camps instead.  Those people will be twenty plus and already severed from their families."  Chi suggested. "And resigned to their fates."  I grimly added.  "I tried to convince some of them to come with me when I was first captured shortly after being summoned several weeks ago.  They flatly refused, saying if they escape, the velkin will merely return to their sanctuaries and take more.  Which may or may not include their families.  They weren't willing to take that risk." It was Chi's turn to frown. "Even though the aliens would eventually take them anyway?"  She asked and I nodded.  "Bah!  And with you being unwilling to use succubi to biochemically convince the males to, . . ."  Her voice faded as a thoughtful look appeared on her face.  "Why couldn't we use telepathy to convince them instead?  Much like we re-balance newly reformatted second gens?" I looked over at Tovin.  Unfortunately, as it usually was, her expression was lost in the shadows beneath her voluminous hood.  However I knew her well enough to sense that she was pondering the suggestion. "The only way it would work, is if we wipe their core belief system and superimpose our own."  The veteran psyren said after a length pause to consider Chi's suggestion. "Can we do that?"  Chi asked, an eyebrow raised. Tovin favored her fellow psyren with a look. "I think the better question would be not if we can, but if we should."  She said after a brief, thoughtful pause.  "We start imposing our way of thinking on sentient creatures and we begin a journey down a dark and slippery road." "Are we imposing a way of thought, Tovin?"  I said, my lips pursed in my own thoughtful expression.  "Or just restoring what the Earth Mother created them with, that the aliens have successfully bred out of them?" The hood swung in my direction. "You refer, of course, to the 'will to live'."  Tovin said.  "They still have that, or the species wouldn't be propagating itself." "Which is more of a biological urge, Tovin.  When faced with either fighting for their continued existence or allowing themselves to be herded like cattle, they take the herding over the fighting."  I pointed out.  "The velkin have crushed their spirit, their desire to progress and succeed, to make something better of themselves.  They now believe they are nothing more than a subjugated people, worthy only of being an alien's next meal." Tovin continued to regard me for a long moment as she mulled over what I was saying. "So you're suggesting we merely restore that to them."  She quietly replied after that moment of consideration.  I nodded vigorously. "That's all I want, Tovin.  I just want these humans to remember what and who they are.  They're not food, for pity's sake.  They're human beings and children of the Earth Mother.  We need to remind them of that." "Very well."  Tovin conceded.  "You present a valid argument.  As long as we aren't imposing a specific way of thinking onto their psyche, I support any effort to rekindle the human spirit into these people."  She paused.  "In fact, I think I know just the way to do it." I smiled. "Sounds intriguing.  What did you have in mind?  And there was no pun intended there."  I asked. I got the distinct impression that Tovin smiled anyway. "Have you heard of dream talking?"  She asked.  When I shook my head, she went on to explain. "It's a discipline that requires the most powerful, and yet the most subtle of telepathy.  You use great subtlety to enter the mind while the person is experiencing REM sleep and insert suggestions into the dream state where you allow the person to use their own mind to process it.  Once you confirm the suggestion's been implanted, you then withdraw."  She paused to look over at Chi.  "The most effective suggestions are done at the very basic, almost primal level.  That's where the power comes into place, as the interface between the primal and the higher mind, the animal and the human is a tumultuous place.  A telepath who isn't careful could find herself caught up in the maelstrom that constantly rages there, drowned in the storm, her own mind lost in the primal feedback.  You need power to retain your own identity and to protect your own mind against the primal storm." Chi let out a soft whistle of astonishment at that. "Sounds intense."  She admitted before looking over at me.  "But I would be willing to try, if it means rescuing those folks from their apathy!" I smiled. "Me too.  Anybody up for a field trip?"

 

Chapter 14: Dreaming of a New World

It was dark and raining as we peered through the organic fencing surrounding this cull camp, the northernmost of the five Fort Kicking Horse had been attacking. "Okay."  Twitch whispered as she moved back beside me, nearly invisible in the gloom despite being close enough to touch.  "Kicking Horse has been advised of our operation here and they're standing by.  Not that it was hard to get them mobilized; they can see the carnage from yesterday's battle from the top of their walls and they're nervous as shit." I nodded before looking over at the crouching form of Kat. "What have the locals been noticing about alien movements, Kat?"  I asked in a low voice. "Not much, big man."  The animus commander quietly admitted.  "After that battle, a lot of the local wildlife bugged out, scared away by all the noise and commotion.  The handful of gophers, prairie dogs, ground squirrels and the like that stayed behind because this is their home, haven't noticed anything since then.  But they've also been laying low." I fought the impulse to sigh.  I should've expected that. "And can you see inside?  This gloom has the rest of us all but blind." Pressing closer to the fence, Kat made a quick scan. "A handful of hunters lingering by the communication shack, heavily armed and ready.  And, . . ."  She paused before waving us back and down into the long grass that grew right up to the twisted metal making up the fence.  And in doing so, we were out of sight as a patrol of four hunters in full battle gear marched past just inside the fence. Carrying hand lights, they shone them through the fence, sweeping their bright beams over the long grass and through the pouring rain in the hopes of catching sight of something.  Twitch had gone ninja, Kat mimicked the animals and went to ground and the rest of us did our best to become a part of the scenery. Either it worked, or the giant aliens were tired of standing in the rain because after a cursory scan, they were moving on, talking in their gobbling, croaking language.  We gave them a couple minutes to get clear before rising out of the grass and moving close once more. "Patrols, every ten minutes."  Kat finished what she was about to say before the velkin patrol drove us into hiding.  "So if we're going in, we need to go now and move quick once we're inside." Nodding, I glanced back at our company.  Normally I would just have Twitch cut through the fence and slip through.  But considering I had no less than a half dozen of the brigade's most powerful psionics with me, I figured a short snap portal would do the trick without leaving a hole in the fence for the patrols to find. So it was to Tovin I looked, giving her a subtle nod to signal we were ready to go in.  While the veteran psyren couldn't see any better than the rest of us non-animus Risen, she could telepathically sense my intent.  With a wink of light and air, we were twenty metres inside the fence. Immediately both Kat and Twitch eased forward, weapons ready as they approached the nearest cull cage. - I've got about eight females, all in their early twenties, and two males, same age range. -  Kat reported on the broadband.  - And they are all asleep. - Moving silently, Tovin slipped up beside Kat before she dropped lightly onto the ground and slowly crouched down as low as her robes permitted. - Okay, I'll do the first dream talk.  Magda, you'll do the next, then Chi, Ronin, Ell and Jazz.  Remember, follow your protocols and stay out of their primal interface with its storms and eddies.  I don't want to have to come in and rescue any of you. -  And then all was quiet as she extended herself into the nearest human, a male.  I could've sworn I saw him twitch when she slipped into his mind but with the gloom and the rain, it was hard to tell.

- Down! -  Kat abruptly commanded over the broadband and once again we tried to make like a part of the scenery as another patrol walked by several metres away.  Fortunately, like the four we first saw, these ones were also watching the fence with unusual intensity, holding their weapons ready in case they didn't like what they saw.  It must be how the Risen of Fort Kicking Horse got in.  Which made it even better that we had ported in versus cutting our way through and running the risk that the semi-intelligent fence would tell its masters about our presence. I watched them warily, ready to go juggernaut in an instant if I needed to.  Of course that triggered an internal struggle where a part of me wanted them to turn around and spot us so I could smash them out.  And a part of me wanted to remain undiscovered so I didn't run the risk of getting anybody else hurt. - Okay I'm out. -  Tovin announced, sounding just a bit tired.  - Magda, you're up next. - - Okay. -  The redheaded psyren said, her mental voice carrying just a hint of nervousness.  - I'll take the other male.  Wish me luck. -  And then more silence. It was so pervasive I let the lack of sound beyond the hiss of the rain falling all around us wrap me  in a blanket of white noise.  And almost didn't hear Twitch moving towards me until she was right beside. Catching motion out of the corner of my eye, I shifted my head just enough to see that it was the wraith, moving without a sound to my side. "Hey, big man."  She greeted me in a whisper pitched perfectly to be nearly hidden by the rain's gray voice.  "Bet you didn't think you'd find yourself back in a place like this without smashing everything in sight."  I quietly snorted. "No."  I admitted.  "And I'm barely restraining the urge to do so now." I instantly felt her hand on my arm. "Chill out, big fella."  She said.  "You and I both know this dream talking bullshit won't work if the heart beats are awake." I grimaced. "Yeah, I know."  I replied.  "It's just that sneaking around isn't really my style." Twitch laughed softly. "Having seen you action, hun, I am well aware of that fact.  You juggernauts have to be knocking buildings down and making aliens cry for their mommies to feel joy.  'Cuz you're all twisted like that." I chuckled despite myself.  If  Twitch was trying to distract me, it was working as I felt some of the tension leech out of me. - I'm out. -  Magda announced.  - That was considerably harder than I thought it would be. - - I did not need to know that. -  Chi announced.  - Going in! - One at a time the psyrens invaded the dreams of the sleeping humans to carefully implant their suggestions.  With there being four more humans than psyrens, Tovin, Magda, Chi and Ell went in twice to make sure everybody was implanted. Then Tovin was silently lifting back into the air with a shimmer of telekinesis. - That's the last of them. -  She said, turning to look in my direction.  - We'll need to give them a couple minutes to process the suggestion then, . . - "Where, . . where am I?"  A woman gasped in a hoarse whisper as she abruptly sat up.  "Am I, . . in a cage?"  She surged to grab at the twisted black material of the fence, pressing tightly against it, her eyes wide with terror. I had seen that look before.  If we didn't act fast, she would scream no matter what we did.  Triggering juggernaut speed, I was by the cage in a heartbeat.

"Shhhh!"  I hissed, shifting just enough that my black clothing wasn't so invisible against the darkness behind me.  "We're working on getting you out.  But if you scream right now, that will bring the guards." Spotting me, she quickly reached through the cage towards me.  I took her hand and she squeezed it in a vise-like grip.  I could feel her trembling. "Can, . . can you help me?"  She said in a hoarse whisper, obviously terrified.  Normally I wouldn't want to deal with somebody gripped by the amount of fear I currently saw on this woman's face.  It made them liable to bolt at the least little sound, or scream at a shifting shadow.  They were almost impossible to extract in a situation requiring the highest levels of stealthiness. But in this case, it meant Tovin's dream walking had worked.  She obviously wasn't content to sit in this cage and wait for her death.  She wanted out and now! "Of course I can."  I said, pasting what I hoped was a reassuring smile on my face, hidden as it was in shadow.  "I just need you to stay calm and we'll get you and your friends out of there." "O-okay."  She hiccuped, clinging to my hand as if it were a lifeline keeping her from certain death. - Tovin, are we going to see similar reactions when the rest wake up? -  I wanted to know.  - Because, while it confirms your implant worked, I really don't want to be forced, . . - "What's going on?"  Another woman sat up, trembling and I fought the urge to grind my teeth in sudden frustration.  If they don't stop doing that, the guards would hear for sure! As if sensing my thoughts, the woman holding onto my hand abruptly released it to quickly move to where the second woman was jerkily looking around, eyes wide in obvious fear. "You need to be quiet, Gayle."  She hoarsely whispered.  "They're getting us out.  Can you quietly wake the others?" Ah, smart girl!  Then she was moving to the other sleeping forms, putting action to her own words. - That one's a keeper. -  Chi commented on broadband, saying what I myself was thinking.  A keeper, indeed!  With only a little reassurance, she had conquered her fear and had moved to take control of the situation in a manner that would benefit everybody in the cage.  That kind of thinking under duress was definitely something we needed! Then she was back at the fence, reaching for me once again.  I quickly caught her hand and she shuddered a sigh of relief. "Good work."  I whispered as the rest of the cage's inhabitants gathered anxiously behind her.  Each and every one of them had a uniform expression of fear on their faces, though they were now doing their best to control it. "Now, I have a friend that can get you out of the cage without breaking the fence.  I don't want you to be afraid, as she will do it in a manner you have never seen before." "It's okay."  The first woman said, giving my hand a squeeze as she did to let me know she was on my side.  "I trust him and I think you can too." There was a quiet murmur in response from all of them, a number of them nodding to each other and her. "We know you, Ambriel."  One of the males whispered.  "And we know you wouldn't steer us wrong.  We will trust him and his friend." - That's a relief. -  Twitch sent over the broadband.  - It'd get messy in a jiffy if one of those heart beats decided to start squawking. - - Yeah, it would. -  I agreed as Ambriel nodded to me through the fence to indicate I had their trust.  - You didn't implant them with an inherent trust of Transcended, did you, Tovin? -

- No, Max, I did not. -  Tovin replied. - It's that beautiful face of yours, big man. -  Kat purred.  - No woman in their right mind could say no to that! - - Whatever. -  I replied, grinning despite myself.  - Either way, they're willing to let us help them.  You want to snap us out to the first fall back point, Tovin? - - I will, Max.  And I'm sending you with them, to make sure they stay calm. -  The veteran psyren indicated. "Okay, my friend is ready."  I whispered.  "In a wink, you'll be not only outside of the cage, but outside of this entire place, out in the grass.  Is everybody okay with that?"  At feeling Ambriel's hand squeeze and hearing everybody's quiet 'yes', I turned back into my mind. - Okay, Tovin.  Ready when, . . - A wink and a puff of air and we were standing in waist deep grass, the rain pouring down all around us.  The cull camp was nearly a kilometre in the distance, its pale green lights visible from our vantage point. - , . . you are. -  I finished into my mind and quietly chuckled. "We're out!"  The woman named Gayle squeaked with no little relief and delight, a broad smile appearing on her face. "See?"  I said with a smile.  "I told you I'd, . . ooofff!"  I grunted as I was abruptly in a tight embrace, Ambriel holding onto me with every bit of her strength. "Thank you."  She whispered hoarsely, tears frogging her voice.  "You saved us!" Awkwardly I returned the embrace when she showed no signs of letting go of me. "You are very welcome."  I whispered back.  Then they were all hugging me in a crying, laughing ball of humanity. I let them vent for a moment, knowing it would help settle them down that much more quickly.  Then I was leaning in to whisper once more. "Now we're going to be saving quite a few more of your people and we're going to need help getting things sorted.  Can I count on you to help, Ambriel?" "Yes."  She said, leaning back enough to look into my face.  Apparently whatever she saw there pleased her as a brilliant smile appeared on her shadowed face. "I owe you my life, friend.  You have my help as long as you need it." "Good."  I smiled in return.  "Because I'll need it.  By the way, you can call me Max." I knew we wouldn't have long before the next set of humans arrived.  It was Tovin's plan to go until they no longer had the goa to dream talk then jump everybody out.  But these were powerful psionics with amazing strength.  I could be hip deep in humans by that point. Anticipating that to a degree, I made sure we had jumped in with a good amount of supplies.  Food, clothing, some water and food; I hoped it would be enough to tide our rescued humans over long enough to jump them back to the Bat Cave. So, with Ambriel helping, I quickly rationed out some food and water along with any article of clothing the others needed against the cold and wet.  Then I set up a couple tents equipped with portable space heaters so they could dry off a bit and get warm.  That done, I stood outside and stared at the distant cull camp and waited.  It wasn't long before I had company. "Can I ask you a question, Max?"  Ambriel said as she stepped out of the warm and light of one of the tents to where I was standing, arms folded, impassively waiting as the rain continued to deluge.  She quickly pulled a poncho she had found in the supply packs we had brought with us, around herself as some protection before stepping to my side. "Of course, Ambriel."  I said, turning just enough to smile at her.  She returned my smile with a bright one of her own before abruptly sobering. "We were wondering where we're going from here." I nodded.  I had been anticipating that question.  Taking my nod to mean I wanted clarification, she went on. "I mean, I hope you're not taking us back to the sanctuaries.  Once they discover we escaped a cull, they'll immediately turn us back over for fear of reprisal.  And while I don't blame them; the aliens are pretty scary and I wouldn't want them coming after me, I am so not going back into a cage!  Especially if it's so those monsters can eat me!" Unconsciously Ambriel shuddered, her words evoking some sort of image in her mind that wasn't making her very happy. I smiled again, this time trying to make it reassuring. "No, we won't be taking you back to the sanctuaries."  I said and she heaved a sigh of relief.  "We're taking you to a Risen base, called New Retribution." "Risen?"  She looked up at me, her eyes searching my face.  "What are the Risen?" Ah, here we go.  Now that was a question worth answering.  I would have to, since it would come up sooner versus later.  I couldn't wait until we were back at the Bat Cave and they were seeing ghouls and liches for the first time.  It'd be a little late by then. "Short version or long?"  I countered, my smile fading somewhat. Seeing my expression change, she lifted a hand to gently touch my face. "I already know you're not one of us, Max."  Her smile was brilliant.  "No human has eyes like those.  Not to mention, you stand in this rain as if it isn't touching you.  Your friends have the ability to transport people great distances without touching them.  And I'm willing to wager you can do quite a bit more than merely be stoic." I winced at that and she giggled, a warm and friendly sound. "You weren't supposed to notice that."  I said with a half laugh. "What?  Those black and purple eyes?  Or that you do strong and silent very well?"  Ambriel asked with a playful smile and again she laughed out loud when I grimaced before she let her hand drop with a final caress. "The eyes, of course."  I answered with a smile then sobered.  "But you're right, Ambriel.  The Risen aren't human, although once we were."  A quick glance revealed she looked both interested and curious, not alarmed.  Good; there was hope.  Looking into the distance, towards the flickering lights of the velkin base, I went on. "We are called a number of things, some of which you may have even heard.  Undead, zombies, monsters; yet only one of those labels truly describe us.  We are undead.  But we're not the monsters of legend and horror.  We are those that once lived on this world, children of the Earth Mother, just like you and your people are.  And she has called us back to fight against the aliens that seek to destroy her children." "So, you fight to protect us?"  Ambriel quietly asked and I smiled as I nodded. "The dead have Risen again, to protect Earth and her children from the alien invaders." Ambriel returned my smile, her eyes bright in the darkness "And I bet you good folks could use some help doing that, couldn't you?"  She asked and I laughed out loud. Oh yeah, she was a keeper, all right,

 

Dream Whisperer

I was standing with the first group we had rescued when the second group winked into view.  Instantly Ambriel and the others were moving forward, speaking words of reassurance and comfort as they welcomed them with food, water and clothing.  And once they were settled, having something hot to eat and wrapped with blankets and ponchos against the rain, Ambriel took a step back. "Hello, friends."  She said with a smile.  "I'm Ambriel from Rushing Waters Sanctuary.  And this is Max, a Risen Transcended, a group of special people that are helping us escape from the aliens." All eyes followed Ambriel's gesture to me and I inclined my head in greeting. "You, . . you won't take us back to the sanctuaries, will you, Max?"  A young man asked in a quavering voice. "Say that you won't."  That from a young woman, huddling with a bowl of soup in her hands.  "Please.  They tore us from our families, from our husbands, wives and children.  For what??" She pointed a quivering finger at the distant camp.  "So we can be their food??"  The woman snarled. Anger seethed in this group.  I could feel it emanating off them in waves.  Not just anger at the velkin but at their fellow humans.  I looked over at Ambriel, eyebrow raised.  Catching my look, she leaned in close. "Some sanctuaries use a lottery to decide who is to be culled."  She quietly explained.  "While others have a 'selection committee' who arbitrarily decide.  Either way, those selected don't live long enough to say anything about it."  She lifted her eyes to look at me for a long moment. "That is, until you and the Risen came along, Max." I let a long sigh go as I pondered that.  I could only imagine the gauntlet of emotions these people were running as they now faced the prospect of a life beyond what they had been taught for three generations.  Now that we had re-ignited their will to live I had a feeling we were going to see a great many of those emotions as the humans struggled with their new existence.  Like the overwhelming anger I was sensing from this group that just arrived. Again, if hearing my thoughts like a psyren, Ambriel leaned back in. "We'll get them settled down, don't you worry, Max.  We'll teach them to focus that anger, and use it to give them strength.  Strength enough to take back the world that once was ours." Again I could only shake my head in amazement.  Had the Earth Mother guided us to this young woman with her innate leadership qualities and willingness to lend herself to the war against the velkin??  Seriously, how the hell did we find such a diamond in the rough in the midst of this filth?  And the first one to approach us, at that!  And yet again I silently thanked Tovin for both coming with such an amazing way to turn the humans to our side.  And for the seamless way it appeared to have been done. "We absolutely will, Ambriel."  I replied.  "And that's a promise."  Then, a little louder: "As Ambriel said, I'm Max.  I'm an officer with the Risen First Brigade out of New Retribution.  And we're here to help.  And I'll begin that help by telling you that no, we won't be taking you back to the sanctuaries.  Just the opposite, actually.  As soon as we gather as many of you as we can, we'll be transporting you back to our main base at New Retribution, a significant distance from here.  There we've set up a refuge facility where you can take shelter." There were several quiet sobs as anger abruptly dissipated into relief. "Now, eat, drink and gather what strength you can."  Ambriel stepped into the pause to quietly urge.  "This night will be a long one, and I have a feeling we have quite the journey in front of us!"

As it turned out, the young human was more right than I figured she'd be.  Using the port outs of the rescued humans as a measure, I discovered the length of time between dream talking and setting the handful of rekindled humans free and moving to the next, was dramatically increasing each time.  I could only guess it was to let the psyrens recover somewhat before diving back into the dream talking. That, of course, had a couple of effects.  Not only did it increase the risk that they would be discovered as the longer they were inside the cull camp, the more likely it was that a patrol would find them.  But it also increased the amount of exposure the humans were getting, with the chill of a late spring night combining with rain that didn't appear to be letting up any time soon.  Without a medic trained to deal with human health and illness, having one or more of them get sick at this point would be disasterous. Yet as concerned as I was, all I could do was stare at the distant lights.  I couldn't abandon the humans to check in on my colleagues.  So I had to let the thoughts churn through my mind while the waiting drove me crazy.  By the time the fifth and, what I would discover a few moments later, last group of rekindled humans winked into sight, it was nearly three hours later and I was literally churning a hole in the wet ground with my pacing.  Thankfully Ambriel had taken a great deal of the responsibility for the humans' well being upon herself so I didn't have to. Each time one appeared, she would introduce herself to them, then introduce me and assure them the Risen were friends that would help them escape not only the velkin, but the humans that let them be taken.  And each time they would cry out with relief and joy before they began working to include themselves in the effort Ambriel had taken upon herself to champion. By the time the exhausted psyrens, Kat and Twitch appeared some twenty minutes after the last group arrived, I was thoroughly convinced who I would nominate as the human leader of our rapidly growing force.  Ambriel and the others from the first group, as well as a handful from the second group now, were busily about getting people food and blankets and keeping everybody as dry as possible.  A difficult task, considering how much water was currently falling on our heads. "Think you can jump us out of here, Tovin?"  I squatted down beside my exhausted friend who had sunk to the ground almost as soon as they managed to stumble into the bivouac.  "Or do we need to camp the night for you to recover your strength?  If so, I can go get some assistance from Fort Kicking Horse." Her hood drooping close thanks to its burden of rainwater, Tovin slowly shook her head. "We won't be jumping anywhere for at least three or four days, Max."  She hoarsely said, clearly drained.  "Between the cumulative drain of our resources from each subsequent dream talk, and the psychic storms a number of us faced deep in their subconsciousness, none of us has any goa left.  In fact, I think I might actually fall unconscious while my body recuperates." Damn, and I thought that for two reasons of which only one was relatively selfish.  Psyrens without goa are sitting ducks.  And these particular psyrens are six ladies the Risen could ill afford to lose; skilled, capable and experienced every one of them.  It didn't help that I had fought beside every one of them and counted them all as my friends.  Especially Tovin, Magda and Chi.  My expression tightened as I thought how I would feel if I lost any one of them.  Or Kat, or Twitch, for that matter.  Might as well cut my heart out right now. With those thoughts darkening my mood, I found myself turning to more selfish thoughts of how much I wanted out of the rain.  I may not feel the cold and the wet like the humans were, but that didn't mean I was completely immune.  I was starting to seriously think about how good it would be to have clean, dry clothes on and to be dry myself.

"Max."  Magda hoarsely said from where she knelt beside the small fire one of the humans had built.  Giving Tovin a comforting squeeze of the shoulder, I quickly stood and carefully wove my way through the exhausted psyrens to Magda.  I knelt beside her after giving a vigilent Twitch a nod in greeting.  The wraith and her animus companion were standing weapons ready as they scanned the darkness around the bivouac for any sign the velkin had somehow tracked us here.  Hopefully the humans weren't so filthy they could be scented even through the driving rain. "What's up, Magda?"  I quietly asked, looking into her tired face. She returned my gaze for a long moment, then lifted a trembling hand to my face.  I almost grimaced when I felt how cold it was.  Her skin was like ice. "I am so very tired, Max."  She husked.  "And I need to rest.  Could you sit with me a while so I can?  As capable as Twitch and Kat are, I only feel safe when you are with me." I smiled and captured her hand to hold it against my face for a moment. "Of course I can, sweetheart."  I said gently and I moved to sit beside her after I let her drop her hand.  Magda immediately leaned against me and put her arms around my torso as I put my arm around her shoulders. "Take all the time you need."  I let her snuggle close before putting her head against my neck and shoulder. I'm not sure if it was the physical contact, or the fact that she was exhausted.  All I know is that one moment she was snuggling close to me.  And in the next our minds were mingling, her telepathy suddenly coming online. "Magda?"  I asked, eyes wide as I felt her presence moving though my thoughts.  But all I got out of her was a quiet mumble that didn't quite sound coherent. Having had Magda in my thoughts before, I wasn't alarmed.  At least, not at first.  Only when I realized this was no brushing over surface thoughts, but a far deeper mingling did I feel a shiver of uncertainty.  By then, of course, it was too late.  Not only was she seeing my thoughts, but I was seeing hers. I blinked at the images that swirled across my mind's eye, their power and passion making me respond despite being soaked to the bone and uncomfortable.  And, as they became increasingly intimate and erotic, they sent the almost blood surging through my undead veins as my heart began to race. "Magda."  I gave her a shake.  "You need to snap out of it."  I said hoarsely, trying to marshal my own thoughts while attempting to wake her.  "Magda!" Then Twitch was kneeling in front of us, concern on her face. "What's going on?"  She asked, looking from my grimacing face to an unconscious Magda and back again. "Her telepathy has kicked in and she's overwhelming my mind with her thoughts."  I managed through grit teeth, twisting slightly so Twitch wouldn't notice my own incidental state of arousal.  "She's so exhausted, I can't wake her up!" "Holy shit!"  Twitch exclaimed, leaning in to take hold of Magda to give her a quick shake, to no avail.  She then threw a quick look over at me. "Are you okay?" I grimaced as a particularly intense scene began to play itself out before my mental eyes.  If I were alive, I would've been panting. "Not really."  I rasped even as Magda let out a low moan and began to move against me.  I fought not to twitch in response as the image in my mind's eye changed yet again to show a scene both incredibly powerful and erotic, and amazingly romantic.  It featured us standing waist deep in a natural pool in the midst of a jungle, water falls cascading over rocky cliffs to shower us in warm water.  We began kissing, deeply and passionately, our naked bodies moving against each other and things quickly progressed from there.

Seeing my discomfort level quickly rising, Twitch threw a quick look over at the other psyrens.  And found them, to a woman, slumped over unconscious. "Well, isn't that frickin' great."  She tautly hissed before looking back over at me.  "Any way you can ride it out, big man?"  She asked. I barely stifled a groan at that as her question was ironically timed perfectly as in Magda's dream image, she was straddling me to unify our bodies in yet another powerful way.  Then, like a bolt out of the blue it occurred to me. Magda had said just a day or so ago as we were preparing to begin the ill-fated defense of Fort Kicking Horse, that to keep a telepath out, I needed to develop mental barriers and protection.  Who better to learn that from than a psionic?  And how would I do that?  Well, if her mind was already inside my head, it made sense that I would find what I was looking for right in front of me. "I don't think I can overcome what she's doing."  I managed.  "But she might have something in her mind that I can use to block her out." "Go for it, if you can."  Twitch urged.  "Kat and I are handy, but we really can't afford to have our biggest gun shut down right now." "Copy that."  I grunted then I was turning my eye inward. For a long moment I found myself caught watching Magda's jungle pool fantasy, our bodies tangled together as we took each other to the heights of release over and over again.  'Damn it, Max, focus!'  I screamed at myself, forcing my attention away from the amazing scene.  It was a shame; Magda really was quite imaginative.  And flexible, apparently. Finally I managed to turn away and by shear force of will, blocked out the sounds of our passionate and energetic lovemaking.  Now, how would I find a memory in somebody else's mind?  Because her mind so completely filled my head, could I just try to retrieve it like I would one of my own?  I mentally shrugged.  It was worth a shot.  'Now, where would I find a memory to do with, . . .?' My mental view spun for a moment then I found myself watching what appeared to be an instructional video, Magda's voice providing an overview of how to build a mental barrier against unwanted telepathic intrusion.  It was fascinating since while it was Magda's voice, it wasn't her delivery or cadence.  I focused on the image, willing it into my own mind. A blink of my mental eyes and I was back at the jungle pool, again witness to me giving Magda a good rodgering.  This time she was on all fours and I was taking her from behind.  'For pity's sake!'  I mentally shouted.  'Focus, man, focus!'  Gathering mental fortitude, I focused on the technique I had just watched in what could only have been Magda's memory.  An artificial memory, perhaps from the template, but I was fairly certain it was in her mind.  Piece by piece, I began to assemble a barrier between her mind and my own, using confusing images, circular memories and spiraling questions. First indication that the block was slowly coming into play, was the image of our energetic lovemaking slowly fading.  The scenery disappeared first, then the two of us engaged, leaving me with an empty space. I heaved a sigh of relief at that.  Magda's fantasy was all consuming.  Now to the effort of protecting my memory core and important functions. By the time I was done and opening my eyes in the real world, both Kat and Twitch were kneeling in front of us, looking with no little concern at the two of us. "Max!"  Twitch heaved a sigh of relief at seeing me open my eyes.  "What happened?" "I managed to find a memory in Magda's mind of how to build a mental barrier to a telepathic probe and used it to protect my mind." I husked, carefully easing a now unmoving Magda away from me.

"Thank the Earth Mother for that!"  Kat heaved a sigh of her own.  "We so need to get the girls out of this rain.  And the humans, too!  It's really too bad the psyrens can't use you as a goa battery like Boost did when he was reformatting all those shamblers." Holy shit!  I smacked myself on the forehead. "Why didn't I think of that?"  I said with a rueful shake of my head.  Between Charge's death and Magda's mind occupying mine, I wasn't quite thinking straight.  Then I was pushing aside my self recrimination and willing goa into Magda's unconscious form.  The result was instant. Gasping, the redheaded psyren's head snapped up, her eyes wide. "Max!"  She exclaimed, and for a briefest of moments a smile danced over her full lips.  Then she noticed the two kneeling scouts and the looks of concern on their faces.  "Twitch, Kat!  What happened?  And why am I filled to the brim with, . . "  Magda's voice trailed off as she looked back at me, a playful smile appearing on those lips of hers. "Max."  She said.  "You filled me full of goa, didn't you.  Not quite what I was hoping you'd fill me with, but, . . ."  It wasn't so much an accusation as a statement.  I inclined my head. "Guilty as charged.  Sorry; should've thought of it sooner.  Thankfully Kat reminded me of that ability of mine."  I began to move away.  "And now I'm going to refill your sisters so we can get the hell, . . ." Only to feel Magda's hand on my arm. "Better wait on that, Max."  She said quietly, a thoughtful expression on her face as she looked over at the unconscious psyrens.  "They're all way below threshold.  Their templates have shut them down in an attempt to recoup the exhausted goa on their own.  If you suddenly push a full load of life force into their bodies, it could damage their templates." I frowned as I sat back. "That's possible?"  I asked, looking over at her.  My frowned deepened when she nodded. "Then what about your template?  I pushed a full goa load into you." Magda paused as she mentally ran through a quick diagnostic. "Everything looks okay, but we won't really know until I spin an ability up."  She said, her expression thoughtful.  Then, with a final caress of my face, she was standing and I could feel telekinetic energy swirling around her. "I fully expect you'll fill me in on what exactly transpired after I passed out, Max.  In the meantime, let's get everybody out of here, shall we?" It took several hops to get us back to New Retribution, Magda needing to shorten each hop because she was taking everybody at the same time.  The humans helped by carrying Tovin and the others wrapped in the broken down tents, keeping us relatively mobile.  And Kat and Twitch made sure our knot of humanity stayed as close to the four of us as physically possible to reduce the strain on Magda's teleportation. By the time New Retribution came into sight, it was only a couple hours before dawn. "Okay, final jump, everybody."  Magda said.  She had recharged twice already from my goa store to keep going and sounded relatively chipper. - Boost, it's Magda.  I'm bringing in five unconscious psyrens who have had their goa levels tapped to below threshold and nearly forty humans as well as Max, Kat and Twitch.  Can you clear some space at the medical facility for the girls? - Boost had several stretchers ready and a team of summoners prepared when a wink of light and a puff of displaced air announced the incoming port.  Then he was forced to step back as humans were abruptly everywhere. Spotting me through the throng, he waved. "Pick up some strays on the way in?"  He lightly asked as I pushed through to join him and I chuckled in response. "In a manner of speaking."  I said.  "Tovin had a method of rekindling the humans' will to live she wanted to test.  So we hopped out to the cull camps by Kicking Horse."  I paused to look over the group of humans that, with a clear voice, Vanessa had stepped forward to give instructions to, getting them to clear room enough for the unconscious psyrens to be brought forward. "She had so much success, we were forced to bring them with us."  I looked back at Boost.  "Unfortunately that success also convinced Tovin to keep going.  She ended up freeing some 40 humans, but in doing so, completely drained her team of psyrens." "Except Magda."  Boost pointed out, hands in the pockets of the white smock he and the other summoners were wearing.  "Unless you played battery and kept her juiced up in order to make the jumps back." "Bingo."  I said with a nod of confirmation. "Smart."  Boost said, knowing full well how useful I was as a goa battery with my nearly inexhaustible supply. "Kat thought of it, actually.  With everything going on, it slipped my mind."  I frankly admitted, earning a sympathetic smile from my friend. "And I don't blame you a bit for that, Max."  He said, stepping closer to put a hand on my shoulder.  "With what happened to Charge and everything, we're amazed that you're functioning at all." I sighed. "Somebody has to, bud."  I said, eliciting a soft laugh from Boost. "We're just glad it's you, my friend."  He said with a smile.  The summoner turned to watch the humans carefully put the unconscious psyrens onto the stretchers. "Okay, so you kept Magda filled up with goa.  Why didn't you just recharge the others as well?"  He wanted to know, looking back at me with a raised eyebrow.  "It would've made the jump back that much easier." "Absolutely.  And I was about to, when Magda stopped me.  She said something about the templates taking the girls offline when they dropped below threshold and said if I forced goa in before the templates were ready to bring the girls back online, I might break something." A thoughtful expression appeared on Boost's face as he considered that. "You know, that could be possible."  He said musingly.  "The templates are created and maintained by the Earth Mother herself, designed to work without outside interference.  If they have their recharging mechanisms in play when you hammer in a load of goa, it could break something.  We'll definitely have to watch that in the future."  Then Boost was turning towards the shifting crowd of humans. "Now, let's do something about your new friends, shall we?"

 

Imminent Threat

It was some time later that found a handful of us Transcended watching the humans sort themselves in the barracks area.  A little foresight had allowed us to construct it with running water, heat, ventilation and an appropriate level of comfort in the case that we'd eventually pursuade humans to fight with us and they'd join us in the Bat Cave.  Thanks to that, and the full spectrum overhead lights, an abundance of supplies from the supply pods we had scavenged and a decent amount of food and water, our newest guests had most of the necessities of life. "Damn, they're just kids."  Chi said with a frown, leaned against a wall with her arms folded over her breasts.  "How can we expect them to help us if they don't even know what's going on?"  A number of the other Transcended with us nodded in agreement as we watched the humans take their allotment of equipment from the quartermaster into the barracks, many talking animatedly with each other. "Be aware my friends that you are looking through the eyes of one who has already lived one life, and are beginning a second."  Tovin gently reminded everybody from where she hovered close to me.  Of her draining experience in the cull camp she showed no ill effects, as powerful and serene as she always was.  I had recharged her along with the other psyrens that had drained themselves at the cull camp after Boost made sure their templates were intact and they hadn't suffered any damage from dropping below their goa thresholds. "And these humans are the oldest of their people, elders selected to represent their sanctuaries in the cull.  They appear as children, but children that have been adults for nearly their entire lives, thanks to circumstance." That, of course, triggered a low murmur of discussion as they considered Tovin's words.  Then they were falling silent as Ambriel broke away from her fellow humans to  quickly walk over to where I was standing with Chi, Tovin and Twitch.  To her credit, she didn't seem perturbed at all by the handful of withered, mummy-like liches that had joined us, or the pair of skin and bone ghouls that crossed her path.  She nodded in greeting to all of them before she came to a halt in front of me.  Despite being covered in a fair amount of mud and filth, her clothes tattered and torn, she looked happy. "Max, Chi, Tovin, Twitch."  She greeted each one of us with a smile and a nod before returning her full attention to me.  "Max, I, um, I'm sort of embaressed to admit this, but none of the sanctuaries have technology or industry.  I mean, we had access to books from the old world so we knew what it is, but we didn't actually get to use any.  The best we had was medieval level crafts.  So no electricity, or machines, or even running water.  I'm afraid I'm going to need someone to show us how the lights, the heating, the ventilation, the cooling and the toilets and sinks work."  She blushed.  "Sorry." I exchanged surprised looks with the others, none of us aware of just how primitive the sanctuaries were.  Then Twitch was stepping forward with a bright smile. "I'll help you guys with that, Ambriel."  She said, looking back at me with a questioning look on her face to make sure that was okay.  I didn't hesitate in nodding and together the two returned to the barracks, Ambriel shooting questions rapid fire at my wraith commander. "Their lack of experience with technology may present a challenge to their training, Max."  Tovin noted as I felt her attention swing onto me.  "I may be able to compensate for that with a memory bolus." My eyebrow lifted as I looked over at her. "A what now?"  I asked with a querulous look. "A memory bolus."  She repeated then proceeded to explain.  "Memory engrams are bio-chemically created electrical circuits.  As telepathy is the manipulation of a bio-electrical field, I can use telepathy to copy engrams as electrical imprints from a donor brain.  I would then transfer them to unused neural pathways in a reciever's brain, using the telepathic field to 'force' those pathways to accept the new electrical imprints.  Once the engrams are encoded into the new pathways, the receiver brain itself then will use its own bio-chemical processes to reinforce and support those engrams."

I found myself slowly nodding as I absorbed that.  How frickin' cool was that!  We could take any memory we needed somebody else to have, and simply imprint it into their brain.  I suspected that was how the Earth Mother's templates passed on information about abilities and limits of a particular Risen type to a newly summoned zombie.  Of course it brought up the morality of imposing foreign memories onto somebody as well as whether it would work with a living brain. Considering how keenly aware of personal boundaries psyrens were, I didn't think we'd have a problem with the first part.  The second, however, . . . "Think that process would work on a living brain as easily as it does on a Risen one, Tovin?" The veteran psyren pondered that for a moment. "We'll have to test it to find out, Max."  She replied after a moment.  "I will gather some applicable memories from a number of donors, including weapon skills from the javelins, wraiths, and vipers, stealth skills from the wraiths, flying from the vipers, tracking from the animus and mechano-electrical from the teslas."  She began to move towards the command center. "I'll let you know when I'm ready."  She said over her shoulder. "Sounds good."  I replied, mentally working down the list of skills and abilities Tovin had just thrown at me off her cuff.  While it would be ridiculous to expect the humans to be as skilled in any one of those areas as a Risen soldier was, if they were passing grade decent on most, if not all, I'd be more than satisfied. I was still pondering that when I heard a quiet voice call out my name.  "Max."  I turned to see who it was and found no-one there.  Frowning, I took a half step towards where I thought the sound came from and again heard my name: "Max." from somewhere straight ahead. Now, I'm an undead juggernaut and I've spent time with zombies, ghouls, vampires, ghosts and liches.  I've faced giant aliens who eat humans, and brain-munching bio-mechanical insects.  I've jumped out of a transport without a parachute and have been shot by a warship in orbit.  There isn't much that would faze me at this point. So hearing some disembodied voice calling my name was just par for the course.  Not having anything else pressing, I decided to see exactly where the voice was coming from.  With a stop at the QM to grab a flashlight, I then proceeded to let the voice lead me forward. Or rather, down; it didn't take long for the voice to pull me from the bright confines of New Retribution and deeper into the mine.  Down side shafts I went, across vast underground galleries where dark machines sat in silence, neglect turning them into heaps of rust, and along corridors that appeared to travel for kilometres in the darkness and the silence. Down, always down the voice quietly urged me to go, guiding me around obstacles and holes as it pulled me along.  Down until I felt like the weight of the world was pressing down on the ceiling above me. It was as I paused at the intersection of two relatively rough hewn corridors, the lack of wear attesting to their yet to be used status, that the voice appeared not in front of me in space as it had all the way down into the mine.  But from behind the rock to my left.  I frowned as I stared at the dark gray granite, minute flecks of quartz and other crystals dancing in my flashlight's cone of illumination.  Then, with a shrug, I went full juggernaut and charged the seemingly solid stone wall. Formed under pressure in the depths of the Earth millions upon millions of years ago, the granite nevertheless didn't resist my battering ram of intent.  It shattered into head-sized boulders and fell into the incredible space that lay beyond, a mere half of metre from the tunnel wall.  As soon as I was clear of the falling rock and dust, I came to a halt and let my light play through the space.  And I immediately found myself uttering a low whistle of astonishment.

It was a chamber of stone and dark crystal that soared a hundred metres straight up, two hundred metres deep and at least a hundred metres to either side.  Everywhere I looked giant crystals jutted from the floor like columns supporting the cavern's roof, or reaching out from its walls in a vain attempt to fill the great, open space.  And in between the large crystals were layers of smaller ones, each taking hold of my light and magnifying it a hundred fold until the dark space was almost filled with it. Despite its natural chaos and organic appearance, it felt as stately as a church, quiet and peaceful.  No, not a church, . . . a stone cathedral. I felt a smile twist my lips upward at that thought.  There was only one entity that could possibly want me in such a place. "What can I do for you, Earth Mother?"  I asked out loud.  And immediately I felt a stirring of energy and force swirl through the chamber before centering on me.  It buffeted me for a moment before I became aware of a shadowy shape in front of me that refused to become solid despite the amount of light that now filled the chamber. At first it took on the low, round form of an ancient fertility statue.  Then it was a shape with exaggerated breasts and hips.  And finally it was a willowy figure with the dancing forms of children around its legs in joyous play.  Then the shadow children were gone, leaving just the willowy figure which swept around me, filling the air with the smells of loam and growing things. "I knew you would heed my call, my juggernaut."  The shadowy form said in a soft whispering voice.  "Only you have the sensitivity to my voice, to my will to be guided thus.  No other creature alive possesses this gift.  Not even Finlay, the erstwhile emissary to the Seer is so sensitive to my voice." My half smile only grew at her choice of wording.  Technically I wasn't alive.  Then I was sobering at her next words. "You are wondering why you are here.  I have called you to this place, this crystal cavern so close to my physical presence, to tell you of an imminent threat to the world." "If you're speaking about the siphon from the vision, we're looking for that right now."  I indicated with a frown. "I am speaking of something much more immediate, my juggernaut."  The shadow said with a whisper.  "The velkin have had a change in leadership.  Their previous fleet commander was aboard one of the three picket ships that you used the K'ethik insect forms to infiltrate and attack.  It was killed in the ensuing battle." "And how is this a threat to us, Mother?"  I asked, while silently exulting that we had taken out such a high value target in Tovin's impromptu attack. "Because the velkin are an aggressive species that values strength over everything.  And their leaders are the strongest of their kind, usually fighting their way to the top in vicious battles with their rivals."  Was her reply, which only made me frown in confusion. "Again this only seems to benefit us in the short term, Mother."  I said.  "If the velkin want their leaders locked up in some contest to see who the biggest gobby is, then let them.  Their infighting gives us the opportunity to continue our preparations uninterrupted." "Unfortunately it isn't so simple, my juggernaut."  The shadow whispered.  "In the same K'ethik attack that killed the fleet commander, several rival commanders were also slain.  Of the handful that is left, a particularly vicious and aggressive young leader has emerged, soaked in the blood of its rivals.  And it has reacted to the destruction of the base and the attack on the picket ships by launching that fateful attack on Fort Kicking Horse.  And now it intends to use visual scanning to identify other bases as troublesome as Kicking Horse and bombard them from orbit in a prelude to a ground assault."

I felt the Earth Mother's attention fall squarely on me. "The enemy has finally taken the Risen as a serious threat to their ongoing efforts on this world." I frowned at that, not all that willing to believe her dire statements.  They created only more questions in my mind.  The least of which wasn't how the hell she was finding this stuff out.  Still, I wasn't going to question the Earth Mother on something as subtle as how she got her intel.  Despite that unwillingness, I needed clarification.  If a new velkin leader had emerged with the intent to take it to the Risen, I needed details so I could prepare as best we could for it. Before I could speak, however, the shadow was whispering once more.  And not to me. "Come forward, my child."  The whisper gently urged and I twisted to see who she was addressing.  And found myself gazing at a terrified looking Ambriel, the flashlight in her hand shaking from her uncertain and frightened trembling. Catching sight of me, the young human almost ran to my side. "I,...I heard a voice calling your name."  She stammered, clearly panicking.  "And I couldn't help following it into the darkness.  It had some sort of power over me!"  Then she flung her arms around me and clung to me as if I were the only thing that could save her, her sobs alternating between those of relief, and those of fear. Letting her shiver and cry against me for a moment, I put an arm around her shoulder and used the other to lay a comforting hand on her head even as I leaned in close to speak quietly into her ear. "It's okay, Ambriel."  I said, keeping my voice soft and soothing.  "The voice you heard belongs to the Earth Mother, the spirit that gives our world life.  She is the power that summoned the Risen from their slumber to fight against the aliens."  I paused to look over at the Earth Mother's shadowy figure.  "She means you no harm.  And you heard her because she wants to talk to you." "To me??"  Ambriel loosened her hold on me enough to look up in to my face.  Only to find me looking over at the Earth Mother's shadow presence.  Following my gaze, she gave a physical start to see the shadow standing there despite enough ambient light to dispel it. "Hello, my child."  The shadow whispered and Ambriel sucked in a ragged breath, her eyes flying wide in shock.  For a second I thought she was going to scream. Instead the young human visibly gathered herself, calmed down and swallowed the nascent scream before taking a step away from me, squaring her shoulders resolutely.  And my opinion of her went up yet again. "Hello, Mother."  She replied, her voice a little unsteady but far stronger than it was even a moment ago.  Good girl. "It is good of you to come, child."  The shadow whispered.  "I am gladdened that some of my children enslaved by the invaders have been freed.  Just as I feel joy for every child born from out of my bosom, I feel sorrow for every one taken unnaturally before their time.  And so many of your people have been taken unnaturally, causing me great sorrow." The shadow paused, as if considering her next words. "That is why I have called you here, Ambriel, Elder of Rushing Waters Sanctuary.  While my juggernaut is a great leader, and master of war, he is no longer human.  So, while he may lead your people for a time, they will need a leader to take them into the future.  A leader who is human.  My juggernaut feels in both his heart and mind that you should be that leader." "M-me?"  Ambriel said uncertainly, glancing over at me.  I nodded. "You, Ambriel.  Everything I have seen from you suggests you will make an excellent leader for your people.  You're smart, resolute, passionate and compassionate.  You quickly assess a situation and move to make the best of it, not only for yourself but for everybody involved.  Your people trust you and respect you.  And you act, not command, showing people by example what must be done in order to succeed."  I paused to smile. "These things are all hallmarks of an excellent leader, Ambriel.  I've seen these things in the leaders I have had in my own life.  And I see them in you.  Your potential is already vast and I look forward to seeing you realize it." "I,. . . do I have a choice in accepting this responsibility?"  She asked, uncertainty in her face.  "I mean, I've never sought power, or control, Max.  I just want to make things better for us.  Humans, I mean." "Which is why you will make a great leader."  I replied before smiling.  "And no, you don't have much choice here.  When the Earth Mother anoints a leader, it's a done deal." Ambriel sighed then nodded. "Then I accept.  Thank you."  She said with no little amount of humility in her voice before flashing me a shy smile.  She then turned back to the shadow. "Thank you both.  For your faith in me, and for seeing my potential.  And while I am not yet certain you've made the right choice, I will work hard to prove that the faith you've put in me hasn't been misplaced." "I know you will, my child."  The shadow replied.  Then it was gone with a rush of energy and motion, which swirled around us both for a moment before spinning into nothing. "Audience over."  I quietly said half to myself.  Then, a bit louder: "Shall we retreat to the surface to look at this in the light of day?" "Can we?"  Ambriel rubbed her arm with a nervous smile after taking a quick look around the cathedral.  "This place gives me the creeps." I grinned at that.  Definitely not Risen; an undead would feel quite at home so deep in the ground and close to the Earth Mother's presence. - Tovin. - - There you are, Max. -  The psyren said somewhat dryly.  - Why is it that you so often disappear without notice? - - Usually because I don't know beforehand that I'm going to leave. -  I retorted with a grin.  Knowing she'd have a question or two about that, I continued. - I'll explain when we get topside.  Mind giving Ambriel and myself a port out of our current location? -  And the cathedral disappeared in a wink of light.

 

Pre-emptive

Ambriel sighed as the sun finally poked over the horizon to send its golden light and warmth washing across the emptiness of the parking lot.  She was sitting with her knees pulled up to her chest, arms wrapped around them as she stared into the distance.  I sat beside her, thoughtful as I considered what had just transpired in the depths of the mine in what I would forever call the stone cathedral. - What you've told me I find quite disturbing. -  Tovin quietly said into the depths of my mind.  - If the velkin indeed have experienced a change in leadership and that new leader is poised to unleash further destruction on the Risen, then we've little time to act. - I sucked on my teeth for a moment as I considered that.  There was no denying we needed to act.  The question was what were we going to do?  Send psyrens to every base across the planet and get them to evacuate their people into the surrounding wilderness and hope they weren't spotted doing it?  Or build several more Bat Caves and have the Risen move their forces underground? Then it occurred to me.  Yes, we send out emissaries.  And yes, we start building other Bat Caves to avoid this situation in the future.  And, at the same time, we hit the velkin in the mouth before they hit us.  And I knew exactly how we were going to do it, too. - We need to buy some time, Tovin.  Get this new leader off balance, maybe even distracted from what it wants to do.  We need to hit them first. - - A pre-emptive strike? -  Tovin's tone was thoughtful.  - Yes, the idea has merit.  The question that comes from that, however, is how.  We'll need to hit them in several locations at the same time to make the strike effective and sufficiently distract the new leader from its plan of attack. - - How about the translocation of K'ethik sabotage units, like we did with the picket ships?  Think that would work, if we have several psyrens translocating at the same time? - Tovin took a little longer to answer this time as she pondered the question.  I knew she was weighing all the options, the pros and the cons of attempting the kind of simultaneous attack I was proposing. - If we can get satellite imagery on multiple targets, then it's possible. -  She said after a long pause.  - But to reach so far, and move so much; to do that with most of the girls, it'll be too much.  We need a better goa source to tap to fuel the translocation. - I grinned. - Got your goa battery right here.  And another eleven that we can use. -  I said. - Like Boost used you to create the second gens?  Yes, yes, that would work.  We'll set up several firing stations then, each with a handful of psyrens and one or two juggernauts to use as goa sources.  We just need to see if Jolt, Dante and Zara will have enough work stations to give us satellite eyes on. -  She said, her tone moving from speculative to affirmative as she became more convinced the idea would work. - Let's go and do that.  Not knowing what the new leader's timetable for its attacks are, having already launched one, the sooner we do this the better. -  I pointed out. - And I agree.  I'll start gathering capable girls and meet you in the command center. -  Tovin said. - Be there shortly. -  Then, out loud:  "Ambriel, I'm heading in to work on a possible angle to slow the aliens up in their plans to hit all of the Risen bases in the next few days.  Want to come with?" The young human looked up at me for a moment, then shook her head. "Sorry, Max.  I still have too much on my mind to focus on something like that."  She confessed, turning her gaze back to the horizon.  "I know as a leader I need to, but I just don't have the focus right now."

I stood. "Fair enough.  I can understand where you're coming from there."  I said with a smile.  "You had alot dumped on you in a very, very short time.  It'll take some time to digest and adjust."  I pursed my lips in consideration.  "If I can make a suggestion to you then, take a little more fresh air then head inside and grab a shower, maybe a bite to eat and some sleep.  Everything always seemed clearer to me after I got food in my belly and some rack time." That turned her back towards me. "You, . . sleep?"  She asked, a puzzled look on her face and I smiled. "No, not any more."  I said with a chuckle.  "But I did, a long time ago."  Then I was turning from her to make my way towards the base entrance.  "See you inside!" By the time I had reached the command center, it was already buzzing with juggernauts and psyrens. "Hi, baby."  Jen stepped close to give me a tight squeeze and a kiss before turning to look at the chaos that swirled near the center of the main room.  Felix, Dante and Zara were all there, along with a large group of teslas, assembling several work stations that had multiple screens instead of the standard three. "Tovin's got the sparkies working pretty hard, eh, boss?"  Simon said as he and Brin stepped close, the fresh-faced juggernaut with her arms around Simon's torso.  He in turn had an arm around her shoulders, the two looking very comfortable together.  I smiled inwardly at seeing that; Brin's energy certainly was a good match for Simon's easy going nature.  They had started seeing each other at the beginning of the Bat Cave's construction and I was glad to see it had turned into something good for the both of them. "That, she does."  I said as the rest of the juggernauts moved to join us.  "Then again, if anybody can motivate somebody to work harder and faster than they've ever done before, it'd be Tovin!" "True, that."  Firinne said in her soft Scottish burr.  She stepped close enough to give me a light hip check before Violet and Hammer moved in beside her, Hammer standing behind the brunette juggernaut and reaching over her shoulders to loop his arms around her chest just above her breasts.  Violet in turn hooked both of her hands onto Hammer's arms to hold him close.  Another pair of juggernauts who had found romance in the close proximity of working together. "That lass could get a stone motivated to dance a jig."  The redheaded juggernaut went on to say and we all chuckled lightly. Then the object of our discussion silently hove into view, a number of psyrens behind her, some floating and some walking.  All of them looked at her steadily, a telltale sign they were carrying on a silent conference.  Tovin was probably giving them instructions on what to do.  That was my signal to do the same for the juggernauts. "Okay, guys, let me fill you in on what's going on here."  I began and every face turned towards me.  "The Earth Mother has said we're facing imminent threat of a massive attack both from orbit, and on the ground.  Apparently the velkin have had a change of leadership, thanks to an attack Tovin launched against them a few weeks ago using translocated K'ethik insect forms."  I paused to take a quick look around at my comrades. "Unfortunately, this opened the door for a new, much more aggressive leader to come forward.  And this gobby bastard wants to start hammering any Risen base it sees from orbit, before sending in ground troops to mop up.  Fort Kicking Horse was to be the first of those ground attacks, and they very nearly succeeded." I felt my face tighten unconsciously as I thought about my failure there.  One I would never repeat. "We are not going to let this bastard get away with its plan.  Instead, we're going to launch a pre-emptive attack and hit the velkin where we've hurt them the most: on their ships.  Once more psyrens will be translocating K'ethik insect forms from off the ships' hulls right into their passages and corridors where all hell will hopefully break loose."  I pointed at the work stations.

"Tovin's got the teslas assembling multi-screen work stations that will let us see a number of different satellites at the same time.  That will allow the psyrens to move quickly from one ship to the next, translocating any K'ethik on the hull inside to start the madness." "That's quite a distance for the psyrens to reach, sir."  Hammer noted, the square-jawed Risen wearing a thoughtful look.  I nodded. "That it is, Hammer."  I replied to him before looking back at his comrades.  "And that's where we come in.  You see, in the last attack Tovin was able to tap the goa of several other psyrens to extend the range of her abilities, much like Justice used other ballistas in our last major raid to summon larger cannons to fire on ships in orbit.  But we don't have the psyrens to create the formations and attack as many ships at the same time as the battle plan requires.  So the psyrens will be using us as goa batteries." "Right, right."  Petite Aria said with a broad smile from where she stood between Dack and Bojay, a blond flash between bronze and ebony.  "Like the summoners did when they used your goa to reformat the shamblers." "Exactly."  I said with a nod.  "As it turns out, that while Transcended can't use the goa of most other types to trigger their abilities, they can use a juggernaut as a goa source, or battery." "That's cool."  Tumult, a honey blond juggernaut from Second Brigade said with a nod of appreciation, quickly joined by just about everybody else. "That, it is."  Jen agreed from beside me.  "And it functions not only to extend our comrades' ranges and strengths, but allows us to do more than merely knock buildings down." "We, . . still get to do that though, right?"  Brin asked with a hopeful look on her face and we all laughed.  Then Tovin was capturing our collective attention. "We're ready here, Max." As per usual, the teslas had worked their magic and several targeting pods, as I was calling them in my head, had been assembled.  Not only that, but they were already online, with many screens filled with images of velkin warships in orbit. At Tovin's gesture, Felix zoomed in on a ship he had hanging in his center screen. "That is a vessel that is currently geosynchronous over the British Isles."  Tovin quietly pointed out even as she slowly began to drift towards the floor.  "Normally, all psyren abilities are LOS, or Line Of Sight.  We have to see what we are doing, or where we're going.  Additionally our abilities, which rely on the manipulation of electromagnetic fields at the atomic level, can suffer from degradation the further away we try to influence an object, or a person.  So a ship in orbit, like that one, would be out of our reach for a variety of reasons." The veteran psyren touched down then waved me forward.  Slipping free of Jen's hold, I obliged, joining her in Felix's targeting pod. "However, a psyren attached to a ballista group during our engagement with the enemy a few weeks ago, discovered she could use energy pathways created by weapon fire as a conduit to extend her capabilities.  She could see further, and move objects far outside of her normal, unassisted range.  This was due to the plasma blasts forming an electromagnetic corridor as they burned their way through the atmosphere on their way to their targets." "From that point, it wasn't long before we determined that any electromagnetic signal formed a similar corridor that we could then convert into a conduit for our psionic energies.  I could literally ride a signal up to a satellite and over to a ship in orbit even though it was thousands of kilometres distant."

Reaching out, Tovin put her hand on my shoulder.  And almost immediately I felt goa begin to flow from me into her.  At the same time Felix finished zooming in on the ship and we could see several insect form K'ethik carefully moving to avoid a sensor cluster on the hull. "Now I could reach across space."  Tovin said with a whisper, her eyes closed as she focused her abilities.  "Take hold of a K'ethik and move it several metres inside the ship."  And we watched as one of the insect forms winked out of sight.  A heart beat later one of the monitoring stations that watched the velkin network sounded an alarm as traffic on the network abruptly increased a hundred fold. "And I have become Death, destroyer of velkin."  She said as several of the psyrens and my fellow juggernauts gasped in astonishment.  Nice touch. Then I felt the pull on my goa double as K'ethik from a number of ships started disappearing and the alarms announcing velkin ships in trouble started doubling and tripling in volume. "And that is how it's done."  She said and abruptly the drain stopped as she looked up with a nod of thanks to me before looking over at first her fellow psyrens then at my juggernauts. "Any questions?" It took a few moments to set up all of the targeting pods with a couple juggernauts and gaggles of psyrens so everybody could switch out when they thought they were approaching threshold.  I didn't anticipate any juggernauts dropping, but I wanted every one of us to experience being a battery for the psyrens doing the heavy lifting.  With that in mind, I swapped my spot with Firinne, her and Jen serving as Tovin, Chi and Jazz's batteries.  I then took a walk through the targeting pods to see how everybody else was doing. "You know, we could probably use this same technique to boost the efficacy of Justice's ground to orbit cannons, sir."  Violet suggested as I stepped past where she and Hammer were serving as batteries for Ronin, Ell and a couple psyrens I didn't know.  I nodded in agreement. "Good suggestion, Violet.  After we're done here, I'll go and have a chat with Justice to see if that works for him."  I said with a smile. "If we manage to infiltrate the entire fleet in orbit, what then, sir?"  That from Tumult as she and Bojay served as batteries for Magda and a pair of her sister psyrens.  She had taken the first turn as the broadshouldered Bojay watched the screens with a keen eye. "Then we spend our time taking out the armies on the ground."  Bojay rumbled without taking his eyes off the screen.  "Without the threat of having them shoot at us from space." "Don't forget that other thing we still need to find, Bo."  Aria pointed out from where her and Dack were working.  She too was carefully watching the screens as the psyrens worked, Dack taking the first shift as battery. "We could use the ships in orbit to stretch our range, once their crews have been eliminated by those big metal bugs." "But then we'd have to take care of those self same bugs, Aria."  Firinne pointed out.  "They'll slaughter anything short of a full juggernaut team that jumps onto those ships." "How about we deal with that when we have to, kids?"  I bluntly suggested, pausing by one of the monitoring stations tapped into the velkin network to watch the veritable storm of communication that was now flooding the channels between the ships as they frantically called to each other for help. "Let's worry about taking out those ships first, then what we're going to do with them after." Felix looked up as I stepped to his station, the one Tovin was using as a targeting pod.

"How's our coverage, my friend?"  I quietly asked, knowing he'd be tracking that sort of thing.  He turned to a small monitor he had set up just over his primary keyboard and let his fingers dance across the control surfaces for a moment. "At this point, maybe twenty percent."  He said after some numbers and images began appearing on the smaller screen.  "That's all our satellites can see at the moment.  If the ships in orbit stay in pattern, and none of our satellites drop out, we could systematically hit up to seventy percent."  He looked over at me. "But I think it'd be foolishly optimistic to assume the ships will stay put once word of the attack spreads."  He paused to point at one of the larger screens that was starting to pull back from its original target to go and look for another.  In the corner I spotted three silver dots that announced the approach of three more. "Like those three there.  They've broken off their patrol route to come and see if they can help the ship we just attacked.  The patterns are already starting to break down." "True, but it also now brings those three ships into our attack pattern."  I pointed out before looking over at Tovin, who nodded and began focusing her attention on the three newcomers.  "In the end, that's better for us." "Short term, perhaps."  Felix conceded.  "As long as our bird can keep an eye on any additional ships arriving on scene.  But most of my birds are mobile, and catch sight of these ships as they orbit by.  And I don't have half the network I would want for full coverage.  Some of those ships are just going to slip through the holes in our net." He paused to let his fingers dance once more, bringing up an image of another ship.  One with a hull free of K'ethik. "And then there are those ships that rigorously combat the saboteurs, and their hulls are free of insect forms we could use against them." I frowned at that.  And I was about to make a comment when one of the teslas near the back of the large room suddenly shot out of her chair. "Sir!"  She cried.  "I've just picked up a signal from Russia.  It's, . . it's one of ours!" All eyes fell on her as she frantically worked at her station standing up.  Then one of the sound stations that were set up at regular intervals throughout the room to broadcast audible communication from battles under observation, crackled to life. ", . . . transmitting in the clear."  A voice began with a heavy slavic accent.  "This is Dimitri Vorinov, of the Risen base Kalashnikov to anyone listening.  We are under attack by alien ships from orbit.  And heavy ground forces are approaching our position.  Please, can anybody hear us??  We need help!  I am transmitting in the clear, . . ."  A heavy burst of static interrupted the voice before the signal went dead. "It's begun."  Tovin quietly said and I could feel the weight of her gaze from under her hood.  Turning away from her, I looked back at Felix. "Can you find out where that signal came from?"  I asked, only to find him already running a series of searches through the network. "Moscow."  He reported within a second or two, reaching out to tap his screen which now showed a map of western Russia.  Another tap brought up a map of its former capital, Moscow.  "Several smaller Risen bases in the area, but that signal seemed to have originated from that one, just within city limits."  Again he tapped his finger on the screen to indicate a spot near the city's northern edge. "Can we get a satellite to see those ships bombarding Kalashnikov?"  I pressed and again I found him already running a search. "I have only one satellite currently in the area, and it's a downward looking weather bird."  Felix tautly reported, looking over at me.  "We have no eyes on the ships hitting that base." By this time translocation at all targeting pods had ground to a halt as everyone looked at each other helplessly. "We, . . we can't just let them die."  Aria plaintively husked as Felix brought up the weather satellite and used it to zoom in on the ruins of what was Russia's largest city.  That let us watch massive dust plumes erupt as the orbital fire pounded the territory in and around the northern portion of the city. "But we can't do anything about it."  Ronin said, the battle hardened psyren's hands flexing and unflexing as she fought her own frustration at seeing Risen under fire and outside of her ability to help. "They are well outside our ability to jump a team in there." "Nor am I willing to risk a team in a futile effort to stop an assault where we'll be outnumbered and outgunned."  I ground out, fighting frustration and feelings of helplessness myself. "We don't need a whole team."  That from Tumult as she looked at the rest of us.  "Just a handful of juggernauts to go and smash the ground forces to pieces so the Risen in Kalashnikov can get out." "You still don't get it."  That from Ell, the psyren who had helped Justice fire on those ships in orbit.  "We can't get you there.  So this whole discussion is useless!" "I can get someone there." The soft voice cut through the babble of voices filling the command center like a laser.  Slowly we all turned to its owner. "If we can ride a signal into orbit."  Magda said, her expression confident.  "Then I can ride a signal off that weather bird to Moscow." It didn't take me long to make a decision. "We'll see about that."  I growled.  "All psyrens, continue translocating K'ethik in the fleet elements we can reach."  Then I was looking at the redheaded psyren. "Magda, jump me there.  Just me.  I won't risk anybody else." "No!"  Jen immediately protested, making to step towards me before a gesture got Bojay to hold her.  The big African-American juggernaut immediately folded his muscular arms around the brunette and honey-skinned Transcended.  She threw a venomous look at him before looking back at me, tears abruptly in her eyes. "NO!  Send somebody else, Max.  Please!"  She plead, her strength unable to free her from Bojay's grip.  It didn't stop her from trying though as she struggled in the big juggernaut's hands. "He's got to go, Jen."  Simon quickly stepped in to say.  "It's the logical choice.  He's first gen, the strongest of us all.  If anybody can, . . ." "NOOOOO!"  The beautiful juggernaut shrieked, jerking hard against Bojay's grip, forcing Simon to step in and help him keep her pinned. "Hold her, boys."  I ordered, a muscle jumping in my jaw, before throwing a hard look at Magda.  "Any time now, Magda." "Can't you, . . please, not you, . . ."  The redheaded psyren began, her confidence suddenly wavering as she realized what I was telling her to do. "MAGDA!" And the command center vanished in a wink of light and sound.

 

Chapter 15: Undeath from Above

I hung in the darkness for a lot longer than I thought I would.  Then, with a wink of light and air, I was in the air and dropping.  A quick look down revealed I had ported back in several hundred metres above the ground.  'Awesome.'  I thought grimly as I continued to drop, picking up speed as I did, going juggernaut with full shields.  Thank goodness for all those parachute drops while I was a soldier, or I'd have no idea how I'd hold my body and position properly for a decent landing.  Of course, being a juggernaut on top of that didn't hurt, . . .literally. The ground shuddered as I slammed into it, my knees creaking as they absorbed the impact.  Then I was kicking myself free to take a quick look around. This was my first city since being summoned, having worked in the country up to this point.  And, as I peered at the shattered buildings and rubble that lay strewn heavily around my landing spot, I found myself astounded at the level of destruction. It was true devastation.  No building was left untouched, most only shells filled with chunks of rubble.  The streets were clogged with the broken remains of those buildings and there was a deep and pervasive silence that spoke  to the lack of life in this place.  I slowly shook my head as I remembered seeing pictures and video of Moscow from my time.  It had been a vital and active capital, the Russians experiencing a surging economy thanks to vast oil deposits that were being exploited in Siberia.  The place I now found stretching in ruin away from me bore no resemblance to that place whatsoever. Just when I thought my surroundings were completely empty of movement, I caught a shift of something with the corner of my eye.  I moved my head just enough to bring that peripheral spot a bit more into view.  And felt my guts tighten as I recognized the long, silver and black shape that was slowly moving out from a hole in a broken wall. K'ethik.  With the velkin fleet right over Moscow, they must've fallen off as the ships were moving into position and dropped into the city.  The question now was, how many were here? Then I was grunting as a battering ram of force smashed into me, driving me almost back into my landing crater.  What the hell??  Did that first one actually decoy for this one?  Still full juggernaut, I twisted and dug in as the second insect form pushed hard with its multiple churning legs.  Despite my attempt to get traction, it managed to pin me up against a wall which immediately collapsed under the pressure.  But it also gave me enough traction on the broken ground to slow the K'ethik bio-mech down to the point I could take a swing at it. Of course, that's when the first one hit me, knocking me off its fellow and into another crumbling wall.  'Are you kidding me?'  I silently shouted as this one now drove me back, through that wall and back out into the rubble-filled street.  Then the second was on me, and a third, the razor tips of their legs clawing against my shield hard enough for me to feel. The weight of three insect forms was enough to bear my staggering self to the ground, too off balance to resist them and gravity at the same time.  We hit hard, the one directly on top of me lunging at my face with massive mouth parts.  I actually flinched when the horizontal jaws grabbed my face just below my cheeks and tried to close, pressure that could chew through metal actually pressing against my densified flesh with enough force for me to feel it squeeze.  'Now I know how those velkin felt when the bugs were eating their faces off.'  I darkly mused.  Then I was kicking out with everything that I had. It was enough to toss the awkward pile of insect forms off me and I snapped my body whip-like to come back to my feet.  Just in time to take a fourth insect form's charge in the chest. Again I grunted as it hit me like a bio-mech battering ram.  This time however I was able to get my hands down onto its round head before it could push me off balance.  Stone and concrete flying as my feet bit into the ground, I dug my fingers into its head with a squeal of bending metal.  Then a hard twist sprayed sparks in a broad arch above its neck and the K'ethik abruptly lost power.

Resetting even as the insect form in my hands continued to twitch as it slowly died, I retained my grip on its head.  That let me use its massive body as a flail, lifting and swinging in time to intercept two more that ripped through crumbling walls to come right at me.  The long, heavy body was a perfect weapon, sweeping aside the attackers with jarring impacts and flying sparks before they even knew what hit them. Then I was dropping the bug as another powered into me from behind, the blow enough to jar free my grip on my impromptu weapon.  For shit's sake!  Where the hell were all these bugs coming from??  I rolled off the bug's round head and twisted to latch onto it as it went by, zero-gap metal screaming as my fingers bit into it.  Bulldogging the K'ethik into the ground, I took a step in and slammed an elbow into the top of its head and let a long sigh of relief go when it collapsed with the now familiar spray of sparks from the joint between its head and its body. Movement all around me spurred me into taking a quick look around.  And I felt my heart sink to see dozens of insect forms swarming on all sides.  I braced for the attack. "C'mon, you big frickin' bugs."  I growled as they slithered through the wreckage towards me.  "I don't have all frickin' day!" My eyes narrowed as abruptly they all stopped as if they had run into a wall.  'What, . . .?'  I wondered, frowning.  Then I started in surprise when they charged forward again.  Instead of targeting me, though, they went right past and into the street behind me. Twisting to follow their new path, my eyes widened when I caught sight of their new target.  A column of velkin armor, advancing through the ruins.  Even as my eyes fell on the heavy tanks that I had run into during our doomed defense of Kicking Horse, they were opening fire on the wave of K'ethik that poured out of the ruins to smash into them.  'Yeah, you gobbies have fun trying to deal with that.'  I silently snarled as the first tank exploded and velkin voices began filling the air with shouts of alarm and fear. As much of a threat as I was, the K'ethik didn't hesitate to leave me when they detected their primary target: the velkin.  Fine by me; I was feeling pretty overwhelmed in the face of those odds anyway.  And as much as I wanted to stick around and play, I had my primary objective to achieve: bailing out the Risen holed up at the Kalashnikov base. With the sound of dying velkin and exploding tanks echoing in my ears, I turned to the north and took off at full speed, going directly through the ruins and rubble in a straight line.  My encounter with the K'ethik had chewed up valuable time, if the appearance of that velkin armor said anything about how close the ground forces were to Kalashnikov.  I didn't have long to make a difference.  If I failed to keep the enemy off the Risen at Kalashnikov, then this experiment was a failure.  Not to mention being possibly stuck in Russia while New Retribution prepared to defend North America against a new wave of velkin aggression. Which wasn't cool.  No, not cool at all. The sound barrier breached with a low 'boom' as I powered through what looked like an apartment block, the top floors obliterated in the disaster that befell Moscow years previous.  Ignoring it and everything else, I put my head down and ran as hard and fast as I could.  I didn't really need to know which direction to go in.  All I had to do was look for the fire falling from the sky to know where Kalashnikov was.  And a glance was enough to see that it was now falling in a fury, the sky almost noonday bright even though evening was hard upon the city. As I ran, I decided to check to see if there was anybody that could hear me. - Calling any psyrens that might be at Kalashnikov.  This is Max Niekro, from the First Risen Brigade in North America.  We heard your distress call and I am here to help.  Is there anybody there?? -

Not really expecting an answer, I almost swore out loud when a psyren's voice spoke inside my head in reply. - Max!  This is Taisia, a psyren with the Risen forces at Kalashnikov. -  The voice said with a distinct Russian accent.  - Thank Bozhe you're here!  We are under heavy attack, including some sort of bombardment from the sky.  How many soldiers did you bring with you?? - - Just me. -  I replied as I darted through what used to be a large park, several withered and charred trees still jutting from the hard, dry ground. - Just you??  But I don't understand.  How can a single Risen help us? -  I could feel the confusion in Taisia's voice.  I smiled tightly at that. - Because this single Risen is a juggernaut. -  I replied as I burst through the last set of buildings and into the space the orbital bombardment had already glassed around Kalashnikov. - And we all know velkin have a severe juggernaut allergy! - It appeared as if the Russian Risen base was in that old medieval style castle over there, a sprawling construct probably dating from the czarist era prior to the arrival of communism to Russia.  It certainly seemed to be where all the weapons fire was coming from as I saw darting javelin bolts streaking through the conflagration to slam into the steadily advancing line of velkin armor visible to my left. The advancing armor seemed to be an excellent spot to start, so I angled towards it and accelerated back to full speed.  Again the sound barrier was broken as I went supersonic.  And then I was amongst the velkin tanks, the screams of the dying filling my ears as I tore relentlessly through them. - Taisia, I am attacking the tanks now.  If I give the soldiers in the castle enough of a gap, can you get them to evacuate? -  I said over broadband.  - The orbital bombardment is almost on top of your position! - - I will try, tvarisch. -  She quickly sent back.  - Many are Russian.  We are not known for how easily we change our minds. - I grinned tightly at that then staggered as a tank blast slammed into me.  I instantly twisted around and charged the offending vehicle, ripping it in half as I churned through it.  It was quickly replaced by a veritable wall of its fellows and inwardly I groaned.  'It's Kicking Horse all over again!'  I grimly thought, hurtling forward to slash more into twisted ruin.  Well, except for the bombardment from orbit, that is.  Either way, there was certainly enough fire power here to crush Kalashnikov with little effort. The marching curtain of fire that was the orbital bombardment was now only a hundred metres or so from the southern wall of the battered castle.  It would be minutes before it marched over top the crumbling stone wall and started burning everything inside to ash. - Time's getting short, Taisia. -  I tautly reminded the Russian psyren as I staggered back under the pressure of no less than three tanks firing at me at the same time.  I twisted enough to let two of the plasma streams fall off me then shrugged off the third to dart inside of their aiming range to hammer my way through them. - I think, . .  -  I grunted as two more tanks took aim and fired, striking me in the back.  - I think I have their attention.  Now is the time to get out of there, before the bombardment comes over the wall! - Silence greeted me and I immediately faltered.  Was it too late?  Even as two more blasts struck me, nearly knocking me to my knees, I hazarded a glance over at the old castle.  Sure enough, the bombardment had reached the southern wall and was now cutting it to pieces.  Damn it!  Not again.  I wouldn't let this happen again!

Like a laser I cut through the tank lines again and again, not slowing down, not hesitating.  Just full on juggernaut all the time.  The tanks disappeared time and time again in giant blossoms of fire and death as I shattered power cores and destroyed weapon systems, triggering massive failure.  The hunters on foot fared even worse with even less to protect them.  I cut them down dozens at a time, a scythe of dark intent reaping a bloody alien harvest. So determined to single-handedly destroy the advancing legions on my own, I didn't notice the shifting of the bombardment from the wall to where I was killing tanks.  Didn't notice until my world suddenly exploded in fire and pain.  'No!'  I howled as darkness swirled in on me, feeling my body getting slammed into the ground by the force of the blast that hit me. 'Not again!!' I wasn't sure how long I was out.  But when I came to, it was due to a psionic shriek splitting my head in two, the blackness instantly giving away to brilliant, piercing light. - Max!  Max, can you read me? -  Taisia shouted into my battered mind.  - I saw orbital fire hitting near you.  Are you okay?  Max!  Answer me! - - Yeah, yeah, I'm okay. -  I winced as i pushed back the unfortunately familiar sensation of being seared right to my bones to the back of my mind.  - Just stop shouting.  You're giving me a migraine. - - My apologies, tvarisch, but you weren't answering right away and we feared, . . -  She began before I roughly cut her off. - Did you manage to evacuate the base before the bombardment started? -  I interrupted her to say, not really wanting to acknowledge my own stab of fear that I felt when they didn't initially answer. - Yes.  At least most of us.  You held the ground forces attention just long enough, moi droog, to let us sneak out.  We lost a few when the bombardment hit the wall, but other than that, we are mostly intact.  Commander Vorinov wanted me to pass on his thanks for your efforts. - The light was starting to fade to something more normal as she said that and the sky came into focus above me.  I tried blinking, only to discover my eyelids had been burnt off by the shot I had just managed to survive.  That realization was almost enough to make me groan out loud.  If it had managed to burn my eyelids off despite being fully juggernaut and shielded, then I can only imagine what a wreck the rest of me was.  I could only hope I wasn't now vulnerable to a head shot in case the hunters saw my body wasn't vaporized by the shot from orbit and came over to finish me off by blowing off my head. - You can tell the good commander to save his thanks until we're actually out of the fire. -  I'm not sure how I did it with muscle burnt off bone, but I managed to flip myself over to stare unblinking at the burnt ground beneath me. - Where are you, Taisia, so I can come and find you?  Never mind; just guide me in when I'm ready to leave the field of battle. - Time to summon some goa and put myself back together again.  I mentally braced.  This part was going to hurt.  Then I was calling for the life force of the planet.  I think I started screaming when the second tendril bit into me to send searing goa through my charred body.  I couldn't tell exactly because the howling in my ears created by the goa refilling my body deafened me to anything else.  And I didn't stop until I could blink, my body fully restored after what felt like an eternity spent with the goa pulling my necrotized and burnt flesh back to life. Shuddering as the pain continued to echo through me, I slowly pushed myself to my feet.  As I was the first time I awoke from getting hit by a shot from orbit, my clothing had been burned from me and I was stark naked. "Hot DAMN."  I growled, trying to push the pain back.  "That frickin' SUCKED!"  I dragged in a lungful of air, more to settle myself than to actually get oxygen, as I was undead and didn't need it.  Only to have it rush out as I was struck hard from the side, the impact enough to break ribs and nearly my hip. I went juggernaut in an instant and stifled a groan of pain as I instinctively pulled in more goa to handle the impact damage, the additional life force immediately pulling my broken bones back into place before repairing them.  Then I was digging in a foot to slow myself as I looked down to see what had smashed me in the ribs.  And felt a twisting in my gut to see K'ethik black and silver. if the third player in our triumvirate of doom not only held parts of the city, but were out here as well, their numbers had to be far larger than what we'd experienced before.  Unless the battle had drawn them out. A hard punch caved in this insect form's head and it squealed a death rattle before its legs went slack and it dropped to the ground.  A quick look around revealed heavy dust had reduced visibility to maybe a couple of metres, the howling of the incoming plasma masking most sounds.  This one had managed to sneak up on me thanks to both of those things.  Yet, as I looked down at it with a frown, it hadn't attacked me with much vigor.  Not like the ones in the city had.  'Probably because you were expecting velkin, weren't you, boy.'  I gave the unmoving insect form a kick, denting in its side. - Taisia, we've got another problem. -  I sent. - We certainly do. -  The Russian psyren quickly replied, her matter-of-fact tone lifting my eyebrow. - Why, were you expecting some? -  I wanted to know. - Of course we were. -  Taisia said.  - We may be undead, but we're still Russian, tvarisch.  We're born pessimistic. - - Fair enough. -  I took a quick look around and frowned as I could see the tell-tale shifting of more insect forms moving through the smoke and haze all around me.  They were definitely keying in on the velkin armor.  Which was both good news and bad.  Good news because they would probably keep the velkin occupied enough to allow us to effect our escape.  Bad news because we most likely would lose Moscow.  Not to the velkin.  To the K'ethik. - We've got another player on the field that poses a considerable threat. - - Are you talking about those big black and silver robot bugs? -  Taisia replied.  Ah, good; at least they had some experience with them. - Those would be the ones. -  I confirmed, trying to get my bearings in the smoke and dust. - Da, they've been flooding into the city for weeks now.  Commander Vorinov thinks they may have a hive, or a nest somewhere in the city and are using it as a base of operations. - I nodded as I heard that.  Made sense, considering how many I had encountered during my brief stint in the ruins.  And it was going to be a bitch to try and take it back from them. With a snarl as they burned through the air, more ship gun plasma started dropping out of the sky.  This time I could hear K'ethik death squeals as they started to take some heat.  Looks like the bugs had just captured the attention of the ships in orbit.  Knowing how much this new commander seemed to hate the K'ethik despite them being instrumental in its rise to power, I could see it ordering this whole place glassed to combat the infestation.  I needed to move, or risk taking another one of those shots. - Taisia, it's suddenly gotten hot out here.  Want to give me a telepathic Heads Up Display map to guide me in?  I need to exit, stage right. - There was a shift in my vision then a small map appeared in the corner of my right eye.  My location flashed red and another location to the north flashed green.  Assuming that was our escaping Risen, I turned myself in that direction and began to run.  I didn't go full out, because I wanted to make sure I didn't run into any more heat. As I ran, the death cries of the K'ethik were now mixing with gobby screams as the insect forms tore into the armored column.  Despite their proximity, the ships in orbit continued firing, raining death down on their own soldiers. Heartless, as expected.  I put my head down and legged it out of the hot zone. We would have to be just as heartless to win.

 

Poking the Bear

The ruins outside of the castle were as battered as the ones I had landed in.  Gaping craters were everywhere amongst the broken and shattered buildings, none of them fresh.  That suggested they were created at the same time the city fell.  I gave them a cursory glance as I jogged through in case one or more of them harbored our metal friends that were currently splitting time between fomenting trouble for the gobbies and dying. Thus I was prepared when I heard the growl of velkin ground effect drives ahead of me and to the left as I moved into a badly shelled neighborhood.  Slowing, I consulted my HUD.  Odd, it was saying I was right on top of the Kalashnikov Risen.  A quick look around yielded nothing.  Oh well.  It's not like these velkin didn't need a good smashing anyway. I readied myself as I went juggernaut, the ground grumbling under my feet as I continued forward.  It was tempting to just burn through what was left of the buildings and take those bastards out.  But without knowing where the Kalashnikov people were, I ran the risk of running them over.  Better to get LOS and burn 'em straight on.  My eyes were hard as I focused through the ruins on the four or five tanks that were making their way along the street running perpendicular to mine.  Along with the armor there was two transports packed full of hunters and maybe another thirty or so on foot. A quick calculation revealed they'd reach the intersection about the same time I did.  Outstanding.  I grinned tightly as I prepared to explode forward. Time to kill some velkin. Before I could launch, however, I watched several shadows appear in the ruins.  Then a hail of javelin fire tore into the column.  Precise shots dropped the hunters that were on foot, most of them down in the first volley.  More took out the ones in the transports, armored bodies rag dolling everywhere to flop unmoving onto the ground.  Damn, these guys were good.  But not good enough to take out the tanks.  I watched several javelin shots carom off the heavy armor even as the massive barrels swung around to send massive blasts ripping through space at whatever they could see. At least it left a little something for me.  Again I readied to take off.  And again, before I could move a step, I was stopped.  This time by a hand on my arm. "While I admire your ferocity, tvarisch, you might want a pair of pants before you go and fight aliens today."  An accented voice dryly pointed out as a pair of camouflaged pants moved into my field of view. I chuckled as I took them and began pulling them on. "Thanks."  I said over my shoulder at the lean form that had retreated into the shadows.  "I lost mine out on the battle field." "I don't need an explanation."  The figure said from the shadows, the tell-tale shape of a goa-forged weapon in his hands.  "I've done things in my life that made old Father Nikolai's hair go white so I cannot judge."  Then he was leaning forward to send several shots snarling towards the nearest tank. "I assume you're the juggernaut Taisia told us about."  He said as he fired.  "Only someone who is virtually invulnerable wanders a battle field naked.  Unfortunately the rest of us are not that protected.  So now might be a good time to attack.  Before that tank shoots me." I turned and watched as the barrel swung in our direction.  Then I was churning forward.  I broke the sound barrier just before I slammed into it, ripping it apart.  Twisting in the middle of a storm of flying metal and burning plastic, I went right down the middle of the road.  And in doing so, I took out the other four, the tanks forced into a single column by the narrowness of the street. As the last tank died, the surviving shadows stepped into the clear, javelin fire filling the air with a hail of deadly green and blue light.  It didn't take long for the remaining hunters that made it through the initial encounter to join their dead comrades on the ground in the face of that volley.

With ruin all around me, I walked through the shattered velkin armor as the Risen soldiers themselves stepped into the carnage.  And I watched as they grimly and without remorse dispatched any hunters still alive with a shot through the head, going from body to giant body to make sure their enemy was dead.  "Alright, nahroad, you've had your fun."  A weathered-looking Transcended growled with just a hint of an accent as he walked through the debris and death towards me.  "Commander wants you back with the company immediately."  Then his black and purple irised eyes fell on me. "As for you, Lady Godiva, he wants to talk to you directly.  If you'll follow me, I'll take you to him."  And without another word he turned and began striding back in the direction he had come.  I had little choice but to follow, a thoughtful expression on my face.  Lady Godiva??  Like what the hell? The bulk of the Kalashnikov Risen occupied the better part of an old apartment block nearly a kilometre from where they ambushed the velkin column.  We passed several layers of pickets on the way in, some perched high in partially intact buildings, while others slinked in the shadows.  They appeared to be a veteran group, moving economically and efficiently through their scant cover while they vigilantly watched for the enemy. It wasn't so much that they were obvious veterans of the war against the velkin that surprised me.  I would've expected some of the Risen would've gotten fairly good at holding their own against the vastly superior numbers and technology of the enemy over the space of 50 years. It was the fact that they all appeared to be Transcended, like my own force back in North America.  If I was to believe Greta, Chris and Mick, Transcended were just as rare in Europe as they were in North America.  Yet here was several hundred strong, each and every one wearing the grim reality of being a soldier like an old coat, worn and comfortable. As I was wondering how that was possible, I passed close to one of the sentries.  And immediately got my answer as I sensed his goa levels.  He was an Upgrade!  But that only triggered more questions, like had someone managed to come up with the process independently of Boost and I?  Or had the process somehow been communicated with the European and Asian Risen and they now actively used it to strengthen their forces? Either way I had a feeling I was about to get some answers as the weathered looking javelin who had been in command of the ambush, led me into a darkened doorway.  I unconsciously braced, not having the most trust in this lot.  And just as quickly I forced myself to relax.  We were all Risen here, right?  Not to mention, I was a juggernaut. Thinking that sent a twinge of pain through me as my body remembered the ass kicking I had just gotten for a second time from a ship in orbit.  Not so invulnerable against that, apparently. "Not approving of our little hideaway, friend?"  Asked the voice we had heard over the wireless.  I schooled my features to non-threatening.  I must've grimaced or something when I felt that twinge.  Spotting another battered looking Risen, apparently the voice's owner, standing in a room at the far end of the corridor the weathered one had led me into, I pasted a smile on my face. "Not at all, Commander Vorinov."  I replied.  "I'm afraid I took some orbital fire while out engaging the tanks that menaced your western flank.  Apparently there are things a juggernaut can feel.  And my body is reminding me to avoid feeling those things ever again." The lean, battered Risen chuckled softly at my dry explanation..  Then he stepped back as I reached the end of the corridor and I glanced over at what he had been doing.  And found myself stifling a whistle of amazement to find a newly repaired Risen sitting on a table.  Wait a minute!  The guy was a summoner??

My eyes went back to Vorinov just as the glow around his hands faded. "Apparently one of the things they can't feel is the cold."  He said with a half smile, his English flawless despite the accent.  "I can get you a shirt, if you like, even some boots.  Unless you prefer the bare-chested berserker look.  You certainly play the part, hurling yourself into the fray like you did." I found myself returning the smile. "Ah, yes; the charging in recklessly.  It's a juggernaut thing." Vorinov nodded in understanding before looking over at one of his underlings, of which there were several in the room in various stances of watchfulness.  When he caught the soldier's eye, he lifted his chin sharply.  That prompted a quick search through a couple of chests of stored goods which resulted in a pair of boots, some socks and a shirt.  All of which were passed to me. "Thanks."  I said with each item, slipping them on as they came to me. "Not at all, Mr. Niekro.  Although, I think it is I who should be thanking you."  Vorinov said, folding his arms across his chest. "Commander?" He made a gesture with his head. "For giving us the room to get out of the castle back there.  We were pressed hard.  If you hadn't of drawn the enemy's fire, we would've been pinned down with nowhere to go when the bombardment came over the wall."  Vorinov explained.  "Instead, I was able to withdraw with nearly ninety percent of my force intact.  Much to the enemy's chagrin, I'm sure." "I can only hope so."  I said, my smile returning. Vorinov turned from me and walked towards a pair of chairs near the back wall.  Gesturing to one with a hand, he took the other.  Assuming he wanted me to join him, I did so, easing into the plain plastic and metal piece of furniture. "Now that you're here, Mr. Niekro, I'd like to ask a couple of questions."  Vorinov said, steepling his fingers in front of him. "I will answer what I can, commander, as long as I get to ask a couple of my own."  I replied, eliciting a tight smile from the battered looking summoner. "But of course."  The smile vanished.  "I'm assuming you came in response to our distress call."  At my nod, he went on.  "We didn't see any aircraft, or any other mode of transportation that announced your arrival.  How did you get here?" "Psyren teleport."  I replied and he frowned. "Not possible.  Psyrens have a limited two hundred kilometre range on their teleports, give or take a dozen.  And you told Taisia that you were from North America.  There's no way you could've jumped from North America to Russia.  Not using a psyren.  So tell me: how did you really get here?" Wait a minute.  Did this guy think I was lying? "By psyren teleport."  I doggedly repeated and held up a forestalling hand when he made to protest.  "Necessity has forced the Risen forces in North America to find innovative ways to bolster their numbers and strengthen their position.  And one of the things we discovered was the use of multiple psyrens in formation to create a goa pool to draw from, which greatly extended a single psyren's range.  I used one of those enhanced psyrens to port me here after we heard your distress signal." Vorinov's face still wore a doubtful look of thoughtfulness. "And how did you get around the LOS issue?"  The Russian Transcended pressed.  "If a psyren can't sense where she's going, she needs Line Of Sight.  She'd have neither over such a great distance."

"We used satellites."  I answered and continued with clarification when I saw Vorinov's doubtful look deepen.  "Psyrens manipulate electromagnetic fields to make their abilities work.  And many pre-invasion pieces of tech use electromagnetic fields as part of their function.  A handful of our more skilled and capable psyrens discovered they could piggyback a telepathic signal on a standard communication or data link signal, like those used with satellites.  That gave them the ability to see what the satellite was seeing, an enhanced LOS as it were.  Combined with the goa pool, they were able to jump me all the way over here." Vorinov stared at me for a long moment, clearly unwilling to believe a word I was saying.  What was it that Taisia said about  Russians having a hard time changing their minds about things?  A nice way to say they were stubborn as shit.  And I could see Vorinov's back was up on this. Abruptly he turned to stare at a doorway set in the room's far wall.  Some sort of telepathic communication must've happened because an instant later it opened and a slender, robed woman stepped through.  It didn't take a genius to see she was a psyren.  She had that same sense of power and ability that hovered around all the psyrens I knew, even though this one wasn't floating off the ground like some of ours did. 'Taisia, is what this juggernaut saying, true?"  He tautly asked, clearly angry.  What the hell?  Why was he so pissed off?  I don't remember doing anything to rub him wrong. "Can psyrens work in formation, using a common pool of goa, to strengthen and improve their capabilities?  And can they use pre-invasion technological electromagnetic energy to extend their sensory ranges?"  The weathered summoner wanted to know. The hooded psyren looked over at me for a moment before turning back to Vorinov. "It's possible, Dimitri.  We just don't have the resources to test it."  She answered in that voice I had come to know so well.  "I am the only psyren attached to this company.  And we have no access to pre-invasion technology." "No tech?"  My eyebrow rose.  "I'm assuming then you don't have any teslas?" "No need."  Vorinov looked back at me, his expression softened only slightly by Taisia's answer.  "I'm not sure what sort of unit you're used to, Mr. Niekro but this is a combat unit.  We only have the soldiers we need to take the fight to the enemy." I fought the impulse to snort.  This is a combat unit??  Oh really?  Like the outfit I left behind wasn't?  I felt a muscle in my jaw jump with tension.  I so wanted to tell this guy, who had asked for help by the way, that my three battalions had single-handedly changed the complexion of this war.  That we spent our time crushing velkin bases and firing on ships in orbit instead of hiding out in a worn out old castle.  And that while his soldiers seemed competent, they didn't have what it took to take down a velkin tank, little yet five of them. No, because that's what a juggernaut does, you frickin' bumble dick! Taisia must've felt my tension levels climb because suddenly there was a voice in my head. - You mustn't take offense, Max. -  She telepathically urged.  - Dimitri and his company have been isolated for years, fighting a lonely war against the aliens in this part of Russia.  And while he is desperately thankful for your assistance, he is now fighting the impulse to ask you to leave so he can carry on with his private battle and soothe his pride for needing to ask for help in the first place. -  There was a pause that almost sounded like a mental sigh. - Russian men and their pride.  Even undead, he cannot get past it being wounded even a little.  To have to ask for help nearly killed him. - I looked over at Taisia with a frown.  I had picked up a note of something else in that quiet comment and defense of the weathered summoner.  A wistfulness and an affection that indicated some sort of feelings existed between the two.  And I found her looking steadfast at the brooding Vorinov.  I didn't need to see her face to know what emotion was drawn there.  She was in love with him.  A love Vorinov obviously didn't return. 

I mentally sighed.  Russians and their tragic love stories even in undeath, I thought in echo to Taisia's earlier sentiment.  Time to leave this Russian tragedy with its grim and pride-filled leader and starstruck leading lady. "Well."  I husked as I climbed back to my feet.  "Sounds like you have everything here under control, commander.  Since you don't have the tech or the psyrens to send me back home, I'll be on my way.  Thanks for the shirt, pants and boots."  I nodded at the staring Vorinov and the bemused Taisia and turned to begin walking towards the door. "Oh, by the way, I didn't ask you my question."  I said over my shoulder without slowing down.  "I was wondering: how did you figure out the process for making Upgrades?" "We didn't."  Vorinov confessed, finally standing.  "An emissary to the Earth Mother gave us the process." "Oh?  And did they say where it was developed?"  I wanted to know as I approached the entrance to the corridor where a handful of javelins were standing.  They almost looked like they wanted to bar my way. "Somewhere in North America."  Vorinov grudgingly admitted. "Huh.  Imagine that."  Then I was slowing as the javelins indeed stepped in my way.  I immediately focused on them, going juggernaut and making the floor beneath me groan with my abrupt change in density. "You boys sure about this?"  I growled, staring each one in the eye for a hard moment.  "I stomp on velkin tanks like they're soap bubbles.  Think your little pop guns can slow me down?" That made them instantly look unsure.  But kudos to them for standing their ground as one looked past me to where Vorinov still stood, arms folded. "Sir?"  He asked as his comrades shifted uneasily away from me. "Let him go."  Vorinov curtly commanded.  "He removed the immediate threat and has allowed us to go back to work.  We no longer require his services." I looked back at him for a moment. "I'll remember that, commander."  I tightly promised.  Then I was pushing past his soldiers and into the corridor beyond. I was shaking my head by the time I got outside, the target of several dark looks.  What the hell just happened there?  I risk life and limb to jump in here to pull their asses out of the fire and these guys act like I insulted them?  All because Vorinov couldn't believe that I could've been teleported from North America.  Again I shook my head.  I had never experienced an interaction going sideways so fast, and for so little reason as I just had with the battered summoner. - Well, so much for that, Taisia. -  I sent over the broadband.  I wasn't going to let that guy bother me.  Time to let it go and see what I could do about getting back home before the velkin's new master plan took a shot at New Retribution. - I am so sorry, Max. -  She immediately replied.  - Dimitri is the kindest of fellows but his pride got the best of him.  His ingratitude for what you had to go through to help us truly was insulting.  I cannot speak more strongly about how terrible I feel about this. - - Bah, don't worry about it, Taisia.  It's not your fault.  But perhaps you can direct me to another Risen encampment where the leader isn't so prickly with an ego so easily bruised.  The attack on your base will be shortly repeated all over the world, including North America.  I wouldn't mind returning home as quickly as possible to help them there.  And I'll need some psyrens with a satellite uplink to make that happen. - There was silence for a moment as Taisia considered my request. - Well, you may have noticed that Dimitri's entire complement, save myself, are males  Yet the Earth Mother summoned both males and females back to fight the enemy.  I'm afraid again his pride got in the way as he wanted only men fighting for him and so sent any female Risen that were summoned to his command away. - - Sorry to say, Taisia, but your commander has issues. -  I replied. - I will not deny it. -  The Russian psyren replied.  - But he wouldn't be Russian if he wasn't deeply flawed, and deeply human in some way.  It is those flaws that make us so passionate and prideful, strong and resourceful, and so sad it makes us angry as a people. - - Yeah, maybe. -  I conceded.  - I won't deny your people are passionate.  Perhaps the women that he sent away have proven to be equally passionate and fight against the enemy in their own way. - - Yes, they are.  And yes, . . they are. -  Taisia said with just a hint of a giggle.  - I was getting to that part before I distracted myself with ponderings on the very nature of the Russian soul.  We do that alot too; ponder our nature.  The female Risen banded together to form a group they call the Valkyries, after the germanic warrior maidens of myth.  They are considerably more diverse than Dimitri's company, and include a handful of men in their number that didn't fit anywhere else. - - Sounds perfect. -  I said.  - I can only hope they have enough psyrens and access to tech to do what I need them to. - - I hope so, too. -  Taisia said.  - Good luck, Max.  And thanks so much for coming all this way to help.  You may not have Dimitri's thanks, but you certainly have mine! - I smiled at hearing the note of sincerity in Taisia's voice.  It was almost enough to make it worth the trip here.  Almost. - No problem, Taisia.  Now, can you give me a heads up map to the Valkyrie camp? -  Full night had descended and the sooner I got out of Moscow, now full in shadow and darkness, crawling with K'ethik, velkin and pissed off Russians, the happier I would be!

 

A Change in Venue

I frowned as I jogged along the battered strip of what looked like it used to be pavement, or something similar, covering a ground route between Moscow proper and one of its outlying suburbs.  The suburb I was headed to was called Arkhangelskoye, to the west and slightly north of the capital's main core.  A large multi-lane highway had taken me out of the capital and I had gone juggernaut, flying over the flattened terrain to make good time.  But as I neared the outlying districts, I was forced to slow when I turned onto a smaller roadway and now I was jogging in the darkness towards a new set of ruins, unable to see more than a few metres in front of me. So it was almost a shock when suddenly there were buildings all around me.  Or rather what was left of them; this place in the dark looked as battered and bombed out as Moscow had been.  'Man, what I wouldn't give to have animus night vision right about now.'  I mused to myself as I slowed and looked from side to side in a vain attempt to get a measure of where I was. I was still staring hard into the shadows when I came to an intersection, the larger road continuing on and a smaller one turning left to travel even further into the ruin's heart.  According to the HUD, the smaller road was the one I needed to take.  I slowed to a halt to give the new road a good look.  Well, as good as the darkness was allowing anyway. I glanced up at the moonless night sky, the spattering of stars across the velvety vault doing little to lend their illumination to my efforts to see.  And thusly I was unprepared when the cold metal of a gun barrel was pressed against my cheek. "Hold it right there, kraseeveeye."  A low woman's voice husked.  "You're a little further west than you should be, dah?" "I'm not with Vorinov's crew."  I said, my hands raised almost instinctively when I felt the barrel touch my cheek.  "I'm here looking for the Valkyries.  Taisia said you could help me." "An American, eh?"  The voice said, not reacting to anything else I had said as the barrel moved from my cheek to the center of my back.  "You're even further off the beaten track then, moi droog.  You should've taken a left at your Statue of Liberty instead of a right."  The barrel gave me a poke.  "Move.  I'll let Ulyana decide what to do with you." With the gun barrel acting like a prod, my guide moved us even deeper into the ruin and darkness.  By the fact that she unerringly steered us towards what my HUD was telling me was the Valkyrie camp said she either knew where she was going, or she could see in the dark far better than I could.  Regardless I was being taken to where I needed to go so I wasn't going to complain.  Not even about the barrel poking me in the spine.  If a velkin bolt thrower didn't hurt me, I highly doubted an old school slug thrower could. Still, I didn't want to play the juggernaut card.  Not just yet.  Let this Valkyrie think I was a run-of-the-mill Risen looking for a company to hook up with and keep everything else close to the chest.  With all the undercurrent I had already run into here, with not all Risen considered equal by all parties, I needed to get a better sense of what was going on here before I decided which direction I would jump in. The first indication we were drawing close to the Valkyrie base was the feeling that we had weapons suddenly aimed at us.  A heart beat later my guide quietly whistled as we passed through a relatively dense section of buildings.  There was no reply, but I got the sense that those weapons were no longer locked on us.  We went perhaps another block or two further in darkness before I caught sight of some kind of light through the blasted out ruins. Instead of going straight through, however, we then proceeded to take a rather circuitous route, complete with several switch backs.  It was enough to make me start looking at the ground.  The only reason to be doing that was to avoid booby traps set up to take out unsuspecting enemies who would see the light and make a beeline for it.  I found my opinion of these Valkyries going up a couple notches at that.  Somebody certainly knew what they were doing.

Finally we finished negotiating the approach and, stepping past a heavy guard of javelins and Transcended equipped with more slug throwers, each and every one of them grim looking women dressed in urban camo and flak jackets, my guide and I stepped inside the camp perimeter.  Which was where she used a quick, unexpected kick to the back of my knees to make me kneel. "Hands on your head."  She ordered and I had to stifle a sigh of resignation as I put both hands on top of my skull. Only then did she step around me and showed herself to be a hard faced animus, her pupils just now starting to shrink.  With ash blond hair pulled back into a tight tail and dressed in camo like the guards, she stared at me for a moment with a frown.  Her gun, a late model machine gun that resembled an AK from my time period, was aimed squarely at my chest. That made me lift an eyebrow in surprise.  If such behaviour was typical for dealing with one of Vorinov's Risen, it wasn't much of a threat.  Mostly because, well, they're already dead.  We all were.  How would pumping a few rounds into their chest make any difference? Then it occurred to me.  I had seen a lot of upgrades amongst Vorinov's troops.  Shooting them would force their self repair mechanisms to come into play, which would then use up the borrowed goa that made them upgrades.  If those mechanisms then burned too much goa as they worked, they'd bring the upgrade below threshold.  That in turn would act to revert them to their previous forms, taking their special abilities away from them.  A rather harsh way of rendering the upgrade less dangerous.  Harsh but brutally effective. Another Risen stepped into my field of view, this one a dark skinned African woman.  They both kept a close eye on me while the blond whispered something into her ear.  Then the newcomer was disappearing, leaving the blond standing there, gun trained on me. Thankfully it didn't take long for somebody with authority to arrive. "You lost, tvarisch?"  A hard voice asked as its speaker came around from my left, my captor moving around behind me.  This one was a honey blond with her hair cut short so the lines and planes of her face weren't softened by bangs.  Pity; they looked like they had been chiseled from cold stone.  Her face could've used a little softening.  I found myself wondering if this woman was the Ulyana that the woman who captured me had mentioned. "Last I checked, the boys played in their little sand castle in the north part of Moscow.  As you may have noticed, this isn't Moscow." "And as you may have noticed, I'm not from around here."  I retorted and got a quick slap across the back of my head for my trouble. "Nobody asked you."  My captor's voice hissed from behind me and again I felt her gun barrel press against  my flesh, this time against the back of my neck.  Now that was a threat.  A machine gun fired from that close could easily sever a head, the only way to kill a Risen.  I barely resisted going juggernaut at feeling that touch.  These women were even less welcoming than Vorinov's men.  They were definitely giving me the vibe that if I said the wrong thing, I'd be wearing a hot lead neck tie. The honey blond glanced at the gun bearer then back down at me, her lack of expression doing little to assuage my doubts. "So, if you're not with Vorinov, who are you with?"  She asked.  With a glance over my shoulder at the woman holding the gun to my neck, I answered. "Risen First Brigade, North America.  I had myself jumped in, in response to a distress signal from the Risen at Kalashnikov.  They were under orbital bombardment."

The honey blond pursed her lips at that, considering my words. "Dah, we saw the fire falling from the sky.  You should've left them, Yankee.  Those filthy youblyodotsi deserve to burn for what they did to many of the girls here."  She finally said in a low, intense voice. I sighed and shrugged as best I could with my hands on my head. "Having met them, I can't say that you're wrong.  Yet, where I come from Risen stick together to fight against a common enemy." "You're not in Kansas any more, Yankee."  The woman with the gun said.  "You're in a twisted version of Oz, where the wicked witch of the East flies a space ship and the cowardly lion shivers behind the walls of an old castle." I risked another glance back at her.  An interesting metaphor, if not a little mixed up. "Does that make you Dorothy?"  I asked, earning myself another cuff. "You Americans."  The honey blond said with a grimace.  "Always with the attitude, even in undeath."  She folded her arms over her breasts. "So you got yourself jumped in here to answer that filth Vorinov's distress call.  I'm assuming you helped him escape destruction.  But then what?  He didn't like having so many foreign soldiers on his territory so he told you all to leave?" "Something like that."  I admitted and she snorted. "What a doorak."  She hissed.  "He could've increased his ability to fight and instead he throws you all out because, . . ."  Her voice abruptly faded as a thoughtful expression appeared. "Wait a moment.  Where are the rest of your men?"  She asked. I smiled tightly. "I didn't say I arrived with a company.  You just assumed I did."  I replied. "You, . . . came by yourself??"  That puzzled her, her expression transforming from one of thoughtfulness to one of confusion. I shrugged again. "I didn't need anybody else."  I said. The honey blond absorbed that, mulling it over for a moment. "And did you assist the Risen in Kalashnikov in their efforts to withdraw?"  She asked and I nodded. "Over ninety percent survived.  Of the armor and hunters that tried to advance on the castle in the wake of the bombardment, they weren't so lucky." Any further words were forestalled as a low trill from the front gate made the honey blond look in that direction.  Figuring it was safe for me to do so as well, I also hazarded a glance.  And watched as a column of camo-clad woman marched into camp, many looking tired and worn as if they had expended a great deal of goa in battle.  Yet only one or two of them carried weapons, goa-forged instead of the standard slug throwers. A pair near the front of the column looked up and saw the honey blond and immediately broke off to head to her.  There was no saluting as they came close but there was definitely an air of diffidence from the ones who approached. "Report."  The honey blond quietly commanded. "The attack on Kalashnikov is confirmed, commander."  One of the newcomers said and I almost twitched in surprise to find her speaking in the low, even tones of a psyren.  "The castle was obliterated by the orbital barrage.  But we found only a handful of bodies inside the base." "Outside, on the approach from the west was an entirely different matter, though."  The second newcomer spoke then, her tone also marking her as a psyren.  "Shattered invader armor and hunters everywhere.  Several thousand, at least.  Most appeared to have been ripped apart by incredible force, reinforced metal simply shredded like tissue paper.  Only a small number showed signs of damage from the robot bugs infesting Moscow city center.  They must've been brought out by the fighting."

"Whatever did the damage must've caught the invaders' eyes because we saw splash damage from the bombardment track over from the castle onto the battlefield, hitting a number of their own units in an attempt to destroy it."  The first psyren took the report thread up again.  "A handful of the bugs were hit and destroyed but it looked incidental to us." "Completely."  The second said with an agreeing nod.  "They wanted whatever destroyed their force, not the bugs." The honey blond slowly looked over at me, the two psyrens doing the same.  Her eyes didn't leave me when she spoke, addressing the two newcomers. "Your column saw action?" "Yes, commander."  The first psyren replied.  "We engaged an invader patrol on the city outskirts, as we were withdrawing from our recon of the battlefield.  Twenty two hunters downed  with no casualties of our own and we would've had more, if they hadn't rolled tanks in.  We made a strategic retreat, confirmed we weren't being shadowed and reported back, as per the rules of engagement." The honey blond nodded, hands now clasped behind her back, her eyes still boring into me. "Tanks are more your specialty, aren't they, moi droog."  She quietly asked and I smiled.  Her question and my subtle reply made both psyrens look from me to her then back at me. "Commander?"  One asked quietly yet with more than a little curiosity. Instead of immediately answering, the honey blond made a gesture and I felt the gun barrel leave my neck. "No point in menacing you with that, dah?"  She said, a faint smile appearing on her face.  "Not that it would hurt you anyway." Letting my hands drop, I carefully climbed to my feet as the two psyrens stared at me.  It was a sign of their control that I didn't feel telepathic probes all over me in an attempt to satisfy their curiosity.  Then the honey blond was finally facing them. "Sisters, we have a very rare creature amongst us.  No more than a handful have ever been summoned over the fifty years we've been fighting the invaders."  She chuckled lightly.  "And to think I didn't put it together until I received your report, Valerie."  The honey blond turned back towards me. "No wonder you could jump in by yourself and help those imbeciles at Kalashnikov." "You're a juggernaut!" I inclined my head as the psyrens and the woman with the gun all gasped. "Guilty as charged."  I said, my smile growing slightly, my quiet admission broadening the honey blond's smile. "Then why the charade?"  She asked, her brow lifting in curiosity.  "Why did you let my scout capture you and bring you in, letting her think she had the upper hand?  You could've taken her, and our entire camp out whenever you wanted." I shrugged. "Considering how you'd been handled by Vorinov and his men, I figured a less than aggressive approach was advisable.  I still got where I wanted to go, which was here.  And your soldiers didn't feel threatened by my presence.  Well, not until now." The honey blond's eyes flickered over the two psyrens and then over at the column still marching by before returning to me, her smile tightening. "They still don't, tvarisch."  She pointed out.  "Okay, so we know who trashed the invader units pressing Kalashnikov's flank.  And it now makes sense as to why Vorinov wouldn't let you stay with them.  He doesn't like it when there's a bigger kher in the room.  Without trying to figure out how you got here in the first place, which I'm sure boggled that moodak's brain, I now need to ask the question: what do you want from us?" "A way back home."  I quickly answered.  "According to Taisia, the Valkyries have a corner on the market for psyrens.  And psyrens are the only way I'm going to jump all the way back to North America in a short period of time." Again the honey blond exchanged a quick look with the two psyrens who still stood nearby. "Taisia isn't wrong.  We have just about all the psyrens ever summoned in Russia attached to our unit."  She confirmed.  "But what our missing sister didn't tell you is that our psyrens don't teleport people around, or use telepathy as battle field communications.  They use their abilities to kill the enemy." It was my turn to take a look at the two psyrens standing close by then over at the column that was just finishing its march into camp. "Your psyrens engage directly in battle?"  I frowned, bringing my eyes back to the honey blond, my curiosity kicking into overdrive.  "How do they do that?" "Oh, with how much the invaders have been active recently, I've little doubt you'll get a demonstration quite shortly."  She replied somewhat mysteriously.  "In the meantime, I can't have you here without putting you to work.  It's the nature of being in an active combat zone.  I have another patrol leaving in about an hour to check on some enemy movement we picked up south of our location.  I'd like you to go with them." I pushed my curiosity to the back of my mind and nodded. "No problem.  I'll help wherever I can, while I'm here.  And while I do that, do you think you can find a unit with psyrens that can teleport?  I'd rather be with my own unit back in North America, getting them ready for the big velkin offensive they seemed to be engaging in." "Velkin?  Is that what you call the invaders?"  At my confirming nod, she nodded herself.  "I'm sure we can make some sort of accommodation for you.  Unlike my male counterpart, I don't have a problem lending aide to a fellow Risen."  Her smile widened slightly. "Especially if they earn it by killing invaders.  Lots and lots of them!"

 

Flight of the Valkyries

Thankfully the hour between my impromptu interrogation at gunpoint and the patrol's departure went by fairly quickly and I found myself out in the darkness with about thirty Valkyries, nearly half of them psyrens.  The rest were a mix of javelins and animus, the animus acting as scouts, ranging in front of the patrol to make sure we knew what was coming. Situated somewhere in the middle of the column, I wondered if it was coincidence that I was surrounded by grim faced psyrens, the psionics dressed in urban camouflage and flack jackets like their javelin counterparts instead of the robes I was used to. "So, you're a juggernaut, eh?"  A quiet voice asked beside me and I looked over at the psyren who had spoken.  She was average height, that is the top of her head was just a bit taller than my shoulder, dirty blond hair pulled into a functional bun on the crown of her head and didn't seem to be as hard as the others around me.  If she didn't look like she was ready to commit mayhem at the drop of a hat, she might've even looked pretty. "I've never met a juggernaut."  She said without moving her lips and I realized we were on a personal telepath connection.  - Is it true you destroyed that massive invader force that menaced Kalashnikov? - I turned to look along our path, a debris and rubble-strewn road that wound its way through the heart of Arkhangelskoye.  Our patrol was moving in a loose gaggle down it, animus several dozen metres into the ruins in front of us and to the sides.  And everybody was wound tight, faces resolute and eyes narrowed as they swept the shadows that lay thickly all around us.  There was no doubt about it: this lot was ready for a fight. All except the psyren beside me.  She turned and looked at me when I didn't immediately answer, her brow raised. - Well?  Is it? -  She pressed. - Why don't you just search my memories? -  I replied while tightening my protection on my memory core at the same time.  Just because I invited her into my mind, that didn't mean I wanted her running amok in there. - Then you would see for yourself. - The psyren turned from me with a snort. - We're not allowed to do that. -  She revealed.  - Telepathy is restricted to person to person communication during combat situations only. - Huh.  'Well, doesn't that make a heckuva lot of sense', I mused.  Speaking only telepathically in a situation like on patrol reduced the risk of the enemy overhearing any conversation. Again my opinion of the Valkyries went up a notch.  Besides being considerably more professional and organized than Vorinov's crew, this bunch seemed much more interested in actively hurting the velkin as well.  They had taken the invasion personally and, by all reports so far, the velkin were feeling their wrath. - Yes, I was responsible for taking out the velkin that attacked Kalashnikov. -  I admitted after my long, thoughtful pause.  - And for a handful of K'ethik in the city before I made it to the castle. - - K'ethik? -  She asked, looking back over at me with that questioning look.  I flashed her an image of the insect forms and she instantly nodded in understanding. - Ah, those things.  Nasty business, those.  We just call 'em robot bugs.  They're resistant to a good number of our attacks so we have a tendency to avoid them. - - I don't blame you. -  I responded.  - They're resistant to a good number of my attacks as well.  And that's saying something. - - Ulyana seems to think they've established some sort of nest in Moscow where they're actually making more of themselves. -  The psyren said with a shake of her head as if she could barely believe her own words.  - I can only hope we won't have to fight them next for control of our own planet. -

I grimaced at hearing that.  It was a thought I hadn't considered.  Fighting the K'ethik for control of Earth after the velkin had been defeated?  I was so focused on destroying the velkin I hadn't even thought of what we'd do after. Then all thought was pushed aside as a low trill from somewhere in the darkness announced the presence of velkin.  I could almost feel psionic fields activate all around me as the psyren beside me fell silent in the wake of the signal. A tap on my arm signaled me to move forward.  Thankfully the time I had before the patrol pulled out was spent getting briefing on the various hand signals the Valkyries used or that tap would've meant nothing.  As it was, I knew I was being requested to come to the front of the column by where the hand tapped me on the arm and how hard. Pieces of the rubble were being silently pushed to the side as I made my way up the side of the loose group of psyrens in preparation for a charge forward.  Seeing that by itself made me very curious as to what kind of fight I was about to witness.  Then a hand signal from the front made everybody drop into a crouch, the drop moving like a wave back through the patrol as the psyrens and javelins in front passed it on to the psyrens and javelins behind them right on to the back. I followed the patrol down, dropping into a low crab and easing forward while putting my head on a swivel.  Moving into such a low profile formation suggested the velkin were within visual range.  The patrol commander wanted to make sure they didn't see us until we were ready for them to see us.  Which was fine by me.  This was their show as far as I was concerned. And then I was beside the commander.  Catching sight of me out of the corner of her eye, she turned just enough to put me firmly in her peripheral without losing sight of the relatively open space in front of us. "Scouts report a large column using Arkhangelskoye as cover to advance into Moscow.  We don't care why they're here, only that they are.  This is our territory and any invader stupid enough to enter will die."  She husked in a low, intense voice.  "The column is at least five hundred hunters on foot, four heavy transports and at least ten tanks.  We'll take the hunters.  You take the tanks." "Copy that, commander."  I replied in a voice as quiet as hers.  Then she was signaling to the patrol. Tight hand signals sent the javelins out wide, some in pairs to ambush points, others covering the flanks.  More signals divided up the psyrens, staggering them at intervals.  To some she gave a bursting motion with her hand to, which according to the brief meant a psychic shock, whatever that was.  To others she made a upward spiral gesture, which meant they were to light their targets on fire.  And to yet others, she made a sharp, stabbing motion, indicating they were to use something called a TK battering ram. It was as the commander made the last of her gestures that I caught the sound of velkin ground effects moving towards us.  Instantly she held up her hand in a clenched fist, indicating we should hold our positions. The ground grumbled beneath my boots as I went juggernaut, my density maxing out and my shields tightening around my body.  Then I was watching as a phalanx of hunters strode into view, the visors of their helmets glowing with a strange light suggesting some sort of night vision was at work as they stepped with sure and confident strides. The commander's clenched hand opened with the bursting motion and several psyrens eased forward.  I watched as they appeared to focus on the front phalanx as the commander silently counted down with her fingers.  When the last one folded into her fist the phalanx twitched before silently falling to the ground, their rifles clattering across the pavement in front of them.

The commander then made the spiral motion as the tank behind the phalanx slowed and several hunters began to run from their positions further back, shouting back and forth.  It was these hunters that suddenly lit on fire with a roar of pyrokinetic power, each giant form completely cocooned in bright yellow and white flames.  Seared by an impossible flame that consumed them whole, flesh and armor alike, these hunters began to scream as they staggered wildly about.  And in doing so created a distraction that allowed the javelins to move in close. A brilliant hail of blue and green lashed out from the shadows, scything the remaining hunters down as they stared in shock at their burning comrades.  Then a light tap on my knee signalled that I  was next.  I immediately stood and charged in one motion. I managed to break the sound barrier before I hit the first tank, ripping it apart with a ripple of impact shock, sending discharging energies in every direction.  A step more and I was beyond it, darting between ranks of hunters that were either being cut down by javelin fire, lighting on fire or simply jerking in place and falling silently to the ground.  Then I was hitting the next tank in line, killing it in a ball of flame. By the time I destroyed the last of twelve tanks that had accompanied the column along with the four heavy transports, the remaining hunters were churning in chaos.  Some fired wildly at the shadows while others tried running.  The runners were quickly dropped by either a javelin bolt to the head or that psychic shock attack that was so epically successful. Those that fired quickly discovered what the TK battering ram was.  Even as they tried to form ranks, a ripple of force appeared just beyond before silently ripping a furrow through both them and the ground beneath their feet, crushing armor and pulping flesh.  Alien screams of pain filled the air as ripples crisscrossed through the ranks, smashing and destroying. I jogged back through the destruction, nodding in appreciation at how devastating the Valkyrie attack had been.  It had been silent, accurate and deadly.  And, as I watched the psyrens snuff out the fires, crush the bodies into dust and move the destroyed vehicles off the road and into the ruins, it was an attack that also left no trace. The road was completely clear when I rejoined the patrol, fighting the impulse to shake my head in amazement at how efficient it was. "Nicely done with the tanks."  The commander, a dark haired javelin, said as I made to jog past her to where the psyrens and javelins had reformed the loose formation they had arrived in.  Indicating that I should join her with a gesture, she went on once I stepped to her side. "If you hadn't of assisted, we would've been forced back into the ruins by those tanks."  She admitted, scanning the battlefield as she spoke for anything the psyrens might've left behind to give away their presence. "The reinforced armor is far more successful in resisting our telekinetic attacks.  With the tanks' introduction to this fight we've been forced to withdraw far too many times in recent days."  She paused to look up at me.  "That has just come to an end.  It's good to have you with us, juggernaut." I inclined my head respectfully. "Always happy to help, commander."  I said and she tightly nodded as she returned her gaze to the front. "Good.  We'll be using your abilities several more times tonight, then." The patrol commander was as good as her word.  Three more times we encountered large enemy columns attempting to move through the suburb on their way to Moscow.  And three more times we pounded, ripped, burned and psychic shocked them into oblivion, reinforcing the cordon the Valkyries had established around the city.

I also extended the patrol's range by recharging the psyrens and javelins both, Transcended and Upgrades, much to the commander's surprise and delight. "Bozhe moi, you are handy, aren't you."  She murmured as she watched me pour goa into an Upgrade psyren that had almost dropped below threshold, which would've stolen her abilities away.  I grinned and extended my hand to summon more, the single tendril snarling as it stabbed up from the ground and into my palm, refilling everything I had sent out. Then she was glancing up at the sky, which was starting to lighten towards morning.  A moment's consideration, then she was signalling back to base. The honey blond was waiting for us near the base's entrance as we approached.  By day I saw it was even more cleverly hidden than it appeared last night, virtually invisible until you were right on top of it.  So to come around a corner and see the honey blond standing there in plain sight, arms folded expectantly over her breasts was almost a shock.  Even knowing the base was there, it looked like she floated in a sea of shattered buildings and ruined roadways. "Someone looks happy to see us."  The patrol commander said with a quirky grin in my direction before she signaled the patrol to break into a light jog. "You're late."  The honey blond said as we jogged in, indicating that the patrol commander and myself join her and let the rest of the patrol continue on. "Nearly four hours, to be exact.  Yet you all look as fresh as you did when you departed yesterday despite deep scouts reporting no less than four engagements in the city."  Her eyes moved off the patrol commander to me.  "Did the late addition to your patrol give you any trouble, captain?" "No, Commander Ulyana."  The patrol commander replied, finally naming the honey blond for me so I could stop calling her by her hair color. "In fact, the juggernaut bore the brunt of all four engagements, destroying the armor and extending our operational range with goa recharges.  He was most useful." Ulyana absorbed this without comment, her gaze unrelenting as she eyed me.  Then she was nodding, her mind apparently made up. "Good.  I've got plenty of work for him to do, then.  You're dismissed, captain." "Sir."  The patrol commander said with a nod before looking at me.  "Juggernaut."  I returned her look and nod. "Captain."  I said.  Satisfied, the patrol commander jogged off with the tail end of her patrol which was just going by then. I watched her and the amazing fighting psyrens she had with her for a moment before turning my attention back to Commander Ulyana. "I'm guessing you haven't found me a ride back to North America yet."  I bluntly stated.  To her credit, she didn't prevaricate. "No.  Nor have I attempted to reach out to other groups in this part of Europe.  With confirmation of your abilities, you have become an asset I cannot part with until I have achieved certain goals." "I see."  I said evenly. "Do you?"  She quickly countered, brow raised.  "I don't think you do.  I think you are consumed by your need to return to your comrades in North America.  I think this, because that's how I would be feeling if I were you.  And I don't disagree the defense of North America is vital.  However I say that with this: so is the defense of every continent.  Moscow is as vital to retake as is New York, or Toronto, or Beijing.  Africa is as important as Europe, Asia, Australasia and South America.  We need to defeat the invaders everywhere.  Not just here, or there.  We stake our claim and we kill any alien that tries to cross our borders and take it from us."

She looked at the patrol which was almost out of sight by this point then back at me. "Your efforts with the patrol gave us the final piece we have in creating a weapon to finally take back what is ours.  We have javelins here, summoners, animus, wraiths and even the odd tesla.  But no combination of those things could defeat the invaders' armor." "Until I got here."  I said softly and she nodded. "Until you got here.  Now any Valkyrie patrol I send into the field has a chance to be successful every time they encounter the enemy.  But I'm not short sighted enough to be satisfied with having you march with patrol after patrol, whittling away at the enemy.  No, I've a bigger plan." The fabric tube unfurled over the makeshift table with a soft rustle.  And in doing so, revealed a relatively detailed map of Moscow and its surroundings including the suburb of Arkhangelskoye.  A series of markings had been made on the map, outlining battle lines, troop movements and dug in fall back points in what looked like a detailed battle plan. Still mulling over what Ulyana had said about not yet getting me a ride out of here and needing to defeat the velkin everywhere, I nevertheless couldn't stop the low whistle of appreciation at seeing the complex and detailed plan sketched out over the map's expanse. "Somebody's been busy."  I noted, examining the troop movement lines and the skirmish points with a practiced eye.  I pushed my frustration and disappointment to the back of my mind for a moment to focus on the detailed map. Ulyana nodded as she came around the table, her eyes never leaving the map. "When I first started fighting the invaders, I knew nothing of war."  She said.  "We would hit them when we could, then retreat before we all got killed.  Over the years I began to understand certain things.  How to magnify strengths and minimize weaknesses.  How to be where the enemy least expects you to be.  How to be, . . . ruthless.  Once I learned those things, I began to plan that final battle on this map."  Ulyana paused to stare down at the representation of Moscow. "I was born there, you know.  In Moscow.  Almost two hundred years ago, before the invaders, before we even truly launched ourselves into space beyond our solar system.  And I used to dream as a girl of being a soldier, protecting Mother Russia from all invaders.  To be awakened to fight the fight to free her is that dark and terrible dream of heroic death come true.  And I will fight for her until I die." As if aware of how dark and morose she was sounding, Ulyana broke off and resumed her pacing around the table. "But until this new invader offensive, we didn't have enough of the enemy to fight to make a difference.  Just the odd patrol here and there.  We couldn't really hurt them.  And until your arrival, juggernaut, we didn't have the hammer we needed to crush them once and for all." Again the short haired Risen paused, leaning over the map to tap a line she had drawn. "This will be our western perimeter.  Anything that crosses it becomes the enemy."  She tapped another line just west of the city.  "And this is our eastern perimeter, same rules."  She tapped several spots to the southeast and southwest of the city. "Enemy landing zones, where they've been bringing in troops as part of their offensive against Kalashnikov."  Abruptly she smirked.  "They should've targeted Arkhangelskoye.  We're the ones hurting them, not Vorinov and his fools.  No matter; we'll use that to draw the aliens down out of their ships onto the ground, where we can hurt them." Lifting my eyes from the complex battle plan, I looked over at Ulyana. "And how do you intend to do that, commander?"  I asked.  She returned my gaze, a thoughtful expression appearing on her face. "These dog invaders are arrogant, if they're anything."  She began, turning back to the map.  "Once we drag them out of space, we'll use that feeling of superiority to our advantage."  She reached out to the symbols marking the landing zones then traced the lines she had drawn from them into the city. "First, with misdirection and their own arrogance, we'll lead them away from their true targets to a place of our choosing, using classic bait and chase."  She then tapped a spot she had circled.  "Once there, we'll use a pincer movement to cut them off from any retreat route and flank them north and south while they pursue the bait into the center of our killing field.  The southern flank will then form the anvil upon which the northern flank will drive down and pin the enemy column against." Ulyana leaned back from her map, folding her arms over her breasts as she studied the mapn. "With us at their backs, and driving into their faces, the anvil will be where we will decisively crush them."  She said before looking up at me.  "You will be in the northern flank pincer, using your juggernaut abilities to push the enemy before you, inflicting such damage on them they will be forced to retreat towards the anvil position." I nodded as I looked for flaws in the simple but effective plan.  As expected, there wasn't any as befitting a classic military manuever performed countless times on countless battlefields.  If everything went according to Ulyana's plan we'd be inflicting some serious damage on the velkin ground forces. "And what will we do once we get them pinned, commander?" Ulyana smiled. "We kill them all, of course."  Was her reply, which immediately put a feral grin on my face. Awesome.  Time to kill some velkin!

 

Chapter 16: Unending Fire

My eyes narrowed as I looked through the binoculars at the massive landing site that sat close to the banks of the Moskva River, south of Arkhangelskoye and just ouside of another western suburb, Zakharkovo.  It looked like no less than a dozen heavy space going transports, like the ones we had killed at the base close to Fort Hill, had blasted a spot clear and set down in a rough semi-circle.  Outrageously huge, the transports dominated the riverbank to form what amounted to a fortified pallisade with their bulks.  And into the open space between them hunters, transports and tanks poured, forming the column that would be shortly marching into Moscow. In terms of size, this new force easily rivaled the one I had killed earlier.  Add the three other columns from the other landing sites and it truly was a massive army the velkin had assembled to destroy Kalashnikov, and every other Risen base in northeastern Europe.  It was also massive overkill, the size of this force far exceeding the actual threat to the velkin presence on the planet.  Even if all the Risen in Europe were to band together, they wouldn't equal this army in terms of numbers.  But that fact wasn't going to stop Ulyana and her Valkyries. There, on a rocky shelf overlooking the bank a squad of Valkyrie psyrens and animus were moving into position right on schedule.  Without broadband to coordinate on the fly, the manuevers required to make this plan work had to be rigorously practiced and studied.  Everything had to be timed down to the last second.  And so Ulyana had taken three days of constant day and night study, training and drilling to make sure her Valkyries knew exactly when and how they would make their moves.  Three days of waiting that definitely contributed to my current state of frustration.  Not sure if it was because juggernauts used perpetual motion as part of their gig, but the waiting was frickin' killing me! I fought the impulse to sigh as I glanced at the late morning sky.  This was the first time in this damn war I was being forced to step away from command and just play a part.  A very important and rather cool part, I might add.  But a part nonetheless, and my feelings of frustration and impotence were warring with the knowledge that we were about to curb stomp the gobbies into oblivion!  According to Ulyana's plan, the greater part of the bait and chase would be carried out by small psyren and animus teams.  The animus would make sure the path to the kill box was clear while the psyrens antagonized and drew the velkin along.  Once the gobbies were clear of the landing sites I would then go in and do a little remodeling, making sure those transports never returned to space.  I would then hit the other three landing zones, stetching east along the banks of the Moskva, before blowing back through Zakharkovo to join up with the northern pincer. Drawn into the kill box by the bait teams and prevented from retreating by the destruction of their transports, the aliens would have little choice but to face us in open battle.  I fought off another sigh at that thought.  Face to face battle; the first any Earth force had attempted to do so since the invasion.  'It should've been my crew, my guys hitting these gobby bastards in the face.'  I darkly mused.  Then just as quickly I pushed that thought to the back. Did it really matter who kicked these alien bastards in the teeth?  No.  We were all called for the same purpose.  And I would fulfil my purpose here by making sure it didn't furball and go sideways on us.  After all, despite the Valkyries' capabilities and my own meagre contribution to the effort, the velkin still had a massive numerical and technological edge.  Not to mention, they owned the high ground with their ships in orbit.  Just as we had determined back in  North America, true victory wouldn't be achieved until the velkin fleet was neutralized once and for all. Still, half the battle was making sure the enemy couldn't hit our assets on the ground.  With the Valkyrie base well hidden, the fleet would have to glass the entire area to hurt them.  That, or hit the planet with something a lot larger than plasma cannons, which introduced the risk of rupturing it open and letting the Earth Mother's essence leak off into space.  If the velkin were truly interested in harvesting that energy, they wouldn't risk that.

Pondering those things made me frown.  It was a shit load of assumptions we were making about the aliens' intentions.  And a hill of hopes were built on those assumptions being right.  Because if the velkin at any time decided Earth was no longer worth the effort, we could have a planet buster getting crammed up our asses and there wouldn't be much we could do about it! Thankfully Ulyana had discovered the one thing that wasn't an assumption.  The velkin were arrogant.  So overwhelmingly confident in their ability to destroy us, the giant aliens were restricting most of their efforts in this newly escalating conflict to ground forces with bombardment only acting in support.  We had to make sure we stung that pride enough that they would continue to try and prove their superiority by facing us in direct combat instead of pounding us into submission from orbit. A flicker of movement in the binoculars pulled me out of my reverie and I refocused on the bait team.  Their heads were together as they quickly conferred amongst themselves on the last few things of concern before they launched the attack.  Then, done, the animus turned and sprinted off into the ruins and the psyrens turned to face the landing site in front of them. The bait team had picked a small rise overlooking the riverbank to give them a slight advantage in launching.  This allowed them to look down into the enemy encampment, which sprawled below.  The dozen or so psyrens strode up to the edge, intent on the base.  Then, as one they were drawing back several paces from the edge.  There was a pause then they were running forward to hurtle off the edge and into space, launching into the twenty metre or so drop to the blasted clear ground of the encampment. If they were any other Risen besides a juggernaut, I would've thought the move foolish.  Why jump from height and risk damage from a bad landing?  With a Valkyrie, however, all preconceptions were turned on their head.  And I would shortly witness that happening yet again with these ladies. With arms outstretched and legs together, the psyrens dropped gracefully through the air, looking more like ballerina dancers than psionic soldiers.  Then they were landing, flares of telekinetic fields cushioning the impact with gusts of dust and small stones.  As soon as their boots were on the ground, they were running forward. This wouldn't be like the silent yet deadly attack the patrol had launched three days' ago in the ruins of Arkhangelskoye.  This was an attack that would be as much for the show as it was to sting the velkin into giving chase.  I hunkered down with my binoculars to watch the action. With their TK shields still in place, the psyrens sent tendrils of pyrokinetic energy crawling over those shields, effectively wreathing them in fire.  It served to give them the appearance of fire elementals, seething with the wrath of the Earth Mother herself.  Then they were using short range teleports to 'hop' into the middle of velkin formations where they then lashed out with fire-laced TK battering rams.  Both burning and torn by the psionic attack, the aliens reacted exactly how they were supposed to: with rage. Plasma rifles were quickly hoisted and aimed and the air surrounding the psyrens filled with howling blasts of energized plasma.  Their shields holding firm against the counter attack, the psyrens were able to get off a few more of those burning battering rams of psionic force along with a handful of psychic shocks before the plan called for them to retreat. Spinning in place, they used the battering rams to push the aliens aside so they could make their break.  Not that they needed to; even as they began to run forward, the psyrens once again engaged their short range teleports and 'hopped' their way out of the landing site, further enraging the aliens who watched their attackers somehow keep just ahead of their pursuit.  I found myself smiling as the entire column, tanks, transports and all, turned as one and charged after the dozen psyrens.  'Damn, it actually worked!'  I thought.

With their teleport hopping, the psyrens moved fast, forcing the velkin to a similar pace in an effort to catch them.  They also further spurred the aliens on by having one or two of them at regular intervals drop back into the midst of the column where precise TK battering rams and psychic shocks did more damage before they jumped back out of range. With that kind of urging at work, it only took perhaps twenty minutes before the entire column had vacated the landing area.  Not that any stragglers left behind would get in my way, but we really didn't want the column to know we were trashing their rides so they couldn't leave.  One last sweep with the binoculars then I was stowing them and charging down the hill at full juggernaut speed. Leaving my sonic boom far behind me, I was a bolt of lightning dropping out of the clear morning sky to hammer into the first transport.  The handful of crew that were left behind to man them didn't even have the chance to look up before I smashed my way through the control deck, killing them in their seats.  Then, after tearing through the engine core and turning it into several large and useless pieces, I took a hard left through the ship's side to hit the next one over. Going at top speed, I was able to destroy all twelve transports in less than fifteen minutes, keeping my destruction profile low so there would be no explosions to let the column know what I was doing.  Blasting out the side of the last transport, I hit the ground and skidded to a halt so I could pull out my map the scouts had made a couple days ago when the transports first started landing. According to the map, the next landing site was two kilometres distant, well within sight of the first site and almost directly east of Zakharkovo, in the bend of the river.  The one after that was north, on the other side of the highway I had originally used to come into Arkhangelskoye, again on the banks of the river as it made a u-bend to head almost directly east.  The third and last landing site followed the  same pattern, located in a bend in the river, near the suburb of Krasnogorsk. Ulyana's plan was to not let the velkin cross the river and advance into Moscow.  Instead her bait teams would draw all the columns back to the space between Arkhangelskoye and Zakharkovo and just south of the remains of an artificial reservoir.  It was a relatively open space where the columns could be funneled into before the pincer, reaching in from the west, would seal off the space and create the kill box. Satisfied that I knew where I was going, I put my head down and opened up the throttle, flying along the river bank.  It took less than a minute to cover the intervening two kilometres and I hit the transports there at full speed.  The bait team here had launched their assault at the same time as the first one had and so the landing site was already vacated by the time I got there.  I fully expected the other two to be empty of troops as well, with only the transport crews left behind. With the river on my right, I continued my navigation and destruction of the landing sites until the final one was history.  Vapor hissing as it escaped a ruptured conduit behind me, I stepped clear of the final transport and consulted the map one more time.  If all things had gone according to plan, the pincer would be forming as the bait teams drew the columns to the kill box.  I needed to hustle to join the northern pincer in time for the maneuver to begin. Plotting the straightest line across the terrain to achieve that, I took off at full speed.  Ploughing through ruin and across battered road, the northern pincer was already forming by the time I arrived.  Pyrokinetic bursts and javelin fire were slashing into a mass of hunters that had formed around a core of armor and transports.  The velkin were doing their best to return fire, the outer ranks sending a steady stream of plasma fire back at the pressing Valkyries, which looked like a too thin line to hold the velkin back.  Time to give them a hand.

"Commander,"  I said in greeting as I skidded in beside a tight cluster of Valkyries near the center of the pincer. "Juggernaut," she replied, looking up from a map she held, a list of numbers held over top as she made some measurements.  She finished giving instructions to the others and sent them on their way before she addressed me further. "Your arrival is timely.  Deploy against the front rank of the enemy, if you will.  Our initial attack got them back on their heels but they're starting to dig in.  I need you to break them so we can continue to push them towards the southern pincer." I nodded as I glanced to the firefight that churned twenty or thirty metres away.  Even as my eyes fell on them, I watched the hunters firm up their lines and go shoulder to shoulder with their weapons up and firing.  That sent a steady wave of plasma fire darting across the intervening space to slam into telekinetic shields as the psyrens protected themselves and those around them.  A moment longer and the alien giants would start marching forward to give their tanks the room to swing their cannons around and bring them to bear. Not on my watch.  Time to kill some velkin! A step forward and I was through our lines.  Two more steps and I broke the sound barrier as I slammed into the hunters.  With bodies flying everywhere, I hammered my way through to pound into the tanks where, as they began exploding, all chaos broke loose. I had to be careful; we were driving them towards the southern pincer, not looking to wipe them out here.  So after an initial flurry of destruction, I began slowing down and picking my targets.  I also moved in and out of the hunter ranks to further disrupt any attempt to get an organized offense going.  Their resistance abruptly broken by my presence, the alien giants took several quick steps back under the Valkyrie pressure, TK battering rams and devastatingly precise javelin fire pressing the hunters' leading edge. With me churning away in their heart, preventing the tanks from getting positioned, and the Valkyries slashing away at the outer ranks, the velkin steadily gave ground.  Step by step, we pushed them back towards where the southern pincer waited.  And as they retreated, they left the ground littered with broken and burnt alien bodies, turning Ulyana's kill box into a graveyard. Then we had them positioned and, with snarls of discharge, TK battering rams and javelin bolts started pounding into the velkin rear.  A heart beat later plumes of flame spouted everywhere as pyrokinetic pulses lit hunter after hunter on fire.  And, in amongst velkin getting smashed by the rams and burnt alive, several hunters silently dropped to the ground, instantly dead from psychic shocks. Having drawn the velkin into the killing box before hopping out, the bait teams now reappeared to add their power to the attack.  They jumped into the mix with me, sending battering rams in every direction and lighting tanks on fire with surges of pyrokinesis.  While the tanks didn't burn like the hunters did, the pyrokinetic flames worked to blind their sensors and their cannons spun about aimlessly or sent blasts into their own ranks.  Effective, either way. The destruction was absolute and outside of the roar of discharge, the snarl of exploding tanks and transports, and the thin screams of dying aliens, the Valkyries operated in total silence.  I found it a little eerie despite having fought by their sides for several days now.  I was so used to broadband filled with status reports, redirections and target selecting on the fly that the silence amongst my allies was deafening. Still, I didn't need somebody chirping on broadband to tell me what part I had to play.  I was the juggernaut.  I smashed aliens to death. I went full speed now that the pincers were closing in on the trapped aliens and started dropping tanks and transports as quickly as I could find them.  All around me, like a blue and green sleet, javelin fire was thick and heavy as it cut from both sides.  More plumes of flame and ranks smashed aside by battering rams and whole squads jerking to a halt to drop to the ground, dead without a mark on them. Then I flipped over the last tank in the line I had been attacking and twisted hard to find another target.  And was in the perfect position to watch the Valkyries cut almost a hundred hunters to shreds with a flurry of light and invisible force.  As the hunters dropped, several javelins jogged out of the smoke, goa-forged weapons ready to fire at anything that moved.  A second later several psyrens joined them, eyes narrowed as they scanned all around us. - Pursuit teams, ready, -  came a terse telepathic command, the first over broadband I had heard the Valkyries so far make.  - A handful have broken off combat and are fleeing to the nearest landing zone.  Take them out! - The group that had just moved into sight continued towards me, looking at me and the heap of shattered tanks that I had piled behind me. "Nice," one of the psyrens said as she stepped by me, grudging respect in her voice.  She then looked over at me. "You've killed them all." I felt a slight smile twist my lips up at that blunt assessment. "It's what I do," I replied, eliciting a quick chuckle from not only her but just about everybody within ear shot.  Then a single air horn sounding snapped everybody's head around to stare in its direction. It was the all clear signal.  We did it.  We had won the battle. Instead of celebrating however, I found myself looking up into the late morning sky. "Fear a bombardment?"  the psyren who initially spoke to me, stepped close to follow my gaze up into the sky.  I silently nodded without taking my eyes off the sky.  And in doing so, I spotted the first flares of light as they began cutting through the atmosphere towards us at fantastic speed. The psyren nodded when I pointed them out. "Your fear is well founded, juggernaut," she said then switched to telepathy, a psyren in the field using broadband for the first time in the battle. - Command, we have incoming plasma fire from orbit. - - Acknowledged, -  came the reply, also on broadband.  - All units move to fall back positions and out of the line of fire.  We're done here.  Let them burn their own dead if they want. - Nodding in silent acknowledgement to the new command, the psyren looked over at me. "Time to go!"

 

From the Ashes

We were half way to the Valkyrie base by the time the bombardment started hammering the battlefield we had left behind, in earnest.  Ulyana met us at the entrance, a thoughtful expression on her face as she nodded in greeting to the Valkyries that jogged past her before looking at the brilliant fire falling from the sky.  I came to a halt beside her before turning to also look back at the plasma raining down from orbit. "We missed that by perhaps five minutes."  I wryly noted and she nodded. "The enemy has the high ground."  She looked over at me.  "That has to end." I found myself chuckling ruefully, my frustration abruptly bubbling to the surface. "That I already know, commander.  I'm open to ideas, if you have any.  I'd do it myself if I could find some way to fly into orbit."  I then made a quick sweeping gesture that took in the whole of her base.  "And you don't seem to be in possession of any tech I could repurpose to make something to help me fly, if your teslas are even up to the task.  Hell, your psyrens don't even teleport worth a damn or I'd ask one of them for a ride!" Ulyana watched me with narrowed eyes as I got a little energetic, my frustration making me talk much more than I intended. "You can blame me for that, juggernaut."  She said without taking her eyes off me.  "I wanted them to focus their abilities on hurting the enemy.  Not being a taxi service."  I nearly laughed cynically out loud at that, settling instead for a snort.  What was she going to do when the war left Moscow?  How was she going to move her troops around with any kind of speed? She must've seen my expression shifting to one she could read because she quickly was folding her arms defensively over her breasts. "I won't be explaining myself to you, juggernaut."  She tautly growled.  "This is my war, not yours.  I will fight it as I see fit.  And I won't have some man dictate to me how to deploy my forces, or what skills they'll utilize." "Fine by me, lady."  I flatly stated.  "I'll be leaving then, to find my own damn way back to North America.  Like you said, you have your war to fight and I have mine.  And it isn't here."  I began walking towards the gate, the guards looking between Ulyana and myself with frowns on their face. "I'm not sure what that asshole Vorinov did to you and yours, but perhaps you should try judging each man you meet on their individual merits instead of lumping us all together, huh?"  I said over my shoulder as I stepped between the battered stone pillars marking the entrance. "Good luck figuring out how to take care of those ships in orbit." Then I was around the corner and out of sight of the main entrance. My hands stuffed in my pockets and my frustration seething just beneath the surface, I walked for several long minutes, staring at the ground without seeing anything as my thoughts churned.  The nerve of that woman to say those things to me.  Especially after I backstopped probably the biggest battle in the history of the Risen!  Seriously, who does that bitch think she is?  And what the frickin' hell did Vorinov do to her to piss her off  at men so badly?  I had half a mind to run to the dickhead in question and beat the answer out of him and his little toy soldiers. "You look like a man ready to commit murder."  A soft voice commented.  I didn't need to look over to see it was the psyren I had spoken to at the end of the battle. "How would you know?"  I fired back.  "You don't have men in your little women only club long enough to learn their expressions and emotions.  Not any I saw, anyway." "True."  She said, easily pacing me.  "The two or three we let stay with us work in a support role.  A tesla and two animus, usually given the task of procuring supplies for us."  She fell silent to watch me for a moment.

"But not all of us are so quick to dismiss your usefulness."  She finally said after a long thoughtful pause.  I looked over at her and found a slight smile touching her full lips.  Wipe away the dirt and sweat, fix her hair and soften that hard as nails face and she would've been quite stunning. "Of course you would be considerably more useful if you at least looked like a man."  She said musingly.  "Instead of something I would see in a magazine or on the cover of a book." I frowned at that.  "Just what the hell is that supposed to mean?"  I quickly countered and she laughed, a pleasant sound in contrast to her hard face. "You're in Russia, friend."  She replied, her smile widening.  "Our men aren't pretty.  They're big and hairy, like their vodka straight and their hockey fast.  They work hard and live harder.  Maybe if you had a broken nose, or a scar or two, something to say that you've really lived your life, you'd look better." I opened my mouth to deliver an angry retort.  Only to find myself laughing out loud.  To her credit, the psyren continued to smile, unperturbed by first my anger then my laughter. "Okay, okay, you got me there."  I said, still chuckling.  "To each their own."  I sucked in a lungful of air and let it slide out my nostrils.  "So at least one of you think I might be useful.  But what's with your boss?  I mean, she seems to have a serious hate on for not just Vorinov, but for men in general." The psyren shrugged. "She's hinted at something having happened to her in her life before undeath.  But when I first met her she had embraced undeath and the new chance it gave her at life."  She looked over at me.  "Vorinov, however, had other ideas.  He systematically hunted down female Risen within his territory, had them beaten for attempting to rise above their station as his inferiors then forcibly exiled.  And because she was swiftly rising as a leader amongst the women, he had Ulyana beaten the worst.  Almost to the point of removing her head." "He did what??"  Only her hand on my arm prevented me to turning east and sprinting at full speed to where I had last left the erstwhile Russian male commander, fully intending on smashing his face in. "Fear not, juggernaut.  Tvarisch Vorinov will get what's coming to him."  The psyren said, her grip on my arm considerably stronger than what I would've expected.  "While that misogynistic pig plays tsar over his little piece of dirt, Ulyana takes the fight to the enemy." I paused, staring down into the psyren's face for a long moment as my thoughts once again churned.  This place was really starting to burn me.  Risen against Risen, Risen with their own agenda, some building private armies and carving out pieces of real estate for themselves and forgetting about the war they all should be fighting.  And now this?  Hunting down other Risen just because they are female and nearly beating them to true death?? I could feel my expression hardening as I pondered all that.  The psyren was right about one thing: there was going to be an accounting called for all the shit that was happening over here.  And Vorinov was going to be at the top of the list! "Okay, so Vorinov will get sorted out later.  That leaves only one question: why did you follow me out of the base?"  I asked, finally taking my eyes off her to look at the ruins around us.  "Considering that Ulyana doesn't take directions from men, I can't see her sending you after me to try and get me to come back." "No."  The psyren said, her half smile never wavering.  "She wouldn't.  In truth, after you played your part and helped crush the enemy armor, she was done with you.  However the Valkyries are not.  We still need you, juggernaut."

I looked back over at her. "For what?" The psyren pointed to the east. "We've unfinished business with the bugs in Moscow."  She indicated.  "Ulyana wants a scouting mission to determine the extent of the nest.  If they've grown in the months since we last checked it, we could have a second crisis on our hands."  She paused, her expression thoughtful as she measured me with her gaze.  "Considering how resistant they are to our psionic attacks and to javelin fire, I would very much appreciate it if you'd accompany us to give us some much needed protection during the mission." I almost snorted out loud at the extremely polite request, almost unwilling to believe my ears.  It was possibly the nicest someone had asked me to do something for them since coming here. "I think something could be arranged, . . ?"  I replied after a moment's consideration, a brow lifted in silent question. "Daria."  The psyren supplied. "Daria.  I'm Max.  You've got your protection.  The K'ethik aren't to be trifled with." "K'ethik?"  Daria repeated, eyebrow raised.  "You give them a name and speak with some familiarity about them.  Can I take from that you've some experience with our big mechanical centipedes?" "You can."  I said and went on to quickly tell her of the handful of encounters we had with the organic robots.  Including using the echoes to push out their essences and take over their bodies. "You used ghosts to push out their essences to possess and take control of them?"  The psyren shook her head in amazement when I nodded in confirmation.  "That is truly incredible.  If only we had ghosts around here that were willing to work with us, instead of scream and howl in eternal agony as they rattle doors and make floor boards creak." I chuckled as I shrugged. "We got lucky.  The echoes approached us, mostly out of curiosity, and were so old that they had forgotten why they were angry and in pain in the first place.  Newly created echoes wouldn't be so easy to work with.  Everything we know about the K'ethik we got from the echoes inhabiting their shells.  They were able to access residual memory cores and obtain some primary commands and programming.  Including the sabotage mission the insect forms are currently carrying out against the velkin fleet." That caught Daria's attention. "The bugs are fighting against the aliens?"  She pursed her lips in thought when again I nodded in confirmation.  "I wonder if there's some way we can use that." "It'd be handy."  I said as we stepped around another corner and onto the battered road leading out of Arkhangelskoye.  And found ourselves surrounded by twenty other Valkyries, a mixture of psyrens, javelins and animus.  They must've been pacing us through the ruins.  A glance over at Daria showed no reaction to their appearance.  So I quickly concluded this must be the team she was scouting out the nest with.  I recognized some of them from the last few minutes of the recent battle with the velkin when Daria's team joined me by the destroyed tanks. Pushing that observation aside for a moment, I continued on. "We could only derive a smattering of their language from the echoes' search of their residual memory.  Maybe if we could somehow interface with a living K'ethik, we might have more success." Daria quickly agreed. "We have enough psyrens in the team to attempt telepathic contact."  She indicated, looking over at me.  "If we can bridge the gap between us and them and convince them to stop attacking us, that would be incredibly useful."

That was the understatement of the century. "Why stop there?"  I asked with a half smile.  "If we can ask them to stop attacking us, why not see if we can somehow work together to hurt the velkin?" Daria's thoughtful expression deepened as she considered that. "Why not indeed."  She said.  "Why not indeed!" Forced to go on foot the ten kilometres or so into Moscow by lack of transport, it was a good two hours before we reached the city.  We took that time to review Daria's plan of attack, which entailed locating the nest, determining its size and counting the number of K'ethik present.  All hopefully without engaging them.  Knowing how quickly they found me when I dropped into the city a few days ago, I had my doubts about our ability to sneak in undetected. At least the trip in was uneventful.  With the pasting we had given the velkin at the field south of Arkhangelskoye, any aliens still left in the general area were staying out of our way while they figured out what to do next.  Which was fine by us.  While it would've been invigorating to pound a gobby patrol into paste, it was just as nice to slip into the ruined Russian capital without delay. As soon as we hit the city limits, the animus disappeared.  When I looked over at Daria with a questioning look, a slight smile appeared on the psyren's face. "They look not so much for the enemy."  She explained.  "But for a safe passage past Vorinov.  With the aliens temporarily withdrawn from the city, he'll be wanting to extend his influence.  And because of that, will look poorly on any 'intrusion' from our forces." A snarl appeared almost by itself on my face. "I dare that slapdick to show his face."  I growled, cracking my knuckles.  "I'll knock him and his tin pot marching band back into the stone age." "Now you sound like a Russian man."  Daria quipped with a smile.  "You just need a scar or two to make you truly Russian.  And maybe a shot of vodka." I chuckled quietly at that, then sobered as something occurred to me. "Speaking of making, I've got a question for you, Daria.  I saw plenty of Upgrades amongst your company, both here and back at the base.  So your summoners obviously have the Upgrade Protocol.  But did they know they can use those protocols to upgrade shamblers to full Transcended?  Ones that don't need to recharge to keep their abilities?" The sharp look she threw me, along with the raised brow was all I needed to answer that question. "Okay, so you folks didn't know that.  Not that it would've helped you if you did.  Upgrading a shambler to full Transcended takes quite a bit of goa.  And nobody does goa like a juggernaut.  Since you don't have one, you most likely would've failed to create a second generation Transcended anyway." "We don't have shamblers either."  Daria admitted with a frown.  "Thinking them useless, Vorinov would use them for target practice whenever he saw them." Again she had to reach out and catch me by the arm before I bolted forward, literally seething with anger. "I'm guessing by that reaction they're not useless."  The psyren said with a frown as if considering something, the muscle in her jaw rippling with tension as she struggled to keep a grip on me. "No, they're not."  I grated, shuddering with the effort to cool my rage.  Dead.  Vorinov was frickin' dead! Satisfied that I wasn't going to bolt, Daria jogged over to the side of the road where she knelt beside what looked like a heap of rubble.  Swallowing the last bit of my anger, I joined her.  And found the psyren kneeling beside a heap of bones, splintered and broken.  Connected, barely, by a couple dried sinews was a fragment of a skull.

Seeing bones in a city as big as Moscow in the wake of the velkin invasion wasn't unusual.  I had seen mounds of them on my way out of the city the first time. It was the fact that this mound of bones and broken pieces was moving. "Holy shit."  I breathed, eyes flying wide as I dropped on my knees beside Daria, who was looking thoughtfully at the twitching heap. "That is definitely what's left of a shambler.  But how the hell did you know it was here?" Daria was silent for a moment as she continued to stare at the twitching shards of bone. "I was being escorted to the edge of Vorinov's territory when we spotted it."  She quietly said after that long moment of silence.  "Not much more than bones and a few scraps of dried skin, barely able to move as it jerkily stepped out of the ruins."  She frowned as she remembered. "They laughed as they opened fire, eight machine guns chattering as they cut it to pieces.  It couldn't even move fast enough to try and get away.  It just shivered as they shot it apart.  Until all that was left was this heap of shards and fragments, still moving with its borrowed life."  She paused to look up at me, her expression unreadable. "That was twelve years ago.  This poor thing has been sitting here this whole time.  And now you tell me there's a person in there, hidden behind the empty space within those broken bones.  It's almost too much to take in." I slowly nodded in agreement, unable to take my eyes off the twitching heap of bone shards. "Too bad you don't have a summoner with you.  We'd find out who's hiding under these chips pretty quick." "Actually."  Daria's half smile returned.  "I never leave the base without one.  Especially when dealing with bugs, who have a tendency to rip my girls up pretty bad."  She looked over her shoulder to the gaggle of what I had thought were all psyrens, who had come to a halt when Daria had moved to the side of the road. "Svetlana?  Mind joining us for a moment?" One of them, a slender, hooded thing, nodded before jogging over. "What can I do for you, captain?"  She asked after going down onto her haunches between us and giving me a quick nod in greeting. "I have an upgrade for you, Lana."  Daria replied. "Sure.  Who?"  She looked around for a possible target. "Them."  Daria said with a thin smile, pointing at the heap of twitching bones. The summoner turned to look at the bones her commander was pointing at with a frown.  Instead of protesting that there wasn't much to work with, she extended her hand instead, already glowing with goa. "It'll be tough, captain.  There isn't much goa left.  And it's a shambler, which means no pattern to upgrade." Instead of answering, Daria looked over at me.  Taking that as my cue, I nodded. "It'll accept whatever pattern you put over it."  I explained, the sound of my voice pulling Lana's attention to me.  "Shamblers inherently lack a pattern.  So, like you would take a new pattern and superimpose it over the old pattern as part of the Upgrade, here you just put your new pattern on and start pouring in the goa." "Fair enough."  Lana replied, accepting my explanation with a confident nod.  She had obviously done an upgrade or two.  "Any pattern in particular that you want to try first?" I smiled. "Juggernaut."  Was my reply, earning me a frown. "The hardest of all the patterns to try to imprint?"  Lana asked, her gaze not wavering.  "There's a reason we don't have any juggernauts in the Valkyries.  There's no way I have enough goa onboard to try to push a juggernaut pattern onto this heap of bones." "No, you don't."  I said.  With a shriek, the goa tendril bit into my leg with a throaty growl and I felt the very essence of the world pour into my body. "But I do." It was a revelation, watching the goa flood into the heap of bones to slowly reassemble first each individual bone and the skull.  Then it put the bones back in their proper place.  Finally, with a ripple of green-blue light, the internal organs, muscle and skin reappeared.  Before I could see any further detail, I sagged towards the ground, the draw on my goa enough to make pain surge through my body. A low groan of agony forced its way through my teeth as the draw started biting into my threshold  Then the hand Lana had on my shoulder to channel the goa through, suddenly clutched into my flesh.  In the next heart beat she let go and the draw ended. "Bozhe moi."  Lana breathed. Blinking away my pain, I looked up with a grimace.  And found myself looking at a pair of long, female legs.  Knowing that she was most likely naked, I stopped my eyes at that point and looked down, earning myself a low giggle from our newcomer. "Well."  Daria said with no little amazement in her voice.  "That actually worked." "Of course it did."  A new voice said.  "Max knows what he's doing." "I just wish I knew how to do it without it hurting so much."  I husked, still staring at the ground. "I could feel your pain with every bit of goa I drew out of you."  Lana admitted, quiet as she was visibly shaken by what she had just experienced. "Don't worry about me, Lana."  I cleared my throat as Daria gave our newly minted second generation juggernaut a jacket and one of her spare pants, which she quickly put on. "I'll be fine in a moment.  I'm just happy the juggernaut template took." Then the newcomer was beside me and helping me to my feet.  As I stood, I found myself beside a tall blond who could nearly look me in the eyes. "Preveeyet."  She said with a bright smile.  "I'm Renata."  I returned the smile with a tired one of my own. "Hello.  Welcome to Moscow, Renata."  I looked at the circle of curious and astonished faces that now surrounded us as the rest of Daria's command came over to take a look at the newly minted juggernaut. "And boy, are you going to be busy here!"

 

A Touch of Evil

As it seemed to be with all the second generation juggernauts, Renata took some of my memories and experiences with her along with the massive infusion of goa that made her existence possible.  And probably a bit more than the others, since we had brought her back from basically a pile of bone shards. That instantly lent her a level of gravitas that Daria swiftly found appealing. "Your girl sure knows what she's doing."  The psyren quietly commented as we continued our cautious push past possible Vorinov positions.  We were easing past a set of apartment blocks that fronted the battered roadway we were using to slip deeper into Moscow, the animus moving silently through the ruins on either side of the road to scout for lurkers.  At the same time Lana, Renata and the rest of the psyrens were just ahead of where Daria and I walked, everybody with their heads on swivels as they scanned the surrounding buildings. Letting my eyes fall on the tall blond for a moment, I found myself agreeing.  Renata moved like she had been a soldier her entire life, loose and easy yet ready to go at any moment.  A beneficial side effect of drawing so much of my goa into impressing a juggernaut template on her.  Both she and Lana had added their eyes to those of the psyrens as they peered up at the pockmarked walls around us, looking for any sign of the enemy.  Which, ironically in this case, was Vorinov and his men.  I glanced over at Daria. "Planning on telling her what you saw that day?  When Vorinov's men chopped her into pieces with their guns?"  I asked and she immediately shook her head. "She doesn't remember and I'm certainly not going to remind her."  The Valkyrie psyren quickly indicated.  "She's well balanced, thanks in no small part to you, Max.  I'd like to keep her that way." "Fair enough."  I replied even as Renata looked over her shoulder back at us.  Seeing my eye on her, she immediately flashed me a brilliant smile. "I won't say a word either.  And not just because it'll keep her balanced."  I looked back over at Daria. "But because it'll keep her from killing Vorinov before his time." As we entered the city itself, Daria angled us towards the Moskva, which ran through the city's heart. "A canal that split off the river just as it ran by the Kremlin helped form an island in the middle of the city."  She explained as we walked, pointing towards the distant silver of the river glinting in the distance.  "Secure on all sides by the river and the canal, the island became a natural refuge the K'ethik decided to exploit.  We'll cross the river just west of the Kremlin, using one of the larger roads.  Hopefully the bugs aren't watching any of the bridges and we'll be able to get onto the island unimpeded." "And if they are?"  I asked, still staring at the distant curve of the river. "You and Renata will have to hammer a path through them."  Daria replied, looking over at me.  "I'm assuming of course that you've faced the K'ethik in battle." I nodded then sighed. "But I didn't have an easy time of it."  I admitted as I returned her gaze.  "The same zero-gap armor that protects the insect forms from the javelin bolts and your own psionic attacks, is seriously resistant to my concussive abilities.  If we get swarmed, there won't be much Renata and I will be able to do to keep the rest of the team from getting mauled." I returned my gaze to the river for a long moment. "A full team of juggernauts would be much more useful.  Especially if the K'ethik are present in the kind of numbers I saw when I dropped in a few days back."

"I see your point."  Daria said before sending a quick mental command to the other psyrens to pull up.  "Let's move off the road.  I have an idea, but I don't want to be out in the open while we discuss it." I nodded, knowing it wasn't velkin that she feared but Vorinov's men.  Tainted by their master's hate, they'd open fire at seeing so many women in their territory and ask questions later. It only took a moment before the team, minus the animus who were still out scouting, had gathered in the bombed out lobby of what used to be a hotel.  Daria quickly took control of the conversation. "In a few minutes, we'll be approaching the Moskva island where we last saw the K'ethik making their nest."  She indicated, maintaining eye contact with each of us as she spoke.  "And there's a good chance the bridges crossing the river will be guarded.  If this is the case, we'll need our two juggernauts to clear us a path.  This is do-able, as Max has faced K'ethik in battle and prevailed."  She paused. "But that was by himself.  If he, Renata or the both of them are swarmed, they'll be able to hold their own but they won't be able to protect us.  This is a problem.  A problem that will only be solved if we find more shambler remains and upgrade them all to juggernauts, giving us a significant juggernaut force to lend us protection.  So I want the team to scatter and search the immediate vicinity for shambler remains.  If they are still animated, sent a telepathic notice to me and I will bring Max and Lana over to revive the fallen shambler.  Now, we have two limitations on how many shamblers we can revive."  "First, I don't want to be in one spot for longer than an hour.  The longer we linger, the sooner Vorinov's men will find us.  Second, we can only revive the amount of Transcended we have gear for.  Renata has my spares, so I need everybody else to pull out your spares and make a pile right over there." The tall blond Russian juggernaut came to stand beside me as I watched the psyrens put their spare equipment and clothing in neat piles on the lobby floor. "Are you sure we couldn't take the K'ethik by ourselves, Max?"  She asked in a low, throaty voice, looking over at me with uncertainty on her face. "We could, Renata, but if we get swarmed like I was when I first dropped into Moscow, we wouldn't be able to guarantee the psyrens' safety."  I returned her gaze.  "And you heard the captain.  That's unacceptable." Renata quietly sighed and nodded. "I will follow your lead of course, Max.  It's just that, . . ."  She fell silent, prompting me to give her a nudge with my elbow. "Just what?  Not willing to share me or something?"  I said with a grin, half expecting her to laugh.  When she didn't, my brow rose.  Before I could say anything further, she began explaining herself. "It's not that, Max.  It's just that, . . when I was alive, I was always the tall one, the awkward girl that nobody wanted to have near by.  I was too clumsy to trust with anything important."  She paused to look over at me.  "Now I am unique and special.  Now I'm a juggernaut, with an important mission to fulfill.  Now I am wanted."  She let out another sigh as she looked down at her boots.  "I guess some part of me didn't want that feeling of special uniqueness to end." "It won't, Renata."  I quietly pointed out.  "You know how many juggernauts currently walk the face of this planet?  Less than a dozen.  On the entire planet!  You are in very exclusive company, kid.  And to tell you the truth, we lucked out finding you.  I've reformatted and upgraded hundreds of shamblers and other Risen in an attempt to create more juggernauts and only found a handful.  And even though Captain Daria plans on finding more juggernauts in the shamblers we're about to recover, we may not find a single one.  It might just be you and me."

Renata's smile slowly came back as I put a comforting hand on her shoulder.  Then abruptly she was hugging me. "Thank you, Max."  She whispered hoarsely into my ear, on the verge of tears.  "First you bring me back from oblivion.  And now you return my confidence in just a few words.  Truly you are an amazing friend!" I smiled as she squeezed me tightly. "Happy to help."  I replied, returning her hug.  I just wished Renata could stay this untainted and uncomplicated.  But knowing how this part of the world seemed to work, I knew that was impossible.  Especially since I had to leave her with the man-hating Ulyana. It didn't take the psyrens long after that to find the first broken down shambler close to the old hotel.  I frowned as Lana knelt beside the pile of twitching bone chips a few metres east of the hotel and off the road maybe a couple more metres. "This road once thronged with shamblers."  Daria quietly noted as her summoner carefully waved a glowing hand over the pile.  "It was the M9 freeway, carrying people to and from the great Smolensky Boulevard, which circled the city's heart.  A natural path for them to tread." I frowned at that.  I didn't need her to tell me that Vorinov had seen to the shambler population's demise.  What I would give for a month with unlimited time and supplies to recover them all.  I would probably pull thousands out of here.  Then my attention was being recaptured by Lana speaking. "We might have a problem, captain."  The summoner said, looking up at first Daria then at me. "Not enough goa to recover them?"  Daria asked and Lana shook her head. "Not the problem, sir.  I'm detecting male energy here.  There's a good chance this shambler is male." "Ah."  Daria looked over at me.  "A problem indeed, especially if Ulyana refuses to let him stay with us as she most likely will." I returned her look for a long moment, my own thoughts churning.  Then abruptly I was sighing. "Then he stays as a heap of bone chips.  What's the point of creating more Transcended if they end up having to go over to Vorinov because Ulyana can't stand them around?"  I bluntly pointed out and Daria nodded in agreement. "My thinking exactly, Max."  An apologetic smile appeared on her lips.  "Sorry." I shrugged, resigned to the facts of this place. "We take out Vorinov, re-educate his followers and change Ulyana's mind about men then we can come back for him."  I said with another sigh, knowing none of those things were happening any time soon. "We will, Max.  You have my word."  Daria promised.  Then she was standing.  "Let's move.  The girls have found another bone heap thirty metres north of the road." With both the time frame restriction and the equipment restriction, we were forced to work feverishly to recover what Transcended we could from the relatively abundant bone chip piles that littered the area around the hotel.  Filtering out any that were male, we still managed to create two more juggernauts along with four more javelins, another summoner and two ballistas. "So they hit harder?"  Daria asked with a frown as she watched the two ballistas demonstrate their shoulder mounted weapons to the javelins, who clustered around them in curiosity.  I nodded in confirmation. "A heavier blast that can stay on target for longer periods in the form of a steady beam, instead of bolts, like what the javelins fire."  I explained.  "Handy against larger targets, like tanks."

"We have them and Vorinov doesn't."  Daria smiled over at me.  "Ulyana will like that." That, she would.  Then I was greeting my two newest juggernauts as they walked up to where I was standing with Daria and Renata, both of them tugging at their clothing in a vain attempt to make them fit better.  Ekaterina, the taller of the two, was a muscular, broad shouldered Slavic goddess of a woman that looked more like an Olympic athlete than anything.  She struggled with clothing that was too small on her amazonian frame. And Tatiana was a cute, petite brunette, lithe and agile like a dancer, the top of her head barely coming to Renata's shoulder.  She struggled with clothing that was far too big on her tiny frame. We couldn't have found two women that looked more different.  Yet there was a lethality, an air of grim purpose about them that was exactly the same.  Like they were ready to smash things.  Oh yeah, these women were juggernauts alright. "Preveeyet."  Ekaterina greeted Renata and I with a smile as she gave her tunic a last tug in the hopes of giving her considerable bosom a break from how tight it was.  Giving up, she shrugged and started pulling her shoulder length, honey gold hair into a pony tail, tying it in place with a piece of cord she had found. "So, we're penetrating the city in the hopes of scouting out this K'ethik nest?" I nodded in confirmation. "That's the plan."  I said.  "We'll go under the Moskva using the tunnel to come up onto Mnevniki Street and take that into the core.  Once we cross Smolensky Boulevard, we go straight until we hit Red Square then take the Bolshoi Street bridge onto the island." "Which is where things could get hairy."  Tatiana said, rolling up her sleeves so her arms wouldn't be so lost within them.  "Any idea how many K'ethik we could be facing once we get on the island, Max?" I could only shrug. "Your guess is as good as mine, Tatiana."  I replied.  "But if I went with the numbers I dealt with just north of Red Square when I first landed, I'd say a shit load.  I was swarmed almost as soon as I hit the ground, often dealing with two or three at the same time." "Bozhe."  Ekaterina breathed with a shake of her head.  "This won't be easy then.  Especially with the squishies tagging along."  She said, gesturing at the Valkyries who were now gathering around Daria so she could bring the newcomers up to date on our mission objectives. "They're not as squishy as you think."  Renata pointed out.  "From what Max's memories say, the psyrens especially hit hard." "I hope so."  Tatiana fervently said with a shake of her head.  "If we're forced to scramble, . . . uuuhh!"  She abruptly grunted, a blossom of dark red appearing on her chest.  She staggered half a step forward, frowning as she looked down at the growing red stain. "Have, . . have I been shot?"  She stammered.  Then the lobby was filled with the buzzing hum of hundreds of steel-jacketed slugs as machine guns opened up on us from outside.  Simulaneously machine gun fire could be heard off in the ruins as our animus scouts also came under fire. Instantly several of the Valkyries went down, including a couple of the newcomers, Daria and Lana.  Tatiana too hit the floor, two or three more holes in her body in addition to the first one.  Renata and Ekaterina too dropped to their knees, each sporting a pair of bullet holes. As dust kicked up by the bullets chewing through the crumbling wall swirled around us, I found that I was the only one still standing, having gone juggernaut as soon as the first bullet hit Tatiana.

"It's, . . Vorinov."  Daria gasped, trying to stem the dark blood oozing from a neck wound that was dangerously close to a carotid.  If she was alive instead of undead, she would've already bled out. "Obviously."  I growled.  "Leave these bastards to me."  Then, to my juggernaut sisters: "Go juggernaut.  The extra goa will patch up those holes and prevent you from getting any more."  A heart beat later I was punching a hole through the wall and charging out into the street. As arrogant as their master, Vorinov's animus scouts stood unprotected in the street, laughing as they hosed the hotel with their AKs.  And they laughed right up until I grabbed the first one at full speed, twisted in mid air and buried him a foot deep into the crumbling concrete of the road surface. The laughter petered out as I slowly came back to my feet to stare hard at them. "Damn."  One managed.  Then they were all turning to open fire on me as I surged forward. I was standing from putting the last one in the ground when Daria managed to stagger out of the hotel, still clutching the bleeding wound in her neck. "They're, . . hitting our scouts."  She managed as Renata stepped past her, quickly followed by a frowning Tatiana and a grim Ekaterina. "Stay put, captain, and let your summoners put your people back together."  I said, my juggernaut sisters joining me on the road. "Let us take care of these scumbags!"  Then we were exploding into motion, each of us going in a different direction as we zeroed in on the gunfire heard out in the ruins. I found a trio of Vorinov's animus pounding away at our scout a couple streets over.  Again they were arrogant to the point of not bothering to seek cover as they jeered and shouted at the scout, who tried to make the most of the scant protection offered by a battered concrete wall.  Anger surging through me at the blatant bullying these assholes were doing against a relatively helpless target, I took all three of them out at the same time.  Smashing them together, I powered through a couple walls with them in front of me before putting them deep into the ground. "Now you pencil dicks know just how it feels!"  I snarled, kicking dust onto their broken and bleeding bodies before turning to make my way back to where the Valkyrie animus was peering out from behind the bullet-chewed wall. "All clear."  I said as i stepped out of the ruins and I watched her heave a sigh of relief then immediately grimace as she held a bloodied hand to her side.  "C'mon, let's get you back to where the rest of the team is waiting.  We'll get you patched up there!" The Valkyrie scout and I reached the hotel just as Ekaterina strode out of the rubble on the road's opposite side, carrying an unconscious animus who was bleeding badly.  A few seconds' later Renata appeared, also carrying a fallen scout. "They had her pinned down and were just shooting her over and over."  The tall juggernaut hissed with anger as she carried the badly bleeding scout out onto the road and towards where I was helping the scout I had rescued across the road. "It took everything that I had to not pop all their heads off at that point." "The animus I faced got pretty roughed up too."  Ekaterina admitted as Lana and the new summoner appeared out of the hotel to run towards us, hands already glowing.  Both were covered in drying blood, some of their own but mostly from others, the two busy while we were gone, putting the team back together again. "They were just standing there, laughing when I found them.  It made me so mad, . . ." She paused as we all cocked our ears towards a final chatter of machine gun fire somewhere off to the south of our position before silence returned.

We stayed silent as we waited for our final companion to return.  Which she did, carrying one unconscious Valkyrie over a shoulder, and letting another lean on the other side, a mouse propping up two people twice her size.  Relieved of our own burdens, the three of us quickly stepped to the diminutive juggernaut to help lift the injured Valkyrie off her shoulder while easing the other one to the road surface. "I know I'm new and all at this."  Tatiana began, her voice low and thick with emotion.  "But I left those men in a broken pile out there, for what they were trying to do to these two women.  A broken pile."  As much as they had deserved what she had done to them, I could see taking out the Vorinov animus in such a manner was bothering her, and badly.  Damage control time. I silently held out my hand and she sobbed as she slipped into my arms to cling to my body, shuddering with the release of emotion. "Shhhh, it's okay, Tatiana."  I said gently, hugging her in the hopes of lending some comfort.  "You did what you had to, to protect the vulnerable.  We all did."  Then Renata and Ekaterina joined us in a group hug, the other two putting their arms around the two of us and for a long moment we let the physical closeness comfort and reassure. "At least, . . at least the bugs won't have faces, right?"  Tatiana sniffed as she leaned back to wipe her tears away with the back of her hand and look up at me.  I smiled down at her. "Right.  Just big, metal centipedes that will want to eat your face off." All three of them giggled at that as, their tension eased and their anger and emotion soothed, the group hug broke up. "That I can handle."  The lithe brunette replied with a grin. "Good."  A grim Daria said as she stepped to us.  The wound in her neck had been repaired, but not before it, and a couple others had stained her clothing with dark blood. "Because we need to get there and get this done.  Before more of Vorinov's fools find us!" With repairs accomplished and everybody sorted, Daria led us in a light jog down the road and into the dark confines of the broad underground tunnel that would be the first time we would cross the Moskva River.  Producing glowing balls of light, formed by a combination of telekinesis and pyrokinesis to fill the tunnel's darkness with a bright white illumination, the psyrens lead the way.  Their light allowed us to easily manuever around piles of rubble and destroyed vehicles that littered the length of the thankfully intact two kilometre long tunnel. Still I breathed a sigh of relief when we jogged out of the tunnel without mishap on the other side.  Not only had I feared the tunnel had been damaged in the invasion to the point where it was just waiting to collapse and drop the river onto our heads.  But it was also the perfect place for Vorinov's crew to ambush us, if they were so inclined.  Not to mention, dark places underground were the logical haunts of insects and so I had the thought in the back of my mind that we could run into K'ethik down there too. So I was more than a bit relieved when we cleared the tunnel with zero encounters and no cave ins.  Now we were on Mnevniki Street which, according to Daria's map, led right to the city center with only a couple name changes to worry about.  Keeping the scouts in close, we did just that, resuming our jog to make up for the time we lost in the frantic encounter with Vorinov's animus at the old hotel. It was late afternoon by the time we crossed the circular Smolensky Boulevard and came into sight of the remains of the once glorious Red Square, site of the Kremlin.  Here, before the governments of the world united, the Russian government in one form or another, made the laws and protocols that allowed their vast country to run in some semblance of order.  Considering what I had read in the history books about this place, and what I had seen in video clips, it was almost depressing to see the onion domes and towers of the once elegant and beautiful building reduced to so much rubble and dust.  The invaders must've made it a point to target all the ethnic and cultural capitals on the planet to further demoralize the inhabitants. My Russian companions must've thought the same thing.  Because, to the woman, they all stopped and stared in a long moment of silence at what was once a site talked about across the whole world as a place of beauty and power.  Then Daria grimaced and began to jog forward once more, not saying a word.  We quickly followed her lead, moving deeper into the heart of battered and broken Moscow. Heads down, we managed to reach the edge of the rubble-filled Red Square in less than a half hour and paused on the broad Bolshoi Street just before it became an arching bridge over the sluggishly moving Moskva. "See any bugs?"  Renata asked as all four of us moved closer to the bridge, which was a good hundred metres long and maybe twenty wide. "Not a thing."  Ekaterina admitted, eyes narrowed as she studied what we could see of the bridge's far end.  "But it's unlikely that they'll stand out in the open, waiting for us to see them." "Very."  I said.  Then Daria was calling out to us. "Juggernauts, take point, if you would, please.  We'll bring up the rear with the psyrens in the middle, the ballistas and the javelins taking the rear along with our scouts." "Copy that."  I said and, after a confirming nod to my three comrades, we began to ease our way over the bridge.

 

Golem

With the Valkyries at our back, I figured it was a good time to do this by the book.  A quick conference with my three juggernaut comrades then we were slowly easing forward over the bridge.  As we did, we went full on juggernaut, in case we got charged.  But, as I expected, the far side was clear. The K'ethik were far too smart to let themselves get caught out in the open.  Yet I could feel their eyes on us as we stepped off the bridge and onto the island for the first time.  I pointed at my eyes then made a signal for two go to the left, sending Renata and Ekaterina in that direction while Tatiana and I went in the other. Apparently it was popular for residences and offices alike to be built within site of the Kremlin and Red Square as the river side of the island was densely populated with multistory buildings.  Or, at least what was left of them.  Their structures had suffered the same global destruction as the rest of the city, perhaps even more so due to their proximity to the city's cultural and political heart.  I could see visible blast damage and shrapnel marks from exploding ordnance, most likely from humans desperate to stop the giant aliens at any cost. It was as I let my eyes drop from a nearby building, that I saw a familiar shifting in the shadows near the base.  I immediately hissed to get Tatiana's attention and the diminutive juggernaut slipped silently to my side.  When I felt her beside me, I pointed into the shadows and flashed a one, perhaps two and she nodded. A low whistle from Renata and Ekaterina signaled that they too had encountered K'ethik.  'Here we go!'  I thought grimly.  Then, into the spaces of my mind: - Daria, we have contact.  Four, maybe more.  Sentries, definitely. - - Copy that. -  The psyren commander's reply was swift.  - Can you neutralize them? - - Affirmative. -  I sent back then looked over at Tatiana to give her a nod.  I then gave a sharp whistle to tell Renata and Ekaterina to advance before I put word into action and stepped forward. The K'ethik didn't take long to react more aggressively to our presence.  As soon as we had taken a handful of steps towards where they were lurking in the shadows, black and silver shapes were churning out of cover and right at us.  Tatiana managed to squeak in surprise before one bowled her over.  I didn't get the chance to help her as two targeted me with the same ferocity I had seen in my earlier encounter. The first one hit me square in the chest with its rounded head, going as fast as its multiple legs could make it go in such a short space.  In other words, it was a battering ram that nearly knocked me on my ass with the impact.  Even braced, it pushed me back a couple metres before I dug in enough to stop it.  And that was just in time for the second one to hit me from the side, curling around its comrade to slam into me from the side. Thankfully I was already dug in so the second impact did little more than push me over a couple centimetres.  But now I had two bugs on me, both doing their level best to crawl over top of me to bring their feet and jaws to bear. A hard elbow dropped onto the head of the one beside me crushed the top part of its head and it jerked to a halt.  Then I was digging in my fingers to grab the one in front of me around the head before I slung it around and into the one that was clawing at Tatiana.  The impact knocked the insect form off the petite juggernaut and both flopped onto the ground, legs flailing for purchase. To her credit, Tatiana snapped herself to her feet in a smooth motion before taking two steps in to hammer a clenched fist to the head of the one that had knocked her over.  There was a loud squeal and a spray of sparks that signaled a fatal blow.  Then she was forced back a step by the one that had attacked me, the K'ethik coming over top its fallen colleague to slam into her.

The tiny brunette was prepared this time, though.  With her hands outstretched, she absorbed the initial charge then used her juggernaut strength to flip the bug over onto its back.  Avoiding its legs and mouth, she then jabbed a quick punch to what would've been the creature's throat if it were a living thing.  Again sparks flew as the heavy shot severed a number of connections inside the creature's body and it sagged lifelessly to the ground. "Nicely done."  I said and she flashed me a quick smile.  Then both of us were dropping back into ready crouches at the sound of approaching feet.  And we just as quickly relaxed when it was Renata and Ekaterina that jogged into sight instead of more K'ethik sentries. They took in the three downed insect forms with a glance as they joined us. "We dropped another pair back over there."  Renata said, jerking her thumb back in the direction they had come in.  "By all appearances, that's all they had stationed here." "But, considering these ones were hidden and only moved into sight when we actually became a threat, there's a good chance more are waiting for us further in."  Ekaterina added, Renata nodding in agreement. "And I would agree with that."  I said with a frown.  "However, if we're to take measure of this nest, we need to press forward and hope we don't get swarmed worse than what we just experienced."  I quickly looked at each of them, pasting a smile on my face. "Excellent work for your first close encounter, though."  And they returned my smile with brilliant ones of their own. - Max, report. -  Daria's terse voice spoke into my mind. - We've cleared five insect forms that were acting as sentries from the bridge approach.  But we're fairly certain more are hiding in the ruins ahead of us.  If you want to move in behind us, we'll press forward into the ruins and draw their attention. - - Copy that.  Make your move into the ruins.  We'll advance in behind you. -  Daria indicated. "That was Daria."  I said at their curious looks.  "I suggested they let us take point and clear the way, with the rest of the team coming in behind.  She agreed.  So we're advancing into the ruins." "Are we splitting up?"  Tatiana asked as I lead the way forward.  I quickly shook my head. "They know we're here.  And that we're capable of taking out individual units."  I indicated as I took the main road leading away from the bridge, all the while carefully examining the buildings on either side. "I suspect they'll ramp up the scale of their attacks, much like invading a bee hive or ant hill elicits a stronger response the further in you manage to penetrate." "So you think we'll face a number of successive waves, with each being stronger than the one previous?"  Ekaterina asked and I nodded. "That's exactly what I'm thinking."  I looked at them, now formed up in a loose gaggle around me.  "So stay frosty.  They'll try to catch us unawares, and if they do, they'll bring the whole house." My words ended up being more prophetic than I hoped they'd be.  We had advanced perhaps a hundred metres into the ruin when the first wave of eight hit us.  In one moment we were alone and in silence, eyes narrowed as we examined the broken buildings around us.  And in the next they were charging out of the shadows, multiple legs flashing. This time it was Renata that went down in a flurry of legs, the insect form hitting her hard enough to knock her from her feet.  I bulldogged the one that targeted me, driving its head into the concrete before a knee to the side of its head finished it off.  As Tatiana vaulted over hers, I then twisted to take hold of the K'ethik pinning Renata down, metal whining in protest as my fingers bit into the creature's side.  Then I was flinging it off and into the two menacing Ekaterina, all three of them going down in an untidy heap.

The muscular juggernaut flashed me a quick smile of thanks before stepping in to pound one of the insect forms into the ground with a single blow, sparks flying at the hard impact.  A second sentry got its head twisted like a bottle cap, sending another shower of sparks flying.  Unfortunately that gave the third enough time to regain its footing and it blurred forward to use its battering ram of a head to knock Ekaterina from her feet.  Despite that, I knew the athletic juggernaut wasn't in trouble.  I paused to take a quick look at the rest of my small team. Tatiana had tangled with hers, the lithe juggernaut looking oddly small as she bulldogged the massive K'ethik insect form to the ground.  Renata had regained her feet to take on another pair, concrete spitting everywhere as she held both of them back at the same time.  And by that point, Ekaterina had twisted away from the one attacking her to get a hold of its back and get control of it. So I turned and looked down the road.  Maybe, if I cut some of these bastards off at the pass, I could get ahead of the rush.  I paused just long enough for one of the remaining sentries to move into my path then bolted forward. That made the sentry my first victim as I hit it going full speed.  Bending it almost impossibly in half with the impact, I felt it break inside before I dug in my fingers into its armored spine and tossed it aside.  Then I was charging up the street at another wave I saw forming there. They either saw, or felt me coming because I was still a good ten metres out when they all turned towards me.  Two even managed to get up onto their back legs to bring their massive jaws to bear before I slammed into them at nearly full speed.  Thankfully the more aggressive posture decreased their traction and those two were the first to be sent flying as I cannon balled into their formation. The remaining sentries weren't so abused.  A couple of them even managed to keep their feet, forcing me to carom off their armored bodies to regain my footing.  I took one out with a sharp hook to its head then three were pushing me back into the crumbling remains of a building directly behind us. For a long, quivering moment the wall stayed up after we punched a massive hole through it with our thrashing bodies.  But when a fourth K'ethik came through the hole to add its weight to the pile that was trying to pin me down, it brushed against the wall which instantly collapsed, filling the space we were fighting in with dust and debris.  'Damn it.' I silently growled as I felt razor-sharp legs clawing at me as heavy metal jaws snapped close to my face. Every effort was being expended in keeping the four away from me.  Which meant I had nothing left to try and counter attack.  'So much for trying to get ahead of them.' Then a pair of them were squealing as something took hold of them and pulled them off me.  Thinking it was the girls coming to my rescue, I prepared to thank them even as I worked an arm free from the jaws trying to crush it.  Only to get an anvil of a fist to the side of my head, the blow knocking me to the ground as it rattled my senses. 'Tell me that isn't what I think it is.'  I grimly thought as I shook my head in a vain attempt to clear my vision.  Then a grip in the back of my collar was hauling me back to my feet and I was turned around to face what I had hoped we wouldn't. Humanoid forms.  Four of them, already looking considerably more advanced than the basic forms we had initially encountered at Campton.  They were aggressively pushing and pulling the insect forms out of the way so all four of them could attack me at once.  'Yeah, keep dreaming, chuckles.'  I silently growled then I twisted out of the grip of the one that held me by the collar. It immediately took a viper quick swing at me, which I had to use juggernaut speed to avoid.  Then I moved in to hammer two quick shots to the sides of its torso, where a human's ribcage was most vulnerable.  Unfortunately the humanoid forms weren't and I was forced to lean back out of the way of a vicious back hand.

Yet, the K'ethik's counter punch had left it open and I went in hard and fast, using a savate knife edge hand to cave in its throat.  Staggered, it took a half step back, a hand coming up to its damaged throat.  And I grabbed its arm to swing it roughly about and take hold of its head.  A hard twist later and it was dropping lifeless to the ground.  Just in time for me to hastily block swings coming in from two separate humanoid forms. - Daria! -  I shouted into the silence of my mind, hoping she was still telepathically connected even as I took a heavy blow on my forearm that was hard enough to jar me.  I was then forced to duck a powerful roundhouse that nearly took my head off from the opposite direction. - Reading you, Max, five by five. -  Daria's voice replied into my head. - Situation has taken a massive change for the worse. -  I quickly reported.  - Humanoid forms have moved up to engage us.  That means they've encountered Risen in the recent past, and have ingested sufficient human DNA to not only take on our shape and size. -  I grunted as one of the humanoid forms threw a punch I couldn't avoid, forcing me to take it on the cheek.  - But they have adopted many of our hand-to-hand fighting techniques. - I grunted again as another blow snaked through my defenses to strike me in the ribs, hard enough to push the air out of my lungs.  Not that it mattered; I wasn't using it anyway.  Still, it was a shock I could've done without. - Recommendations? -  Daria tautly asked. I paused to quickly block a series of strikes that came at me almost faster than the eye could follow.  Then a punch was stabbing past my face, an obvious miss.  Not one to ignore opportunity, I rocked the K'ethik who threw it with an overhead smash to the side of its head.  It immediately dropped to one knee, putting it in perfect position for me to smash my own knee into its face.  The man form was flipped onto its back by the blow, falling awkwardly into the path of its comrade who had tried sliding forward to attack while I was distracted. It stumbled, and seeing my opening, I lashed out with a thrusting kick to catch it on the chin hard enough to break whatever connection it had in its neck to allow its brain to communicate with its body.  The man form immediately froze and fell lurchingly to the side and on top of its weakly thrashing colleague. - We seem to still have their attention.  I would move forward now, while we still have it and prep to hop back out once you've made your measurements and counts. -  I finally managed to answer, looking around for the fourth man form.  Ah, there it was, crabbing around the two dead man forms in an attempt to attack me from behind. - Acknowledged. -  Daria swiftly replied.  - We are moving in now, keeping to the south of the road where you've engaged the sentries. - - Good idea, . . -  I began to say before something moving back out on the street captured my attention, drying up both mental and physical words. What the hell, . . . was that? It was massive, dominating the street like nothing I had ever seen before.  It slithered like a snake, the concrete rasping and turning to powder beneath its belly as it moved forward.  Continuing the reptilian theme, its head and upper body were raised like a cobra, giving it a maximum height of nearly five metres.  Easily four metres wide and perhaps two high at its lower portion, it pushed aside rusted hulks and mounds of debris and rubble as if they weren't there.  Thankfully this behemoth didn't appear to be equipped with weapons. Unfortunately, what it did have was a back covered with man forms, each holding onto special harnesses that appeared to be built right into the metallic behemoth's body.  And I felt a chill as one they looked right at me, several of them opening their mouths to reveal those row upon row of jagged metal teeth I was far too familiar with.  'Ah, damn!'  We were so in over our heads. - Abort, Daria, abort! -  I screamed inside my head.  - You need to get out of there, now! -  And I felt my undead blood run cold as all that answered me was mocking silence. Then I was grunting as the man form that had been stalking me, made its move while I was distracted by the behemoth out on the street.  Hitting me hard, it slipped an expert full nelson on to pin my arms above my head.  A heart beat later it was biting at the back of my neck with its own set of glistening metal shark teeth. I could almost feel its confusion at its failure to even put a dent into my skin with teeth that were meant to chew through hardened alloy metal.  Then I was twisting side to side hard before I threw my feet out in front of me.  Already stunned by its inability to hurt me, my twist opened my attacker's hold enough that when I took my feet off the ground, I dropped out of its surprised grasp. Hitting the ground, I threw myself into a forward roll just in time to elude its frantically flailing hands.  Then I was back on my feet, launching a tight crescent kick that took the stumbling man form in the side of the head as it leaned in too far. Unfortunately that, while damaging, the blow wasn't enough to kill it.  Instead it was slung into an untidy heap a few metres away where it twitched, obviously injured.  Good enough for me; that gave me the opening I needed to get the hell out of here.  Time to grab the girls, then go full juggernaut into the ruins in an attempt to find Daria and the Valkyries. I spun around, ready to go full speed.  And found a veritable tide of man forms rushing towards me.  'For shit's sake.  I so need to be just a little less juggernaut and a little more Jet Li.'  I mused darkly.  Then they were piling into me, growling as they drove me back. It was as I frantically tried to put my feet down and get some purchase to push back that I heard the scream.  Then several man forms were running by the near side of the behemoth, which had slowed to let its passengers off.  In their arms was a wildly struggling Renata.  Seeing me, she screamed again even as I went under an avalanche of silver and black bodies. "MAAAAAAAAAAAAAAX!" I grit my teeth as I hit the ground hard, at least a dozen humanoid shells on top of me.  Then a hard blow smashed into the side of my head, hard enough to steal my consciousness away despite being full juggernaut. 'Okay, buddy, just how the hell are you going to get out of this?" I wondered just as everything went black.

 

Chapter 17: Nest

To tell you the truth, I was surprised that I regained consciousness.  I figured with that many K'ethik on top of me, I was dead as soon as I blacked out and dropped out of juggernaut mode.  They would literally tear me apart. So, when my eye fluttered open to let late afternoon sunlight flood in, I had to admit to possessing a modicum of astonishment.  Of course as soon as I had regained consciousness, I immediately wished I hadn't as vicious pain pulsed unceasingly through my body.  And, as my other eye refused to open, mostly because it was no longer there, I abruptly knew why. Nearly a third of my head was gone.  And along with it, my left arm and right leg, and portions of my torso.  So mangled were my remains that they were carrying me in a fabric sling soaked with my undead blood.  But not all was lost: despite my damaged condition and the pain that it brought, I could feel my leg and arm somewhere nearby in another fabric bag.  They both felt pretty much intact beyond the trauma from having been torn from my body. The downside to being carried in a fabric sling is, . . . well, you're getting carried in a fabric sling.  No control over where you're going or what direction you happen to be looking in.  Thankfully what was left of my head was positioned well enough that I got a glimpse of where we were going.  I just wished that what I saw didn't give me chills.  Metaphorical chills, of course, since I didn't have enough body to have real ones at this point. Nestled in the courtyard of a ruined apartment block was what looked like an old impact crater.  It was perhaps ten, maybe fifteen metres across and two deep with ejecta, along with a fair amount of rubble from the surrounding buildings, heaped up along the outside edge.   The deep gouge in the earth appeared to have been there for some time, as the crater's edges were worn smooth and the ejecta looked weathered.  Of course, the edges could've also been smoothed out by the dozens of K'ethik insect forms that swarmed in and out of it. Was it because this crater served as the nest Daria had been sent to recon?  If the big robotic insects showed anything remotely resembling actual insect behavior, I would've said yes.  Especially millipedes as they had a tendency to live under things like rocks and logs and as close to the ground as possible.  They would've naturally gravitated to a big hole in the ground like this one, despite the fact that nothing covered it and hid them from prying eyes.  And these bastards were pouring in and out of it like mad. Yet, as the man form that was carrying me slung over its back turned left to follow the crater's edge, insect forms rushing by on either side, I got the feeling their behavior was due to something other than a coincidental resemblance to giant bugs.  There!  It swung into my rather limited field of vision when the humanoid shell carried on around the edge.  Some sort of machine the insect forms were crawling all over.  It almost looked like it was built in the crater's very center.  But before I could see any details with my one remaining eye, another one of those massive cobra personnel carrier things slithered in the way, blocking my view. If I had more mouth remaining, I would've hissed in frustration at that.  But knowing I didn't, I concentrated instead on pushing the pain back enough to think on what I had just seen.  Just what the hell was that machine?  And what was it's purpose? Without warning I was being roughly dumped on the ground, joining a untidy heap of other Risen already there.  They too had been torn apart, some with obvious signs of being chewed upon.  And all of them were unfortunately still possessing enough goa to remain animated. "Help, . .  me."  One within my now even more restricted field of vision whispered hoarsely from half a mouth, nearly two thirds of its head chewed off.  The plaintive whisper twisted what was left of my guts into a helpless knot in the knowledge that even if I did manage to pull myself back together, these poor bastards needed a summoner to repair them.  And I had a sinking feeling that the Valkyrie summoner Lana, along with the new summoner they had found, were both torn apart and helpless somewhere in this pile of body parts.  If they had even survived the K'ethik attack.

Pushing that feeling aside, I concentrated on doing just that: pulling myself back together.  Returning my attention to my detached arm, I began gathering my will power.  As I had in that first velkin attack against Tate and I mere moments after being summoned, I needed to draw it to me.  While I could just grow a new one, juggernauts possessing an almost limitless capacity for self repair, it would take time and a considerable amount of goa to do so.  So getting my arm to return and reattach would save both time and goa and the more I had of both, the sooner I was getting the hell out of this nightmarish place. There!  I got it to move, drawing it to me like a fish on a hook.  It was strange to say the least, feeling dirt and pieces of broken concrete and brick under my fingers as if my arm was still directly connected to me.  Then I felt my hand brushing against something.  At the same time my detached leg felt something brush against it.  Could I be so lucky?  Had I actually managed to find my severed leg?  With my frickin' severed hand?? Carefully I used my hand to turn around enough to identify which part of my leg it was touching before I maneuvered it down to grab my ankle.  After making sure the grip was as good as I could make it, all things considered, I once again began pulling my arm back to me, the grip on the leg enabling me to bring back both. It was an agonizing few minutes as I laboriously used one detached limb to reel in both to where the rest of me lay in an untidy pile.  But, with each centimetre that they were closer to my body, I could feel my ability to control them grow.  Until, finally, they were beside me.  A tug with my hand put my leg roughly into the right position and, after it shifted around to its proper alignment, it reattached with a surge of goa and I felt a wave of warmth wash up my leg and side. Next it was my arm's turn, the limb slithering around my body until it too was more or less properly placed.  Another surge of goa and it reattached, shifting until everything was lined up correctly then finishing the connection with another wave of warmth through my upper body. Thankfully it appeared the K'ethik were ignoring the Risen they had harvested from, or they would've seen me put my leg and arm back on before carefully pushing myself into a kneeling position.  And they certainly would've seen and heard the tendrils of goa that snarled out of the ground to slam into my broken and battered body to fill me to the brim with the life energy of the Earth. I grit my teeth to avoid screaming as I felt my tissues rebuild, cell by cell, layer by layer, bone restored to its proper place before being sheathed in muscle and skin.  And then I was sagging forward to suck in a lungful of cooling air, my body on fire from renewed neural connections and replaced tissue which tingled as if it had fallen asleep instead of being chewed off. My vision was doubled while I waited for the final connections to be completed to my new eye.  A blink or two later everything was coordinated and I could see normally even as my undead blood flow was restored.  With my eyes working as they should, I took a quick look down to see my borrowed clothing hadn't been too damaged by being torn apart.  I then took a quick look around at the heap of assorted parts that lay unevenly around me. "Are any of you a summoner?"  I husked and I saw one of the nearly unrecognizable masses close by me twitch.  Moving to it, I saw a bracelet that once belonged to Lana on the remnant's wrist. "Lana?"  I quietly asked and the remnant twitched again.  "Damn it.  I'm so sorry this happened to you.  But we're going to fix it, you and I.  What I need you to do is concentrate on self repair.  Don't worry about the goa.  I'll supply that.  Okay?"  And when the mass twitched for a third time, I reached out and touched it, willing goa into the failed flesh.

It was like watching a shambler being converted.  As goa rushed through her body, I could see tissues reappearing and reattaching, bone forming and coming together, organs being replaced or repaired and finally skin and hair returning to cover it all. Gasping, Lana sat up, eyes wide as she stared at me. "Spahseeba Bozhe!"  She managed before we both realized she was basically naked.  Quickly I pulled off my jacket and handed it to her.  Taking it with a grateful smile, she pulled it on and did it up as best she could, considering its own tattered condition. "Thank you, Max."  She husked and I nodded with a smile. "No problem.  I'm just sorry it happened to begin with.  Was it the K'ethik?" She nodded. "The metal men came out of nowhere."  She said before looking away, remembered horror on her face.  "They began tearing us apart and, . . and eating us.  We tried fighting back, but javelin fire and psionic attacks both were useless.  The ballistas held them back a little longer, but in the end, they were flanked and taken down." I felt a muscle in my jaw twitch.  I had seen it before, of course, at Campton.  And had hoped to never see it again.  Now, unfortunately, thanks to the K'ethik's ability to absorb memories through ingested brain matter, those damn robot bugs knew everything we knew.  I unconsciously lifted a hand to the part of my head that had been bitten off.  Everything I knew.  Then I shook myself, physically pushing the dark thoughts and memories into the back of my mind. "Lana, we need to focus on the here and now, okay?"  When she didn't immediately respond, shivering as she stared into the distance, lost in the terrible memories of the attack, I reached out to gently put a hand on her face to get her to focus on me.  Her hand flying up to hold mine against her face, the Valkyrie summoner turned back to look at me, eyes wide. "Okay?"  I repeated, now that I had her complete attention and smiled when she nodded.  "Good girl.  Now, it's unlikely the K'ethik will come back here to check on all the fallen.  They've harvested what they wanted and are leaving the rest to rot.  So we're going to pull a fast one on them.  You and I are going to recover and revive everybody that's here.  Then we'll get the psyrens to hop everybody out as far as they can." "That doesn't sound like you're coming with us."  Lana quickly pointed out and I watched fear and uncertainty appear on her face when I shook my head. "I can't.  Not yet, anyway.  I've dealt with these bastards before.  Yet there's something about this bunch that's different and I need to know what it is.  Before they come pouring off this island and take out anything not them in the surrounding area."  I glanced over my shoulder in the direction I had seen the last K'ethik go after dropping me off.  The path appeared to go to the right and behind a building, effectively hiding this dumping ground for spare parts from prying mechanical eyes.  Good; we needed as much privacy as we could get from the K'ethik if my impromptu revival plan was going to work. I looked back to a concerned looking Lana. "Not to mention I've some protection against these things which you guys don't.  If anybody's going to find out what the hell is up with these bugs, it's going to be me." Lana slowly nodded, still looking uncertain though she was obviously seeing the logic in my reasoning.  I flashed her one more smile then turned to the heap of body parts. "Hang tight, everybody.  We're going to get you out of here!"  And, as several remnants began to twitch in excitement, I summoned more goa and turned back to Lana.

"Let's rock and roll!" By the time we were done nearly two hours later, we had recovered not only the original Valkyrie team, but the remnants of several other Valkyrie teams that had gone missing in the last few months as well.  We also managed to recover the bulk of two additional teams, mixed male and female, sent to Moscow from one of the southern Risen bases to scout out the situation in the former Russian capital. As soon as the last one recoverable was revived, I found them gathering around me.  Including my juggernauts and the members of the Valkyrie team I had come with. "As you've dealt with these things before, I think it prudent you take command of the situation." Daria quietly stated from where she crouched beside me.  Clad in a strip of fabric around her breasts and another covering her groin, the Valkyrie psyren still managed to exude a quiet, dignified command presence. I nodded before looking over at the remains of the other Valkyrie teams, and the two teams from the south. "That work for you guys?"  I asked and they quickly nodded their heads. "You're the only one that's dealt with these things, tvarisch."  One of the men from the southern bases, a lean vampire with a jagged scar stretching off his face and down onto his neck, said with a quirky smile. "If we're going to get out of here, we need somebody who knows what they're doing." That elicited a low murmur of agreement, even from the Valkyries not under Daria's command.  With a final look over at the grim psyren commander, I sighed then nodded. "Very well."  I rasped and several of them, including my juggernauts, heaved sighs of relief.  "I'll give us directions.  But I'm going to need you all to work together to get this done.  If any of you work against us for a hidden agenda, or some command protocol that I don't know about, we might as well start yelling for the shells to come over and get us.  Because we won't be getting out of here any time soon."  I paused to look around the ragged circle that now crouched close to me. "Agreed?"  I asked and swiftly everybody answered to the affirmative.  I took another quick look around the circle, Risen and Transcended Risen both looking tired and worn, what little clothing they had to preserve their modesty making them look like vagabonds.  Vagabonds that were relieved as hell to be getting out of here in one piece!  "Okay."  I said after a moment's consideration.  "It's going to be quick and simple.  Two things will happen: one, the psyrens are going to start jumping everybody out.  Second, I'm staying behind to check, . . " "We."  Renata firmly corrected from where she had hunkered down on my other side.  "We are staying here to check out what the K'ethik are up to.  You're not staying here by yourself, Max." "That's for sure."  Ekaterina said, Tatiana nodding vigorously in agreement. "I'll stay as well."  Daria stated, her jaw set.  "You'll need a quick evac, once you make your recon." She returned my gaze without flinching for a long moment as I stared her down.  Then I abruptly nodded. "Very well.  Juggernauts plus one.  Everybody else bugs out.  Got it?"  At the low murmur of acknowledgement, I nodded. "Good.  Now let's move, while we still have the element of surprise." The winks and soft hisses of displacement were already happening behind us as I eased up to the corner that hid the dumping ground from the rest of the K'ethik holding to take a peek around it.  And I found myself looking directly at the large crater dominating the courtyard.  I frowned as it appeared to be filled with even more insect forms than before, man forms restlessly prowling the perimeter and several of those massive snake things moving slowly through the space in the distance.

"Was that crater there before, when the Valkyries first noticed the K'ethik congregating here?"  I looked over my shoulder to ask.  Daria frowned from her spot in between Renata and Tatiana as she quickly searched her memory. "I believe so.  But that was 20 years ago.  Back then there were only bugs, none of these humanoid things, and in far fewer numbers." "And no machine."  I pressed.  There was no hesitation. "No machine."  Daria confirmed. Ekaterina leaned against me to peer around the corner. "Whatever it is, it's big."  She murmured.  "Maybe eight or nine metres high."  She looked over at me.  "What do you think it does?" My frown deepened as I pondered a couple possibilities then just as quickly discarded them. "No frickin' idea."  I replied without taking my eyes of the tapered cylinder of the machine sitting in the crater's heart.  "But the bugs seem to be the only ones allowed near it.  Those cobra transports and the man forms aren't even allowed over the crater's edge.  As soon as one tries, it has three or four insect forms getting in its way." My eyes narrowed as I watched a ripple of light appear at the base and work its way up the tapered shape to make the bulbous top pulse with  power. "And now it seems to be activated."  I muttered.  Then, a little louder: "Without knowing that that machine does, we need to make our move."  I looked back at Daria.  "You ready for your scan of one of these K'ethik, Daria?" The Valkyrie drew in a long breath before letting it out slowly. "I'm ready."  She said. "Good."  A quick glance back at the meat pile saw the last group wink out of sight. "And we're clear.  Okay, ladies, let's move." As we eased around the corner, our eyes were hard as we identified possible targets.  Daria, now in the middle of the four of us, also did a quick head count of the K'ethik we could see along with a measure of the space as per her original mission.  She muttered under her breath as she added, calculated and estimated.  Moving forward I felt oddly exposed in little more than a breech clout, the rest of my clothing having gone to cover up the ladies we had revived from the meat pile.  Not sure why, as I had gone into battle before completely naked and not thought a second about it.  Maybe it was the fact that we were about to storm an alien base that had guards that easily held their own against juggernauts.  Or maybe it was because I was with four equally disrobed women in a situation I would categorize as critically dangerous. Whatever the reason, it made me feel like we were in some sort of perverse scene out of a sci-fi movie where cavemen dressed in tattered furs were about to launch a daring attack on shiny, metal alien invaders. Except we were cavemen that could knock down buildings.  And this shit was about as real as it got. A humanoid shell on one of those restless patrols of the crater edge was what spotted us first.  It was swinging around the perimeter when we fell into its natural line of sight.  Immediately it opened it's ravenous maw and charged with a growl.  'Groovy.'  I found myself thinking even as I braced for battle.  If we didn't drop it quick, it wouldn't be long before the rest of them spotted all the flailing action and come running. "Can you get a lock on its essence?"  I said over my shoulder and Daria tightly shook her head.  "Damn."  I hissed.  Then I was sprinting forward to intercept. As I charged forward, my thoughts raced.  Last time, we tried taking these sons of bitches out with shear fire power and we had epically failed.  We had to try something different this time around, or face the same inevitable conclusion.  Then it occurred to me: if they look like humans, why not treat them like them?  Like actually fight hand to hand, instead of just trying to smash them out.  I mentally shrugged.  What could it hurt to try?  Except my head, of course.

I went full juggernaut as I closed with the shell.  But, instead of powering forward to pile drive into it, I slowed to a stop and fell into a martial arts fighting stance.  If the shell was confused, it certainly didn't let it show.  Still silently snarling, it came barreling in, arms swinging.  Mentally labelling this one a bar fighter with its wild delivery, I forced myself to react accordingly, as if I truly was in a bar fight. Ducking the first wild swing, and backing out of the way of the next, I took a step inside its reach and let loose a flurry of viper-quick blows to its upper body and face.  And as I did so, I used every bit of my juggernaut strength and speed to target, launch and land each punch, using every iota of hand to hand combat training I could pull out of my memory.  And I grinned in tight satisfaction as each punch bent and warped its zero-gap armor. Staggered by the viciousness of my counterattack, all the shell could do was take a half step staggering back.  Not wanting to let it off the hook, I pursued, stepping in close once again to snap up a vicious uppercut, catching it flush on the chin and rocking it back yet again.  I took a moment to gather myself then a hard spinning heel kick finished the job, the blow striking hard enough to break its neck. I landed lightly as the man form dropped to the ground, staying in a ready crouch.  Good thing; even as I landed, more humanoid shells were charging forward.  Then, following my lead, the girls spun into action all around me, using the martial arts knowledge gleaned from the memories I had passed to them.  Together we slashed into the charging K'ethik, using speed and skill in the place of brute strength to get the job done. The next few minutes passed in a whirlwind as we ducked, punched, chopped and kicked our way out of trouble.  By the time the last of our attackers went down, we were all breathing heavily from our efforts. "That, . . that was invigorating."  Tatiana panted as she bent over, hands on knees, in an attempt to catch her breath. I nodded in agreement even as I willed my body to stop its remembered response to fatigue.  We were undead, damn it.  We don't get tired.  A quick goa pull and my strength and vigor were completely restored.  Catching sight of me doing that, Renata quickly followed suit and she heaved a sigh of relief as her fatigue vanished. "I forgot we could do that."  She said with a sheepish grin even as Ekaterina and Tatiana copied her, a wash of goa rippling over each to renew and reinvigorate them. I returned her grin before looking over at Daria, who knelt beside one of the man forms still twitching with departing life. "Anything?"  I asked and frowned when again she shook her head. "Not sure if its the changes they make to adopt the humanoid shells that's preventing me from sensing their essence."  She began with a puzzled frown.  "But any of the man forms that I've tried to touch felt telepathically empty to me.  Like there wasn't anything there."  The athletic psyren reported, returning to her feet. I sighed in resignation. "That leaves only one option."  I sighed.  "We need to scan the insect forms!" "We might not get the chance, Max."  Renata said, turning to point at the crater.  "Look!" Following the tall blond's pointing finger, a wave of astonishment washed through me at seeing the chaos boiling around the base of the strange machine the K'ethik had built in the crater's center.  The best way I could describe it was the tangle of bugs you'd find kicking over a log, or heaving aside a large stone.  Except these bugs were metres long and a metre thick.  It was hard to tell with the non-stop movement that made one bug appear to flow into the next, but it looked like hundreds of insect forms had moved into the crater and were now frantically crawling over each other.  And as they did, they emitted a low, almost constant buzz that gave me the impression they were agitated as hell.

"What are they doing?"  Ekaterina softly asked, coming to stand beside Renata and I as we stared into the seething mess at the machine's base. "Not sure if they're doing it."  Tatiana pointed out as she too came to stand beside us.  "Or that weird machine is doing it to them." Indeed the machine was alive with light, which strobed up and down its height in a strange, rhythmic pattern as though responding to some sort of internal event.  And the light was strobing faster and faster with each passing moment.  Each time it did, the insect forms became that much more frantic in their motion. Abruptly a low thrum, strong enough to be felt through the soles of our feet even in full juggernaut mode, was sent vibrating through the ground.  At the same time the bulbous top of the machine exploded into brilliant light, a blue-white shimmer that washed over the frantically shifting insect shells below. As soon as the light hit the silver metal bodies of the insect forms, we watched in stunned silence as the metal began to break down, splitting apart to expose dense metallic internals.  Insect after insect fell apart, spilling their robotic innerds onto the crater floor where they mingled with those belonging to their comrades.  And all the while the man forms mutely watched from the crater's edge, incredibly untouched by the light which also washed over them. Within moments the hundreds of mechanical millipedes that had thrashed in a ball of motion and metal around the machine's base were completely broken down, almost completely filling the crater with a strange sort of metallic ooze.  As the last body dissolved, the light changed, morphing from blue-white to reddish-yellow, slowly pulsing in a manner not unlike a heart beat. The ooze began to shift with the first pulse of the reddish-yellow light over it, bubbling and twisting as if something swam beneath the mercurial surface.  It was Tatiana that spotted it first, the lithe juggernaut pointing to a bulge that had appeared equidistant between the machine and the crater's eastern edge.  And we watched as the bulge grew, elongating out of the ooze even as the ooze simultaneously shrunk as though something was absorbing it. "I, . . I've contacted something."  Daria hoarsely whispered, her eyes flying wide in shock. I risked a quick glance back at her, not really wanting to miss witnessing whatever was happening in the crater. "You sure?"  I hissed.  Then Tatiana, Renata and Ekaterina's collective gasps brought my attention snapping back around to the crater.  And I watched in stunned silence as the bulge had grown into a long, stretched out silver mass the size of a velkin, towering over the humanoid shells on the edge and on level with the machine as it absorbed the last of the ooze. Apparently finished its growth, the shape violently shook before sprouting what looked like two arms, complete with massive five fingered hands.  Its base shook again and divided into two legs even as the top began to resolve into a head. As if the appearance of the limbs was some sort of signal, the body quickly resolved into a giant humanoid shell.  But, unlike the ones that were standing on the edge of the crater staring up at it, this one was powerfully built, with complex and detailed armor.  Then, incredibly, it began to shrink.  And with each stage in the shrinking process, it looked more detailed and complex.  Until it stood, approximately my height but easily twice my size, powerful and massive, staring with a humanoid face at the shells lining the crater lip in front of it. Then, without warning, it turned its head to look directly at us and I felt a stab of pain in my brain.  'What the hell?'  I silently shouted.  I didn't have long to ponder the pain; even as its eyes fell on us, it began to walk forward and I grimly pushed the pain to the back of my mind as I readied myself.

"Stay frosty, ladies."  I husked. It was perhaps ten metres away, the other shells strangely silent and unresponsive as they watched it approach us, when it spoke in a clear baritone. "Max Niekro."  It said, calling me by name and yet again I winced as another stab of pain went through my head.  It smoothly went on in flawless English, not noticing my wince of agony  "I have examined your memories and have discovered that your kind, the Risen, are in direct conflict with our hated enemies, the velkin." Fighting the impulse to rub my head where I could almost imagine K'ethik teeth biting into my skull, I grimaced.  Now I knew why my brains hurt with this thing standing in front of me.  It was the frickin' alien that ate my brains!  Or, at least one of the insect shells that were broken down to create it, had. That knowledge would've given it an advantage over the Risen as I knew tactics, strengths and weaknesses, and the locations of important installations.  Instead of making it more aggressive towards us, however, it seemed almost, . . . conciliatory. "That is correct."  I finally answered, wondering just where the hell this thing was going with this. With its armor intricately etched with sinuous and alien markings and fashioned so cleverly that it looked powerful instead of bulky, this new K'ethik looked at us with almost a human expression on a face that oddly resembled mine as it returned my frank appraisal. "We too are in direct conflict with the aliens that attempted to destroy us."  The newcomer revealed in an almost conversation tone.  "We didn't know war until their invasion.  We didn't know conflict until they tried to crush us.  But the K'ethik have survived by adapting.  And we adapted to their attack by creating an army, by fighting back.  Yet they fled before we could actually defeat them.  And the sabotage units were sent in pursuit." It paused to look back at the machine, still glowing with the reddish-yellow light. "They have fought against the velkin for fifty of your years, attacking our enemy, always attacking."  Then it was looking back at me even as its armor rippled, the sinuous markings glowing with a soft light as strange blisters began to form in regular rows over it.  The blisters also glowed, an eerie energy curling around the newcomer's upper body. "And still the enemy is undefeated."  It said softly, actually sighing in apparent frustration.  "They are tired, the sabotage units are.  They want to go home.  But their programming states they cannot until the velkin are destroyed.  So many came together, to fuse and create me for the purpose of finding an end to the velkin and discovering a way to take them home." Again the armor rippled as if it barely contained powerful energies within and I watched with an upraised brow as the blisters on the front abruptly shifted independent of both each other, and the black metal they were recessed into.  And within the glow each exuded I saw what appeared to be miniature insect forms inside.  What the hell?!  Were these blisters eggs, carrying hundreds of new K'ethik?? The newcomer carried on as if unaware, or unconcerned about the forces and shapes moving within its armor. "They made it a part of my programming to examine all options to achieve this end: the velkin defeat and their return home.  And I have come to the conclusion that we must work together against a common enemy in order to find success." I almost went to one knee in shock at hearing that.  Here we had come to the nest in the hopes of finding a way to communicate with them so we could initiate an alliance.  And here this new kind of K'ethik was approaching us to offer the same thing??  Had we finally found some good karma in this horrible place? I hastily pasted a smile on my face and nodded. "We too have come to the conclusion that an alliance between Risen and K'ethik can only further our own efforts to defeat and destroy the velkin.  So we welcome your offer to work together." The newcomer smiled and held out a hand, human style. "Let us shake on it then, Max Niekro."  It said and I carefully took the hand, as warm and soft as any human's despite being obviously fashioned out of metal.  It gave it a shake before letting go. "It is done."  It's smile broadened slightly.  "An alliance has been formed between the K'ethik and the Risen." "Outstanding."  I found myself saying, not willing to believe this was all happening.  "And now that we are allies, we would like to get to know you better.  Beginning with what we can call you.  It'll get awkward fast if we just refer to you as the K'ethik all the time." The creature nodded in understanding.  And in doing so, made the shapes within the glowing blisters move.  They quickly emitted tiny hisses and chirps as if protesting their sudden shift, further cementing my realization that they were, in fact, K'ethik.  Small and being carried around by this thing, but K'ethik nevertheless.  Damn, if they grew as quickly as they adapted, the newcomer could shed those eggs and have an instant army within a few minutes. As if reading my thoughts, it looked at me. "I am the one carrying the hopes of the many."  It said.  "And many are with me, so I may achieve my purpose."  Again the miniature K'ethik in their glowing eggs shifted and chittered as if underlining what the newcomer said.  "Because of this, you may call me, . . "  It paused for a moment in thought. "You may call me Legion."

 

Homecoming

I looked past Legion at the humanoid shells that seemed to be watching us.  Maybe it was paranoia sprouting from the fact that these things had recently munched on Risen heads, but I was getting the distinct impression they weren't happy about something. Legion must've gotten that impression as well because it turned to look over its shoulder at the man forms and frowned.  Then it was twisting around and striding towards them. "Um, what are you doing, Legion?"  I asked even as the ladies behind me tensed. "These shells have outlived their purpose."  Legion replied as if it were the most logical and thus the only answer it could give.  "They were adapted out of the insect form to deal with your people.  Since we now have an alliance, . . ."  It paused as it came to the first one, which looked at it somewhat apprehensively if I was any judge of body posture. "They are no longer needed." If I wasn't already full juggernaut with my enhanced senses on line, I might have missed it.  As it was, I almost did as Legion lashed out with a massive fist to smash the humanoid shell in the face.  Instead of going down like it would've if I had hit it, the shell shattered as if it were made out of glass, shimmering pieces sent flying in every direction. "What, . . .?"  Renata stammered in shock behind me. I ignored her, concentrating instead on Legion.  And it was a good thing I did, or I would've missed the shimmer of energy that was released by the shell's destruction being absorbed by Legion's armor.  A heart beat later another blister appeared with a nascent K'ethik in it. "Holy shit."  I breathed, eyes wide as I saw that.  Was Legion stealing the essence of the humanoid shell to create another of its soldiers in waiting? Then, like a bolt out of the blue, I understood.  No, Legion wasn't stealing essence.  It was recycling in the K'ethik world.  Or, better yet, it was reclaiming them from a form no longer needed.  Legion was taking the K'ethik essence out of the humanoid form and putting it back into the type of shell it was originally given.  Then the shells were charging Legion en masse, mouths agape in silent screams as they tried taking the massively powerful new K'ethik down.  Legion may be recycling these nasty bastards but it certainly appeared as though the humanoid shells didn't want to be recycled. Again and again we flinched as Legion lashed out with a blow that could've knocked an elephant out cold, or shattered a tank.  And again and again the shell struck exploded into a million dancing, crystalline fragments as though Legion's very touch disrupted their structural integrity.  Then two at a time were being reclaimed, then four, six, . . . then too many for me to follow, even with my juggernaut senses.  And with each shell destroyed, essence was absorbed and a new blister formed on Legion's armor. Within moments all the humanoid shells in the courtyard were gone, their remains silvery dust swirling at Legion's feet.  But the strange new K'ethik wasn't even close to being done.  As soon as the last man form was gone, it was charging at the nearest cobra transport, which had jerked to a halt in reaction to Legion's rapid advance.  Legion ran smooth and easy, like an Olympic sprinter in their prime, directly at the transport.  At the very last moment, it thrust out a clenched fist.  Then the transport too was gone in a hail of metal dust and crystalline wind, generating no less than six new blisters on Legion's armor.  So six original K'ethik had fused to form that big frickin' thing.  Made sense, in a strange, robotic bug sorta way.  I shook my head at the infinite malleability and adaptability the K'ethik seemed to possess.  Like Daria had said at the beginning of the mission, it would be hell trying to get these things off our world if they didn't want to go.

Thankfully Legion had been instructed during his creation by the insect forms that they did want to go.  To say that was a load off my mind would've been one of the greater understatements I had made in a great while.  Now we needed to leverage this new alliance into aiming that adaptability right at the velkin. Then, in a shower of dancing light reflecting off metal crystals, the last of the transports was gone too.  Momentarily by itself, Legion took a slow look around to see if it had missed any of its former colleagues.  Then it paused, head cocked slightly to the side. "You should go, Max Niekro."  It then said, straightening up and facing the entrance to the courtyard.  "I have summoned the remainder of the K'ethik on the island to this point for reclamation.  If you do not vacate immediately, their arrival may predicate grave injury." Holy shit, no kidding! "You don't have to tell me twice, Robbie."  I growled, looking over my shoulder at Daria.  "Time to go, captain." Nodding, the Valkyrie commander focused.  And with a wink of light and a hiss of displaced air, we were standing at the fall back point on the other side of the Moskva, our backs to Red Square, looking across the river at the ruins on the island.  Even now I could hear the squeals and the snarls of the various K'ethik being reclaimed as they resisted Legion with everything they could summon as dust swirled above the hidden nest. I let a long sigh ease out my nostrils, unable to deny that I was happy to be out of that place.  Then I turned back to Daria. "I relinquish command to you, captain.  The company is once again yours." She nodded gravely, then held out her hand.  When I took it, she shook it firmly. "Thank you for getting us all out of there, Max."  The Valkyrie psyren indicated with a nod before she let my hand go.  "You've made me very glad indeed that I thought to include you on this mission.  I'd hate to think of what could've happened if you weren't there." I smiled. "Thankfully you don't have to." Daria chuckled lightly. "I'll agree with you there.  I just wish I didn't have the memories I do have of that place."  Then she was sobering.  "Which brings up the question, Max.  What about Legion?" At mention of the K'ethik who made an alliance with us, I found myself looking back at the island where dust still swirled over the hidden K'ethik base. "I don't know, captain."  I admitted.  "We really didn't get the chance to talk about what would happen after we created our alliance.  It just started reclaiming the other K'ethik and we were forced to withdraw."  Then any further speech was impossible as, with a low snarl of old time thruster jets, an oddly familiar looking transport dropped out of the early evening sky. The transport's sudden appearance made me forget Legion as it was quickly joined by a handful of others, each making sure it stayed clear of our knot of stunned Risen as they carefully maneuvered around each other to land lightly on the broken paving stones of the square. Those were human transports!  I had seen some that looked just like those at Campton, except these weren't rusted out and left to the elements.  Not saying they weren't battered and broken down, but they were still in good enough repair to be usable.  I was shaking my head in amazement at their appearance as several individuals in standard human combat gear jumped out and jogged towards where I was standing with Daria and my juggernaut comrades. "Max Niekro?"  The first one, a blond fellow with chiseled good looks and carrying a javelin goa-forged bolt thrower, called out as they approached.  When I nodded, he stepped close, several more javelins behind him.

"I'm Lars Gunnarson, out of Fort Ice Dragon, north of Stockholm.  The Earth Mother's liaison sent us here to retrieve you and make sure you got back to North America." I almost laughed out loud at that, relief and astonishment all mixed together.  I guess I was missed after all. "Lead the way, Lars."  I said with a smile.  Nodding, the blond javelin turned with his soldiers and began jogging back towards the transports, who still had their thrusters idling.  They obviously hadn't intended on staying long.  Retrieval and bug out; it was what I would've done, dropping into a hot LZ without knowing the particulars of the situation on the ground. Before I could follow, a light hand touched  my arm.  Turning in surprise, I found Daria standing there.  Mutely she held out a scrap of fabric torn from her clothing.  Taking it with an upraised eyebrow, I looked at her. "Ulyana would kill me if she knew I gave that to you."  The psyren quietly said without offering any further explanation.  I slowly nodded in understanding then glanced back at where Tatiana, Renata and Ekaterina were standing. "Take care of my girls, will you, Daria?"  I asked, keeping my voice just as quiet.  "Don't let Ulyana push them around, or turn them as hard as she is." "I will.  You have my word, Max."  Daria flashed me a rare smile.  "Good luck." "And to you as well."  I said, then with a final nod of farewell to my trio of juggernauts, I turned and jogged lightly towards where Lars was waiting just inside the transport's door. The Scandinavian Transcended handed me a duffel bag as I stepped into the transport and smiled at my questioning look. "Just looked like you needed a spare kit, sir."  He said as the thrusters spooled up and we began lifting off the ground.  And, after glancing down at the breech clout I wore, I laughed out loud. it took nearly two and a half hours to make the trip from Moscow to Fort Ice Dragon, just north of Stockholm, Sweden.  And as we did, we passed over several former Risen bases that looked like they had been pounded from both the ground and from space. "They're hitting us all over the planet."  Lars said as I stared at what used to be a massive base south of Tallinn, Estonia.  It had been systematically reduced to craters and melted stone.  "First they roll in ground troops to take down anything that moves, then orbital bombardment to glass the rest.  It's the alien version of scorched earth.  And if we didn't get the heads up from your people at Retribution, it would've been a slaughter." I looked over at him with a frown. "Retribution sent word of the attack?"  I asked and he nodded in confirmation. "Apparently your psyrens have discovered some way to boost their abilities so they could reach all over the world with their telepathy."  The javelin said.  "They said they were looking for you at first, but after we got over our initial shock at hearing them, we learned about the impending attack."  It was Lars' turn to frown.  "Now, if you don't mind me asking, sir, there's something I don't understand.  If your psyrens could reach across the Atlantic to talk to our psyrens, why couldn't they reach Moscow and get a hold of you?" I grimaced at that. "Moscow is a clusterfuck, Lars."  I tautly rasped.  "That's why." "Sir?" I sighed at his confused expression then launched into a quick explanation of how Vorinov had polarized the male and female Risen into two warring camps pitted against each other with his brutally misogynistic, old world behavior.  And how the Valkyrie commander Ulyana had taken her female Risen and forged them into an elite fighting force with every skill and ability focused on killing the enemy.  Which meant their psyrens knew how to rip velkin apart with their minds, but couldn't use their telepathy to make broadband connections.  Or to teleport any distance further than a few metres.

I wasn't surprised to see the confusion grow on the Scandinavian javelin's face as I outlined what was happening in and around the former Russian capital. "Risen against other Risen?  And psyrens that fight instead of use their regular abilities?"  He repeated, then shook his head as if to clear it.  "That boggles the mind, sir." "Yeah."  I chuckled wryly.  "Try living it, Lars."  And then we fell silent as the transports flew out over the Baltic Sea, marking the last leg of our journey. The lowlands of southern Sweden followed a short time later, with the ruins that belonged to the former Swedish capital of Stockholm occupying its natural harbor along with them.  We then passed over yet another blackened and battered piece of ground before the transports swung around and began dropping towards what looked like a hole in the ground. "I'm guessing that used to be Fort Ice Dragon?"  I asked, looking over at Lars, who quickly nodded yes. "Version one."  He said with a bright Scandinavian smile.  Then the transports were dropping through the hole in the ground and I was looking out over a brightly lit underground base. "I'd say welcome to the Bat Cave, but I think you folks at Retribution used that one first."  Lars said with a grin as I nodded in appreciation at the large, well-laid out base.  "It used to be a storage facility for heavy equipment for a local construction firm that specialized in building underground structures.  We co-opted it at Retribution's suggestion and it pretty much was a move that saved our lives, as the aliens hit the above ground base only a few hours after we moved here." "I hear that."  I said as the transports angled for what looked like a landing area of some sort, with lights set out to designate spots to land. A group of Risen were waiting for us there, including three hovering psyren in their characteristic robes.  Seeing them sent a wave of relief through me.  Finally!  Psyrens that did what psyrens were supposed to do.  I joined Lars and his crew as they hopped out of the transport as soon as it was on the ground to walk towards this group. "Commander Brynhild."  He said, saluting one of the pysrens who had floated forward.  "I've retrieved Commander Niekro as the Earth Mother liaison requested."  A Risen base commanded by a psyren?  How cool was that! "Well timed, as always, major."  The psyren Lars had named as Brynhild replied.  "As we've recieved another telepathic communique from New Retribution to say that they are currently under attack."  That news sent a thrill of anxiety through me.  What?  Retribution was under attack??  Like what the hell are we waiting for, people?  I need to jump outta here, pronto! Thankfully Brynhild was on the same page. "We need to prepare to send Commander Niekro there as soon, . . ."  She began to say. "Sir."  Another one of the psyrens abruptly interjected, floating forward as she did.  "Beg pardon for the interruption, but we are picking up another signal on rapid approach to the base." Brynhild turned to address her colleague. "Is it one of ours, Ragnhild?"  She asked, her calm, psyren voice steady and confident as I expected it to be. "No, commander.  Nor is it an invader signal."  Ragnhild hesitated for a moment.  "We, . . we can't tell what the signal belongs to.  We just know that it was moving quickly but is slowing as it angles towards our external entrance.  Shall I have our ballistas open fire as soon as it's in range?" I let a long sigh out as I abruptly realized what the signal belonged to.  it had to be Legion.  Somehow the K'ethik super shell had discovered I had left Moscow and set off in pursuit to further its agenda of defeating the velkin so it could return the K'ethik home.

"Don't bother, commander."  I bluntly advised.  "Ballista fire won't even slow it down.  In fact I get the feeling it could take a hit from the enemy guns in orbit and laugh it off." Brynhild silently turned to face me and I could feel the weight of her gaze hitting me. "You know what this new signal is, Commander Niekro?"  She quietly asked and I nodded. "It calls itself Legion."  I said.  Then any further explanation was useless as, with the whistle of thrusters and the hiss of split air, a silver and black shape darted into the overhead entrance and dropped rapidly towards us.  I had just enough time to see a flattened lozenge shape with stubby wings and oversized thrusters before it shifted in a blur of energy fields and malleable metal to become Legion.   The K'ethik super shell dropped the last metre or so to the ground with a crunch, it's knees bending to absorb the impact.  'Great.  Not only can it wipe out an army of its own virtually unstoppable colleagues.  But now it can frickin' fly too!' I found myself darkly musing. "Max Niekro."  It straightened up to say even as Lars and every other javelin within ten metres leveled their weapons at it.  "Forgive my late arrival.  I had to ensure that all the K'ethik in the city were reclaimed before joining you." "No trouble, Legion."  I replied, motioning for Lars and the other javelins to lower their weapons.  At this range, the bolts would only splash back on us after being deflected by the K'ethik's zero-gap armor. "We appreciate you cleaning up like that.  And I'm sorry for not offering you a ride.  Commander Brynhild's transports arrived while you were still reclaiming the island and I didn't get the chance to ask if you intended on accompanying me back to North America." Legion made a very human dismissive gesture with its hand. "No apologies necessary, Max Niekro.  As you said, we didn't have the chance to discuss such eventualities before the need to reclaim the island was pressed upon me.  However, I will now take the opportunity to say that it is indeed my intention to accompany you back to North America.  From all the memories I have processed, I have come to the conclusion that you represent the best chance for the K'ethik to return to K'eth and reclaim their lives." I nodded. "Sounds cool, Legion.  And you arrived here just in time.  Commander Brynhild here was about to jump me back to New Retribution, my base in North America.  It has come under attack by the velkin." I watched Legion visibly twitch at that. "Then let us make haste, Max Niekro.  There is a battle to be won, and velkin to kill." I grinned at hearing that.  Frickin' music to my ears.  I looked over at Brynhild. "Legion will accompany me back to North America as a representative of its people, the K'ethik."  I quickly explained.  "The K'ethik are a bio-mechanical alien race that the invaders attempted to destroy before they arrived on our world fifty years ago.  They failed, and the K'ethik sent several autonomous units in pursuit as the velkin attempted to flee their system.  Legion has approached me to form an alliance between the K'ethik and the Risen to achieve our mutual goal of the invaders' destruction." A ripple went through the Risen that surrounded us, one that carried mixed relief and apprehension. "I expect you'll be filing a full report detailing this new alliance with your Earth Mother liaison once New Retribution is secure."  Brynhild indicated in her quiet voice.  "I look forward to reading it." "As do I."  Lars muttered from a few paces away, a look of disbelief on his handsome face. Ignoring him, Brynhild went on. "In the meantime, let us send you back to North America.  Using the technique your psyren commander Tovin gave us, we will form a psyren ring to boost my teleport range and uplink to a satellite in orbit to get LOS.  Stand by." "No need, commander."  I replied, holding out my hand.  "As a juggernaut, I can serve as a goa source to boost your range.  All you need is the satellite link for LOS." Brynhild nodded as she moved forward to take my hand and instantly I felt goa flowing out of me. "Uplink established."  She said.  "New Retribution identified.  Prepare to jump."  Then, with a wink of light, Fort Ice Dragon disappeared in a wave of blackness. Again I hung for what felt like an eternity in the blackness.  And, this time I could eerily feel Legion's presence nearby.  Before I could do more than that, we were winking back into reality several hundred metres above the ground.  Seeing we were airborne, I went full juggernaut so I could survive the fall. As we began to drop, I looked down and saw the flat, paved space of the parking lot outside of Retribution's main entrance.  A space that was currently filled with velkin hunters and tanks engaged in combat against several Risen units.  Plasma and goa bolts were flying back and forth as dense as sleet as the two sides exchanged fire.  And several tanks were already destroyed, crushed as a number of juggernauts were flying around the battle field, cutting the enemy to shreds. It made me wonder: how the hell did the velkin see where Retribution was?  Then I was slamming into the ground, my knees bending to soak up the impact.  Legion came down right beside me, doing the same. "Filthy invaders."  Legion growled, actually sounding mad as its powerful body tensed.  Not just mad; frickin' pissed off!  It glanced upward. "And their ships are moving into position to bombard this location.  They must've seen the tents set up by recent arrivals marking the site as a Risen base." Recent arrivals?  Tents??  What the hell?  Then with a telepathic surge, my mind was linked into the battle's broadband. - , . . Justice, bring to bear on those tanks breaking through the north flank. - Tovin's familiar and quiet voice filled my mind.  - Jen, we need the southern approach cleared!  Jolt indicates we have enemy vessels moving into position to begin bombardment. - - Give me a count down, please, Tovin. -  Jen's voice quickly fired back. - T minus five minus on my mark. -  Tovin said.  - Mark. - - Boost, status report on your evac of the refugee camps. -  The psyren commander then said after a brief pause. - Seventy percent, Tovin.  Alot of these Risen are badly wounded. -  My summoner commander replied.  - They're not easy to move without your psyrens giving us a hand. - - Acknowledged, Boost.  I'm sending Ambriel and her second team over to give you a hand. - Tovin indicated.  - Ambriel, did you read that? - - We copied, Tovin. -  The human leader's crisp voice said into my mind.  - We are moving now. -  And I watched as plasma fire from close to the base entrance suddenly stepped up to give cover.  A heart beat later several humans in full combat gear began running in ready crouches towards the tents set up just north of the base. "Legion."  I rasped and the big neo-shell looked over at me.  I pointed out the running humans then the tents in the distance. "Those are humans, not as protected and capable as Risen units.  We need to make sure they reach the tents." "Acknowledged."  Legion grated, turning back to the seething battle line.  It then lifted it's arm and I watched it's hand morph into what appeared to be a cannon.  Then I was clapping my hands over my ears as it fired several shots in rapid succession, the very air around us shuddering with the concussive force of its ordnance getting launched. I twisted to follow the blasts, some sort of shimmering bolts of energy, arch over the surge of where the hunters were directly clashing with Risen troops and in where the velkin were massed.  And watched as they took out several tanks and squads of hunters with vicious and massive detonations. Damn.  That was frickin' awesome!  Then I was exploding forward. My turn.

 

Waste Not, Want Not

I went supersonic and darted through a cluster of tanks before ripping my way through several ranks of hunters.  Hitting the brakes, I turned a tight 180 then powered through more tanks.  Then I was forced to skid to a halt so I didn't run into Legion, who had moved into the velkin ranks behind me.  It was now busily finishing off a squad of hunters that had turned and counterattacked in an attempt to protect their armor.  The cannon it had changed its hand to had become a smaller caliber rapid fire weapon and it was using it to chew the hunters into bite-sized pieces. "Legion!"  I exclaimed, coming to a halt beside it.  I had to speak loudly to be heard over the sound of battle that raged all around us.  "What are you doing?" "Attempting to devise a weapon to strike at the enemy vessels about to unleash their barrage at your base."  The neo-shell tautly replied, also making its voice loud enough to be heard as it twisted to scythe another squad down.  The the rapid fire weapon then morphed back into the cannon so it could pound the line of tanks that were attempting to flank our line to the south. I pulled my hands away from my ears when it restored its hand to quickly step to the nearest ruined piece of velkin weaponry. "During the final stages of the velkin assault on K'eth, they also bombarded surface targets from orbit."  It explained as it ripped a piece of armor plating free to quickly examine it.  "My people do not naturally fly.  The flight form you saw at that other Risen facility I created in my effort to follow you.  So we had no defense against their attack from the skies.  We were forced to adapt and eventually we devised a method to fire our soldiers into space to fight them directly.  Your soldiers, however, are not so individually powerful.  We cannot simply fire them into space." "Uh, no."  I staggered as I took a couple tanks shots off my shields.  "Hold that thought."  Then I turned and charged the phalanx of armor that advanced on where Legion and I had been talking.  A couple minutes later I was back, twelve more tanks reduced to smouldering debris in my wake. "So you're thinking of building a weapon that can fire on ships in orbit?"  I said, coming to a halt beside the neo-shell as it added several more large pieces of plating to a pile it was building. "Yes."  Legion replied.  "Your memories describe an event where the Risen Transcended type called ballista managed to enhance their range and fire power temporarily to strike several times at ships in orbit." I nodded. "That was Justice, using additional ballistas in a booster circle to form batteries.  But that required isolating enough ballistas from the battle to create the batteries."  I paused to take a quick look around.  "The battle here is too complicated for us to do that." "So I surmised.  Hence my effort to build a similar weapon that won't require Risen or Human assistance."  It paused to bend the piece of plating it held in its hand even as several plasma bolts darted in to hammer it in the back and shoulders.  The same energy field I had seen at work in Moscow shimmered as it easily absorbed the blasts, allowing Legion to ignore the hits.  I didn't though.  I turned and darted forward to smash through several squads of hunters that were once again attempting to relieve their beleaguered armor.  And once again I spun back around to rejoin the neo-shell as it attempted to assemble a ground based weapon to strike at the incoming velkin warships. "You know, a beam weapon is spectacular to fire but impractical when facing movable targets."  I pointed out, making a quick lap around Legion's pile of plating as I spoke.  "You want something that will either fire in bursts that can then be moved before it can be targeted.  Or a weapon that will launch something that can hit the target hard enough that retaliation is impossible."

Legion paused in bending another piece of metal to look over at me. "Your memories suggest some experience with ground to air defense, Max Niekro.  Missile batteries and radar-guided anti-aircraft guns, primarily.  Do you think this technology can be modified for our purposes?" I snorted at that.  I wasn't the walking piece of technology here.  How the hell should I know?  Instead of saying that out loud, however, I frowned in thought as I considered its question for a moment. "The anti-aircraft guns, no.  At least, not easily.  But the missile technology can be easily extrapolated for the task.  A missile should have sufficient thrust to launch a package quickly out of a gravity well, along with sufficient yield in the warhead to seriously damage a target as big as a velkin warship.  You can either have it guided, thus reducing the onboard tech, or you can make it self-guiding, reducing the warhead payload slightly by requiring room for the guidance tech." Legion stared at me as it appeared to be sifting through what memories of mine it had available.  Then it was nodding. "I have located the technology that you are referring to in your memories, Max Niekro."  It then turned to the pile of plating.  I watched as its energy field extended towards the metal which began to crystallize, much like the bodies of the K'ethik Legion had reclaimed back in Moscow. Instead of just letting the metallic sand blow away in the wind, as it had in Moscow, Legion converted one hand into a siphon.  The other became a giant extruder and I could only shake my head in astonishment as it converted the metal sand on the fly into first a launch frame made out of zero-gap metal, sometimes moving faster than even my eyes could follow.  The frame was swiftly followed by a rocket with the same oversized thrusters I had seen on Legion's flight form, looking like a slightly heavier version of the SAMs I had dealt with over in Afghanistan.  And like those SAMs, this one was already pointed skyward at nearly 90 degrees from the horizontal. "The impellers I have equipped this projectile with, generate sufficient thrust to propel the projectile out of the gravity well within ten seconds.  And the anti-matter warhead has sufficient yield to disable or destroy a standard velkin warship, as I now see in orbit around your planet." Anti-matter warheads?  What the hell?  Legion must've been reading my mind because, before I could say anything about the warhead, it turned to me. "I realize much of the technology I have incorporated into this weapon is currently beyond your capabilities as a race.  And it will remain that way until I can pass on the knowledge to your people upon achieving victory in this battle."  A small screen flipped out of the missile's holding frame and Legion activated it with a touch of a reconstituted hand.  It came alive with a wash of light and immediately showed three flashing red symbols on a dark field, with a curve of blue green beneath.  The flashing symbols obviously represented the ships above us, the field: space, and the curve was Earth. Before the neo-shell could do anything beyond that, it was slammed with a massive plasma blast, obviously launched from a tank.  Smaller blasts began raining down all around us shortly after as the velkin renewed their counterattack.  I turned to look in the direction the ordnance had come in.  And found no less than three full phalanxes of twelve moving towards us, accompanied with a couple hundred hunters. With one hand once again a cannon, and other the smaller caliber weapon, Legion turned with a snarl to open up on the advancing velkin.  I let it tear them up for a couple seconds before I joined the fight, not relishing the thought of taking K'ethik friendly fire from Legion while trying to smash some velkin.

Thankfully Legion seemed to be aware of that and I was deftly avoided as it continued to fire into the velkin in between my lashing attacks.  It didn't take long before we had crushed the counter assault between the two of us. I returned to the missile array just as Legion was once again addressing the control panel's touch screen. "Targeting the warship on the left of the formation."  The neo-shell indicated, tapping the red triangle on the left.  The frame immediately shifted slightly to point the missile at a different section of the sky.  Legion then tapped a pulsing green dot in the bottom left hand corner of the screen and, with a howl of maxed out impellers, the missile leapt upwards and rapidly out of sight. - Was that a missile being fired?? - Justice barked onto the broadband.  - Did anybody see where that was fired from? - Then my attention was being captured by Legion's big hand on my shoulder.  It must've initiated some sort of neural interface because, a heart beat later, my eyes blurred and then I was watching the three velkin warships firing maneuvering thrusters as they took up geosynchronous positions over the base.  They had just come to a complete stop when, in a flicker of motion, the missile darted up from beneath to drill the vessel on the left directly amidships. There was a flicker of light as the warhead exploded then a ripple of concussive force was rolling away from the warship as it was ripped apart by the explosion, sending a massive piece of itself careening into the vessel beside it. "Holy damn!"  I breathed, my vision abruptly my own.  But only because Legion needed its hands again as it quickly assembled additional racks onto the original frame it had built.  A few minutes later the frame had become a four missile array, with four more of the missiles mounted on it. "Targeting centre vessel." It tapped the green dot and a second missile was sent screaming into the heavens.  "Targeting the right hand vessel."  And a third missile howled out of the array, swiftly darting out of sight. - Holy shit!!  Two more missiles have been fired! -  Justice snarled.  - Does anybody have eyes on the spot they're coming from? - - Going to take a look now. -  That was Jen.  - They seemed to be fired from well behind velkin lines. - - Right behind you, Jen. -  Firinne said and I heard them begin smashing their way through the front lines towards us. Then Legion's big hand was on my shoulder again and the warships once more appeared in my vision.  Just in time to see the center vessel get hit in the belly just behind the bridge, it's forward section disappearing in a blaze of light.  That flare almost blinded me to the third missile, which darted into slam into the last vessel's engine section, the resulting explosion swallowing what was left of all three vessels. Legion's hand dropped and I found myself staring at the bloom of light that was visible high above us, the flare marking the spot where the ships that were about to hit us, had died. "Targets eliminated."  Legion rumbled before looking over at me.  "Your sky is clear, Max Niekro." I shook off my astonishment to grin as I nodded in acknowledgement.  Hot damn!  The problem of the velkin having the advantage of orbital positioning on us had just been most assuredly resolved! - All units, be advised. -  Tovin came on to broadband to say.  - Satellite imagery has told us the three ships that were about to bombard the base have been decisively destroyed.  Track back has indicated that those missiles fired from an unknown location behind enemy lines are definitely responsible. -

- We've run into some resistance here. -  Firinne indicated, her mental voice slightly exasperated.  - The velkin have moved in close to our lines so clean juggernaut runs are difficult at best.  We have lost LOS on our target. - - Copy that.  Captain Abbas, prep an insertion team.  We'll jump them in at the tree line, where they should be able to establish LOS on the missile emplacement, and who's operating it. - - Acknowledged, commander. -  Abbas replied.  - My team will be ready in two minutes. - I frowned as I listened in on the broadband traffic, hesitant to reveal my presence and, in doing so, bring Legion to their awareness.  I wasn't sure if it was because I was still uncertain of Legion's commitment to the fight, although it slapping together that rocket rig and blasting three velkin warships out of orbit had gone a long way to assuaging my doubts. The harsh sound of velkin plating getting dropped against another tore my attention from my internal argument and I frowned as I looked in the direction of the sound.  It was Legion, gathering up pieces of the tanks we had just destroyed, most of it being turned to metal sand even as my eyes fell on it. Now that the neo-shell knew what it was doing, it worked too fast for me to follow.  Frames went up, followed quickly by targeting systems and missiles.  By the time Abbas and his team winked into sight twenty or so metres away and close to the tree line, Legion had three additional frames up and all four loaded with four missiles apiece.  It handed me a flattened interface device that looked similar to Felix's data pads as Abbas and his handful of javelins came running up, weapons trained on the both of us. "This will remotely access the missile control systems."  The neo-shell rumbled.  "I will show you how to operate it once the battle has finished." I nodded even as Abbas stopped a few metres away. "Alright, hold it right there, pal.  Let me see your hands."  The upgrade shouted, his bolt slinger pointed right at me. I looked over my shoulder at him without moving further, then returned my attention to Legion.  The neo-shell had once again extended that strange, shimmering energy field that was around his body, the one that looked like the distortion you get from heat radiating off something, towards the first missile array. "I said, show me your hands!"  Abbas snarled, his team now splitting their aim between me and Legion. "He seems quite aggressive, considering we just destroyed the warships about to fire on your base."  Legion pointed out as he watched the array incredibly shrink from nearly three metres high to something could comfortably sit in my hand. "He is a bit, isn't he."  I agreed. "You shot down those three velkin warships?"  Abbas hissed in disbelief.  Again I looked over my shoulder at him. "Do you see anybody else over here with a missile battery other than us, son?"  I replied with a raised brow. "I, uh, . . ."  Abbas stammered before he caught sight of the second missile battery abruptly shrink down to toy size under the influence of Legion's strange energy field.  That made him fall silent all together, and he wasn't the only one that found his weapon slowly dropping down.  The entire team was dead silent as they watched the third and fourth batteries reduced to toy size.  That done, Legion produced a zero-gap metal carrying case that it then put the batteries into before closing it and activating some sort of device on the top. Abbas and his team didn't move as Legion then turned and presented the case to me. "For future endeavors."  The neo-shell deadpanned and I grinned.

"Thank you, Legion.  We're in your debt." Again the big K'ethik made that human gesture of dismissal. "Please, think nothing of it."  It said.  "I have only acted in the best interest of our alliance.  Besides, I believe it was your idea, Max Niekro." That stirred Abbas and his men into action. "M-max Niekro?  As in Commander Niekro??"  Abbas took a handful of steps around to look at me directly, his eyes wide. "Sir?  Is that really you?"  And, upon seeing my familiar face, his expression turned from confused and apprehensive to joy. "Sir!  It is you!  But, . . but how did you get back from Russia?" My answer was lost as Legion opened up with its cannon at more velkin armor rolling our way.  And, at the same time: - All units, be advised.  Orbital tracking has identified additional warships moving into position over the base.  Prepare for orbital bombardment. - Felix tautly commanded over the broadband.  - I repeat, prepare for orbital bombardment! - "Legion!"  I snarled as Abbas' team moved behind the pile of plating the neo-shell hadn't yet used to return fire on the mass of velkin headed right at us.  Somehow hearing me above the sound of its own weapon, and the snarl of plasma rounds streaking all around us along with the growl of javelin bolts firing in return, the K'ethik turned towards me. Seeing that I had its attention, I immediately pointed at the sky.  Frowning, Legion twisted to look upward.  And I watched a snarl appear on its silvery face before it turned to the pile of plating. "I need you to vacate the vicinity around the metal, please.  Now!"  It barked at Abbas and his men with sufficient force the upgrade javelin quickly shuffled his men back.  Thankfully they were veterans and they kept firing at the advancing aliens even as they crouched closer to the ground.  Considering the enemy was over five metres tall, moving closer to the ground was always a good idea, forcing them to reorient and leaving themselves vulnerable for counter strikes. That was my signal to get involved. "Don't you just want to use the four batteries you've already made, Legion?"  I yelled, stepping close as plasma streaking by on every side, so close I could smell burnt ozone with my deadened Risen senses. Legion jerked its head in the negative as it began to extend its energy field. "We'll need those in a time where metal won't be as available as it is this day."  It pointed out, turning to begin assembling another missile frame.  "I will use what we've gathered to swiftly assemble another array."  And with that, it went to work. I let a breath go out my nostrils.  Logical.  I should've thought of that.  Then I was turning and charging the velkin force. This time it was quite a bit harder to rip my way through this newest element, as the velkin kept shifting and staying out of straight lines so I couldn't take a lot out at once.  The tanks too had broken up and staggered their formations with the additional space afforded by the artificial plain that was the parking lot.  That forced me to take them out one at a time.  Which was taking time.  And with each passing second, they drew closer to the frantically working Legion. - Evac! -  Abbas screamed onto the broadband.  - We're about to be overrun.  We need evac! - With the abruptness of flicking a switch, the javelin fire that had been lacing through the velkin ranks stopped.  Good; Abbas' team was now clear.  I slashed through a tank, the resulting explosion taking out the one beside it and a handful of hunters before I was clear and running towards Legion. Damn, Abbas wasn't kidding, I thought as I looked over shoulder and was staggered by a blast to the upper chest.  The tanks were only maybe twenty metres away.  Both Legion and I were now swimming in plasma fire, the blasts coming steady and frequently.  it was so heavy, the K'ethik finally turned from its almost completed array to open up on the velkin with its small caliber weapon. For my part, I slashed into the tanks once again, hitting the first hard enough to flip the metallic behemoth over onto its side and partially blocking the advance of three more behind it.  And I watched as they opened fire on their own vehicle, blowing it apart with several well placed shots before they rumbled through the resulting space. Then the first one was exploding as it took one of Legion's heavy ordnance blasts right in the front plate, ripping it apart with enough force that I was staggered despite being full juggernaut.  The second one died just as quickly.  Then the third was almost on top of the array, its blasts hammering the energy shield Legion had erected to protect it. Two steps and I was slamming into it with enough force to push it across the cracked asphalt in a spray of sparks.  Just in time to see the first blast from orbit drop out of the sky to hammer into our lines, the impact sending seared and broken bodies in every direction. - All units, begin your withdrawal. -  Tovin's voice was tense, almost crackling with barely restrained anxiety and energy.  - Retreat to the base's main entrance, now. - It was a tough call.  Leave the troops out in the open where the bombardment, which was now starting to drop with some earnestness and not let the velkin know there was an underground base here.  Or save as many soldiers as possible and reveal the Bat Cave's presence.  And she had made it.  'Good for you, Tovin.'  I thought. Then I was twisting around to follow a missile as it howled out of Legion's array and into space.  Somehow the neo-shell had used the pause in the velkin advance the start of the bombardment had caused as the aliens paused to watch the energy start to fall from the sky, to finish.  And now missiles were screaming one after the other into the sky. All four were gone in less time it took for me to blink.  And I watched as light blossomed high in the heavens, marking them hitting the new arrivals with devastating force. Almost instantly the bombardment ceased.  In one moment the ground was shuddering with multiple impacts.  And in the next the sky was clear. In the act of assembling more, a big hunter reached out to try and pull Legion away from the array by brute force.  Then it was screaming as Legion's energy field pulsed and the velkin began crumbling into scintillating shards.  Incorporating these new particles into its construction, Legion finished two more missiles and sent them howling into the sky before it turned with a snarl and opened up with both hands. For my part, I grunted as several tank blasts hit me along with a hail of small arms fire.  If you could call plasma bolts fired from guns the size of tree trunks 'small arms'.  Then I was putting my shoulder into the nearest tank a couple steps in and crumpled in its front end.  And in pushing it aside, I was the perfect position to see the veritable sea of green-armored giants marching towards where Legion and I desperately fought and I felt a muscle jump in my jaw in tension.  These bastards were here for one thing and one thing only. To crush New Retribution.

 

Reunion

Even as my eyes fell on the tidal wave of velkin sweeping towards me, I heard the snarl of impulse drives being pushed to their absolute maximum.  Then I caught sleek shapes darting from the underground hanger and swiftly climbing out of sight.  Tiger Rays; Tovin must've been holding them back to keep the Bat Cave hidden.  Now that the velkin knew we were here it was pointless to continue the charade.  Then they were dropping back out of the sky, plasma cannon blazing and particle beams hissing as they sliced into the giant alien ranks. Braking thrusters howled as several Tigers slewed around, unloading at anything over two metres tall.  There they hovered, their shielding flaring from multiple hits as they hammered tanks into fiery messes and cut hunters into ribbons.  Then they were wheeling away to climb once more into the sky seconds before their shields collapsed. The strafing run had taken a bite out of the velkin front.  Just enough for me to power through.  Before I could move, however, a massive pressure from behind knocked me to the ground.  Desperately I tried bracing against it.  And found myself sinking into the ground as, with a force that made my bones vibrate, a tank rolled right over top of me.  The ground effect field added to the monstrous weight of the massive vehicle was a crushing force that pushed me further and further into the ground. "You've, . . . got to be kidding me."  I managed before my face was shoved into the hard ground. Now, if I needed to breathe or anything like that to stay alive outside of not being crushed, this all would've been quite the dilemma for me.  As it were, I was temporarily out of the fight while I waited for the tank to continue rolling over top of me.  There of course was a problem with that scenario: I'm a juggernaut. We don't wait. Grunting as I twisted around, using the pressure of the ground effect field to help me dig out enough space in the hardened ground to get onto my back.  Then it was a simple process of punching upward through the effect field and into the metal bottom of the tank. It took several blows to penetrate through the belly armor, then a couple more to rip it big enough for me to crawl through.  As I worked, I was dragged along by the tank's forward motion, my maxed out absolute density tearing a furrow through the paving and the stone-hard ground beneath. Finally I broke through and, with a grunt, I pulled myself off the ground and into the hole I made.  There, with my feet braced against the ragged sides of the opening, I continued to work my way upward until, almost two metres of armor, electronics and effect assembly later, I burst into the tank's main cabin. Almost immediately chaos ensued as the five velkin inside drew their side arms and began firing at me as I emerged from the ragged hole in the floor.  'Surprise, you green blooded bastards!'  I thought darkly as I clambered free.  They shouted in their gobbling and croaking language as I shrugged off the small arms fire and charged the nearest one.  It was easy to run up the side of the console it was crouching by, moving too quickly for them to continue to aim at me.  Then I was launching from the console top and twisting in midair to drive a clenched fist into the side of that gobby's head, crushing it like a watermelon under a sledgehammer. I hopped off the giant's stove in skull and was making to jump back to the floor when a velkin rifle hit me like a baseball bat, flinging me against the far wall of the tank's cabin.  Again I managed to twist in midair to get my feet under me.  That way, even though I hit hard enough to dent the metal, I was able to launch back off the wall like a shot to drive through that gobby's chest.  I ripped free through the other side in a spray of alien blood and entrails, smoothly rolling and dropping to the deck.

That was two of five down, the other three frantic now that they saw I was difficult to stop.  More croaking shouts echoed in the small space before I darted forward to sweep out the feet of the next giant, who was stumbling in its attempt to avoid the two ruined bodies of its colleagues.  It went down heavily and I ran up its side to stomp on its chest, crushing its internals before using it as a ramp to launch at the last two, which were sitting at the tank's controls. The one on the left I hit in the back of the head, riding it all the way down into the control panel where I crushed it.  With that one taken care of, I shrugged off the side arm blasts from the other to run up the side of the control area and take hold of its head by its helmet.  I then twisted hard enough to rip its head off its body before dropping to the cabin floor.  From there I smashed my way out through the control panel, the tank grinding to a halt behind me. As it exploded with the feedback from the destroyed panel hitting the drive unit, causing it to erupt, I strode from the flames to find myself facing a desperate line of Risen soldiers.  They had been frantically firing at the tank in an attempt to stop it.  They stared wide-eyed at me with fear on their faces, which made me frown.  With the tank out of the way, they shouldn't be, . . . wait.  I still held the giant's head in my hand by my grip on its helmet, didn't I? Lifting it up, I gave its dead face one more look then casually threw the head over my shoulder and smiled.  Immediately the ragged line of Risen erupted into cheers. And ragged they were, a mix of liches, vampires, ghouls and a handful of Transcended, most equipped with Dante's Reapers.  These must be the still standing remnants of whatever flood of Risen had made its way to Retribution in the wake of the new velkin offensive. Then a familiar figure was shouldering his way through, his clothing tattered and his shell scuffed and scratched from seeing heavy duty. "If I had eyes, I'd say they were being deceived."  Hannibal drawled, a smile on his quicksilver features as he parked his Reaper on his shoulder.  "Because they're telling me I'm looking at none other than Max Niekro himself, recently returned from the steppes of Russia!" I grinned. "Hannibal Barca of Cathage."  I said as the echo stepped forward to take my hand in an old style wrist grip.  "I do have eyes, and they're glad to find themselves on you, my friend."  I gave his arm a good shake before letting go.  "Looks like you folks got yourself a bit of a dust up here." Hannibal grimaced as he looked beyond me at the carnage on the battle field.  Then on to the battle still raging close to the base entrance. "What can I say, commander?  The velkin decided to hit us and hit us hard."  His eyes tracked back to me.  "It's been glorious battle, the likes this old ghost's eyes have never before seen.  And we teeter on the edge of defeat.  A single push one way or the other way could determine the course of this fight."  A slight smile touched Hannibal's lips. "Thankfully you've arrived to provide the push in the right direction." I couldn't help chuckling. "That's the general idea."  Then I was sobering.  "Where's the rest of the metal militia?  I thought you echoes stayed pretty close together." Hannibal sighed. "Originally that was the intent.  But when the elements that we took in from the other destroyed Risen installations began to falter during the heat of battle, each of us was assigned by that psionic amazon of yours to bolster select units."  He jerked a thumb back at the ragged company of mixed Risen behind him.  "This lot belongs to me."

I glanced back at the firestorm raging in the heart of the battlefield, fuelled by another strafing run currently at play by the Tigers.  Even as my eyes fell upon it, the seething maelstrom of motion and light was further lit up by several ballista blasts, cutting through several hunters apiece before winking back out. I turned back to an attentive Hannibal. "Kay, this is how we're going to play this, Casper."  I began.  "You and your command will come with me.  We'll swing around the back of that skirmish there and, . . ." Abruptly Hannibal held up a hand, momentarily silencing me with curiosity as a faraway look appeared on his face. "Um, hearing voices from beyond there, Casper?  Whatever you do, don't let them tell you to go into the light.  I still need you here." "Not so much voices, commander."  Hannibal admitted after a long pause as thunderous explosions went off all around us and the air hissed with discharging weapons.  "But I'm definitely feeling something.  At first I thought it was K'ethik, drawn to the carnage.  But this, . . this feels different." I pursed my lips at that.  There was only one thing even remotely K'ethik out there.  And that was Legion.  I still wasn't sure I wanted any of the echoes close to the neo-shell.  If it thought they were rogue shells, it would simply break down their bodies and reclaim them.  But what if it also reclaimed the sliver of psychic energy that kept them existing in our world?  Would I look up and see Hannibal's face floating in one of Legion's little armor blisters, his energy now claimed by the neo-shell? Abruptly I sighed.  Whether it was Hannibal meeting Legion.  Or Legion running into the echoes, eventually they would encounter each other.  It's not like there was a lot of space in New Retribution for the two sides to go about their business without never running into each other.  So I might as well get it over with.  And hope that Legion didn't reclaim the whole shooting match. "That would be Legion you're sensing, Hannibal."  I said and the echo turned and looked at me with a frown. "Legion?"  He repeated and I knew he was drawing the obvious connection between his old life as an opponent of Rome where he faced many legions in battle. "Legion."  I confirmed with a nod.  "A new type of K'ethik that was formed in a nest in Moscow with the sole purpose of returning the K'ethik to their home once their programming is satisfied." "But, . . their programming dictates they stay with the velkin fleet until either they're dead, or the velkin have been destroyed."  Hannibal retorted with a frown. I smiled. "Exactly." I turned to look in the direction I could hear the sound of Legion's cannon firing.  "With an army on its back and incredible power given to it by the fusion of hundreds of K'ethik insect forms, Legion is here to help us." "Help us do what??"  Hannibal said, his confusion deepening. "Win the war against the velkin!" The neo-shell was in the heart of at least twenty hunters, the ruins of several tanks all around, its small caliber weapon chattering as it cut hunter after hunter into pieces.  Hunkered low, I glanced back at Hannibal's second in command, a rather capable lich originally based at Fort Kicking Horse.  Holding up my hand to show all five fingers, I then gestured to the right. Nodding, the lich sent five of his soldiers in that direction to flank the shifting velkin company that surged around Legion.  Another gesture sent five the other way.  Then the rest of us advanced.

"Pick your targets."  I hissed, the order being passed on.  "Make sure you don't hit the big silver guy in the middle.  It won't hurt it, but it'll probably piss it off something fierce!" "Yes, sir!"  The lich said somewhat nervously before passing what I said on.  Then again my hand came up with all five fingers and I began dropping them one at a time.  And when it was a closed fist, the small company of Risen opened fire. With two flanking fire teams and the main body of the small company in the middle, it didn't take long for us to winnow the company around Legion down.  Of course, it didn't hurt that it was helping its own cause.  Legion wore a snarl on its face as it slapped away grabbing hunter hands, shrugged off rifle and side arm plasma fire and sprayed its own weapon liberally at its enemies. The last velkin dropped from a Reaper bolt to the back of its giant head, Legion calmly stepping to the side to let the oversized alien flop to the ground beside it without hitting the neo-shell.  Then it was pushing aside the massive bodies to walk towards us. "Max Niekro."  It greeted me.  "I was confident that tank wouldn't get the best of you.  And yet again you have proved me right."  It paused long enough to send several cannon blasts arching towards the tanks harassing the troops trying to fall back in order to the Bat Cave's primary entrance. "Now we must press against the enemy's flank, and turn them from their efforts to enter New Retribution." - All units to maximum alert. -  Tovin abruptly returned to the broadband to say, her voice hard. - Velkin have entered the base.  I repeat, velkin have entered the base. - "Too late."  I growled, looking over at the frowning neo-shell.  "I just heard on broadband that the base has been penetrated."  I looked over at Hannibal, who was staring at Legion. "Do we have a secondary fall back point, Casper?  Somewhere we can retreat to and regroup?" Tearing his eyes off the powerful neo-shell who, up to this point was ignoring the echo, Hannibal shook his head. "New Retribution is it, Max."  He revealed.  "The velkin offensive has destroyed every other base of significant size across the continent.  Retribution was our fall back.  At least for the Risen in North America." A surge of anger mixed with guilt swept through me.  If I hadn't of jumped to Russia, I could've been here to help organize North America's defense.  Instead, I got embroiled in a conflict between Vorinov and Ulyana that wasted precious resources and time.  Yes, I helped turn two waves of invasion the velkin launched at the Risen forces there.  But, in doing so, wasn't available to do the same here.  'And that might have lost the Risen North America.'  I grimly thought. Legion opening fire with its cannon pulled me from my dark thoughts and I looked over at the neo-shell.  Well, at least my trip to Russia wasn't completely wasted.  If I hadn't of gone, and got my head munched on, we wouldn't have such a powerful K'ethik ally now.  Of course, if we lost New Retribution, it wouldn't matter anyway. "Any ships positioned in orbit to hit us, Legion?"  I tautly asked and it paused in its shelling of the velkin lines to take a look skyward. "Negative, Max Niekro."  It quickly reported.  "Debris only and no other vessels nearby." I jerked a hard nod then looked over at Hannibal. "Time to take Retribution back.  You boys ready?"  And I nearly growled in frustration to find Hannibal's small knot of Risen looking less than certain.

"No, you're not."  I hissed before looking over at Hannibal.  "How about you, general?  Ready to rain some pain down on these gobby bastards?" "Always ready for that, commander."  The echo instantly responded, his answer putting a tight smile of satisfaction on my face. "Outstanding."  I gave the Risen behind him a hard look.  "Time to put on your big boy pants, you lot.  Stay in tight and do exactly what I tell you to do.  Let's go!"  And I turned and began to jog towards the battle churning in front of New Retribution's front door. I couldn't help grimacing in frustration and sadness to see scores of dead Risen on the way across the churned up battlefield, each and every one of them missing their heads.  And most of them wearing Retribution gear.  My battalions had taken a beating here trying to keep the enemy out of the base.  And it appeared no type was spared as I saw javelins, animus, wraiths and ballistas equally represented along with dozens of liches, ghouls and vampires.  Even the odd summoner and pysren were among the dead. Only juggernauts were spared, . . . so far.  At least I hadn't seen any that I had recognized amongst the mounds of the dead again. I came around the hulk of a shattered tank, victim of one of Legion's earlier barrages.  And immediately came to a halt with several squads of hunters directly ahead of me.  They were maybe thirty metres away and working on preparing some sort of digging machine at what appeared to be the collapsed entrance to the hanger.  I could only figure somebody booby-trapped it after I left, and managed to collapse it after the Tigers sprung into the air. I quickly held up a clenched fist to silently order everybody to hold their positions.  Then I turned and waved Legion forward. "Can you rig me up a portable particle cannon?  Something mounted on a tripod?" The neo-shell was already assembling a tripod by the time I had finished my question, breaking down the tank that was serving as our cover to do so. "The K'ethik have experimented with a broad variety of particle beam weapons in our efforts to destroy the velkin," Legion quickly explained as it assembled a heavy barrel.  "With the exotic metals found in velkin armor, thanks to their many conquests of lesser species in the galactic arm, low density particle beams were dissipated or absorbed without effecting any damage."  It paused long enough to mount the barrel, complete with an aiming and triggering mechanism on the tripod before moving it to the corner of what was left of our cover. "Only high density particles approaching true atomic diameters proved effective in battle.  Propelled by fields lending gigajoule levels of potential energy to the beams, they were highly effective in combat." Hannibal frowned as he looked at me. "Did you catch any of that, commander?  Because all that went over this old ghost's head." I shrugged. "Doesn't matter, Casper."  I paused to nod my thanks to Legion before I stepped in behind the cannon and took aim. "I don't need to understand how it works.  As long as it kills velkin, I'm good."  Then I depressed the firing mechanism. The brilliant blue-white beam caught the first squad amidships, cutting them in half with barely a pause.  I quickly swung the cannon around and sent another pulse through the digging device  and the squad that was working on that.  The device, some sort of energy beam borer, immediately exploded, the force of the resulting fireball scattering the pieces of the hunters I cut in half. Somewhat protected from the explosion by both a greater distance from the device and their armor, the remaining hunters turned and began firing. "Move up and engage."  I ordered curtly and Hannibal led his squad to where I continued to deploy the cannon, ripping through the hunters' tall bodies with my energy beam scythe.  Seeing that most of the hunters were already down, Hannibal's squads grew a bit more confident and began laying down a decent rate of fire to target the survivors.  Hannibal himself took up position to my right, while Legion stood on my left, both the echo shell and the neo-shell opening up with everything they had to drop the rest. Under the withering crossfire, the hunters quickly fell and in a couple minutes we had destroyed their efforts to penetrate the base through the collapsed hanger entrance.  The main entrance, however, was a different story. Swarmed by hunters, the last of the surviving Risen that were making a stand there were either dead or had withdrawn behind the heavy door we had erected to protect the main entrance.  Now a building-sized tank had rumbled up to less than ten metres from the door and was methodically pounding at it with its cannon.  Smaller breaches were already visible on either side, through which squads of hunters were deploying, using some sort of portable crane to lower them in. "Can I carry this thing?"  I asked Legion, then collapsed the tripod and put the barrel on my shoulder without waiting for it to reply.  I then hustled to where a heap of Risen bodies provided a little bit of cover.  The velkin had pushed them there to give the tank access to the front entrance. Ignoring the urge to examine the bodies for somebody I knew, since many were wearing battalion uniforms, I set the tripod back up. "There, there and there."  I pointed to where I wanted Hannibal to deploy his soldiers.  "As soon as I cut that tank in half, I need you to hit anything over fifteen feet tall." "Copy that, commander."  Hannibal grimly replied, already positioning his men. Seeing that he was ready, I then thumbed the cannon back on and took aim.   The tank was the victim of the first pulse, the high density particles accelerated to nearly light speed more than enough to turn the hardened armor into so much melting wax.  'Man, if we would've had this kinda tech when the gobbies first landed, we never would've lost!'  I silently enthused, nodding in appreciation of the cannon's power as Hannibal's soldiers opened up on the survivors.  Well, at least the humans wouldn't of lost. Legion cut down the last of hunters menacing the entrance and again I put the cannon over my shoulder so we could advance. "C'mon, boys."  I growled as I legged it towards the ruin that was what was left of Retribution's front door.  "There are velkin in our house.  And just like any vermin, we need to find them."  I looked back at Hannibal, Legion and the handful of Risen following them. "Find them and kill them all!"  Then I was hopping into the next hole leading downward.

 

Chapter 18: The Perfect Storm

My knees flexed to absorb the impact of dropping maybe twenty metres onto solid rock.  Then I was peering down the corridor I had jumped into to see weapon discharges further down.  A heart beat later Legion was landing beside me, then Hannibal, both shells with weapons ready. "Looks like our soldiers are giving them a fight."  Hannibal noted, his head swinging towards several dead velkin  stretched out in the corridor.  Most had died from being shot in the face, the giants forced to crouch in order to make their way down the wide, but only three metre high passageway.  In that position they'd be far more vulnerable.  Yet it would be very difficult to resist when giants start crawling into your corridors, taking up space and pushing forward by size alone.  And the aliens' intrusion had quickly generated success; almost twice as many Risen were unmoving amongst the much larger corpses of their enemy. "It would've been better if the defenders had managed to keep the gobbies bottled up here."  I husked, tearing my eyes away from the fallen Risen that lay thick on every side.  "They could've held them back almost infinitely." "If this was the only access point."  Hannibal pointed out. "The empty shell is correct."  Legion rumbled, acknowledging Hannibal for the first time.  "I detected multiple breaches into the upper corridors of the base.  Many were even large enough to accommodate a velkin hunter with little difficulty." "Empty shell?"  I repeated, pushing aside the neo-shell's findings for a moment to frown over at it.  The neo-shell gestured at Hannibal, who also looked over at Legion with a frown. "Yes, that."  It said.  "It wears the battered body of an insect form.  Yet no K'ethik essence is detectable inside.  It is, . . empty." "But I'm inside."  Hannibal insisted, his words garnering a look from Legion. "I acknowledge something exists within the shell, or it wouldn't be animated and possess the power of speech.  However such a force is beyond my ability to detect.  So I have categorized it as empty." Well, that would certainly explain why Legion was doing such a good job of ignoring Hannibal up to this point. "Hannibal is the psychic echo of a man who died violently a long time ago."  I explained, bringing Legion's attention back to me.  "He and several other echoes were strong enough as energy sources to take possession of insect forms and treat them as their own bodies." Legion gazed at me for a long moment, before turning to look back at Hannibal. "And these, . . echoes are allies?"  It wanted to know. "Indeed they are."  I quickly confirmed. "Very well.  I grant them amnesty from my reclamation protocol.  I will not reclaim this, . . echo.  Or any others identified as such." "Well, that's a relief."  Hannibal muttered.  Then a loud explosion down the corridor was reclaiming our attention. That prompted the Carthaginian to look back up at the hole we had dropped down. "Down you come, boys."  He shouted up at the hole.  "On the double!"  And his Risen soldiers started dropping down, landing as best they could before taking up positions all around the frowning echo.  It didn't take long before they were throwing fearful glances at the dead giants all around us, some packed so close together we would be forced to squeeze through if we wanted to reach the corridor's end. Legion solved that problem for us.  Striding forward, it began breaking the giant bodies down into multi-colored sand.  A heart beat later it was tossing a carrying strap and an adaptor to move the triggering mechanism to top mount back to me.

"That should make the weapon easier to trigger while carrying it, Max Niekro."  It indicated before it carried on, breaking down the giants as it went.  I frowned as I first set up the carrying strap then attached the adaptor and grinned when I found both processes ridiculously easy. "You said it, Legion.  Thanks."  Taking a good grip on the cannon, now slung onto my hip mini-gun style, I strode after him. As I did, Hannibal took a couple quick steps to catch up with me. "How does he do that?"  The echo asked, looking over at me.  It was the neo-shell that answered, however. "Molecular reassignment."  It said over its shoulder.  "The omni field projected by my armor allows interaction with matter at the molecular level.  Similar to the mechanism you have in your shell, echo, that allows conversion of standard matter to zero-gap metal, I can alter the molecular composition of any material the field interacts with.  In this case, conversion of organic and non-organic molecules into a crystalline structure that can be used as a base material for later composition and fabrication.  Strengthening the field allows me to alter the matter at the atomic level, enabling conversion of organic to non-organic and back again.  Thus I can make zero-gap metal out of water, as an example." "Oh."  Hannibal said with a confused look on his face and I almost laughed out loud at seeing it.  Then Legion's clearing of the way opened up the corridor enough that I saw the massive heap of broken and seared Risen bodies where the defenders had tried making a stand and any humor was seared out of me. "Damn it."  I hissed.  Then I was striding forward, the particle cannon swinging back and forth looking for a clear target. Again the bodies were mostly Retribution Risen, first, second and third battalion, going by the flashes on their shoulder.  Risen I had fought with.  Risen I had freed from shambler hell.  My friends. The corridor abruptly opened up, a precursor to it running into the base's main chamber.  And, as we stepped into it, a squad of velkin appeared from another side corridor in confirmation of Legion stating other access points now existed.  I didn't care about that now.  All I cared about was burning some of these sonofabitches into ash! I snarled soundlessly as I brought the cannon to bear, the corridor lighting up with blue-white fire as I streamed several pulses of high density particle beam right at them.  Four went down almost immediately, their disconnected parts steaming in the cooler air beneath ground.  The others spun in an attempt to train their weapons onto us. And found themselves instead in a hail of blue-green light as Hannibal and his squad opened up on them.  They were quickly dropped to the hard ground. I stepped to the nearest one, dead thanks to no less than four holes in its chest and kicked its lifeless leg. "We need to get ahead of these bastards."  I growled.  "What I wouldn't give for a, . . "  I gave my head a hard shake. - Any psyrens on broadband? -  My attempt to reach one of the base's psionics was greeted with heavy silence.  Grimacing, I tried again. - Any psyrens on broadband? - - This is Sokol. -  Came a faint reply. - Sokol!  This is Commander Max Niekro.  My team and I are advancing into the main part of the base and need a jump into, . . - - My apologies, commander. -  The psyren interrupted, her voice even fainter.  - But I've been badly injured.  I no longer have the capability to teleport.  In fact, I can no longer feel my legs.  I'm so so, . . . wait, I see movement.  Oh blessed Earth Mother, it's another squad of velkin.  And they've spotted me.  Please, sir, . . I'm just inside the entry from the hanger deck.  If you can, I need, . . -  Abruptly her voice cut off and I felt a mental twisting as the telepathic link we had was roughly severed as well.  It didn't take much intelligence to figure out how.

"Fuck!"  I snarled.  Then I was running as quickly as I could without going into juggernaut mode. "Max!'  Hannibal shouted after me as he, Legion and Hannibal's squad had to sprint to try to catch up.  "Where are you going?" "To stop the velkin from killing any more of my people!"  I shouted back then put my head down and went all out. Twice more I hit a branching of corridors where velkin were slowly making their way inward and I viciously chopped them to pieces with the particle cannon, the beam cutting through them to leave glowing grooves in the hard stone.  I would then dance through their mangled bodies before continuing on. Finally I burst into the main chamber.  And nearly staggered to a halt at catching sight of the carnage.  Everywhere I looked there were bodies, mostly Risen.  Most were missing most, if not all their heads.  Only a few velkin were down, in comparison.  The overhead lights flickered fitfully, many cut off from their power sources and reduced to backup batteries.  And many of the buildings were seared or burning outright.  The vista made me almost physically ill, which should've been impossible being undead and all. If I hadn't of caught sight of a couple fierce firefights in and around a couple of the more heavily built structures near the back wall, I would've lost all hope.  There, the ballistas I had seen firing back on the surface, were keeping the aliens back with well placed blasts.  Which were quickly followed up by precision javelin bolts and Reaper fire.  Whoever was in command down there, they knew what the hell they were doing. "Blessed dark seas." Hannibal breathed in terrible awe as he staggered to a halt beside me.  I glanced over at him. "Can you get a line on any of the other echoes?"  I grimly asked and he turned away from the horror of the carnage-filled cavern to tilt his head slightly to the side. "Yes.  All are active." I nodded. "Where?"  I asked and he turned to point to the most fierce of the firefights.  Even as I also turned to see where he was pointing, several giants out of the thick ring they had thrown up around the building fell back, armor smoking. "There."  He growled. "Then that's where we're going."  I tracked over to the other big firefight, raging in and around the field hospital.  "With a stop right there."  I pointed to a spot in between the two fights.  "That way we'll have an angle to cut the outside of both enemy positions apart without endangering our people inside." "Sounds good by me."  Hannibal said, hefting his Reaper. "I agree."  Legion said with a nod, a hand morphing into its cannon.  Seeing that, I shot it a look. "No heavy ordnance, Legion.  Spacing is insufficient to keep our people out of the blast radius."  I tightly advised.  The K'ethik threw me a quick look and just as quickly nodded, its hand morphing into its small caliber rapid fire weapon. "Perfect."  I paused to look back at Hannibal, then at his squad.  Then I was looking forward. "Let's move." Staying low, our small unit moved through the open space between the near wall and where the fighting was heavy.  Not wanting to attract undue attention until we were in position, I ignored several squads of velkin methodically moving through the cavern, hunting down Risen that had decided to hide instead of fight.  Seeing that, I momentarily wondered if the humans had done the same thing.  Or if they were all dead as well, snacks for the giants that were sullying the Bat Cave.

Then we were in position. "Stay low."  I commanded before I stood and took aim with the cannon at the velkin threatening the spot where the other echoes had joined the defenders in a last ditch attempt to keep the aliens back. "Pick your targets, boys.  And drop as many as you can.  Fire."  Then I was opening up with the cannon. The blue-white pulses scythed into the unsuspecting velkin, dropping half of their company and tearing up their makeshift barricade within seconds.  Even more were cut down by Legion, Hannibal and the small group of soldiers we had with us.  In a few seconds we had virtually emptied the velkin position, the gobbies caught completely with their pants down.  And we weren't done there. "Other side."  I grated and, as one, everybody turned to take aim at the other alien position menacing the hospital.  For my part, I swung wide and took the opportunity to fire at any velkin group I could see in the vast cavern.  And, in doing so, managed to catch several by surprise, chopping them into pieces before I was finally into position to take a bead on the opposite side. "Fire."  I rasped and again we opened upon the dug in velkin. This time we were joined by a handful of the Risen that had been holding the other building.  After we cleaned out the positions that pinned them down, they had ventured out to see what had happened.  And found our little squad letting the aliens outside the hospital have it.  With flares of light, ballista blasts snapped past us to take out even more, javelin fire right on its heels.  And the position was cleared almost twice as fast. Momentarily satisfied, I turned once again away to let the cannon do the talking, the bright light of the powerful pulses lighting up the shadowy corners of the vast chambers.  I made two passes, keeping the beam at about three metres off the ground so only velkin were targeted.  Then I was lifting the muzzle and a dirty, bloodied Justice stepped forward, a grin on his face. "I should've guessed it was you, sir."  The ballista said, sounding exhausted but oddly exhilarated.  "You fired off those missiles too, didn't you?" "Guilty."  I husked.  I reached out and send a surge of goa into Justice's body, watching as he visibly straightened.  "Let's go and clean out the rest of these gobby scum, shall we?" It took nearly three hours to clean the rest of the velkin out of the base.  And another hour to take out the stragglers that were hunting around outside.  As we did so, we found out what caught their interest out there. "Commander Ambriel, I presume?"  Pushing aside the last dead giant, I came to stand in front of what looked like a rather unassuming shack. "Max?"  Ambriel's voice lifted from inside with a laugh of pure relief.  "Is that you??" I grinned as the door to the shack flung open, revealing a ladder leading downward to a bolt hole the humans had used at the end of the fight to hold the enemy out of the Bat Cave to isolate themselves.  Along with all the Risen they had rescued.  Then the young woman was in my arms, laughing and crying at the same time.  I found myself hugging her right back, extremely relieved that my decision to bring the humans to Retribution hadn't resulted in all their deaths. "Come on, Ambriel."  I finally said, leaning back from her so I could look down into her face.  "We need you and yours downstairs to help clean up." She quickly nodded, her smile brilliant. "After you, good sir!"  She said with another laugh. As we walked back to the secondary entrance we had used to climb out of the Bat Cave to begin securing the area around the base, I looked over at her.  And marveled how much the young woman had matured in the few days I had been gone. Carrying her Reaper with confident familiarity, Ambriel walked with firm, determined steps, her eyes moving to examine her surroundings with intent.  And she took the lead, her grim looking fellow humans looking to her to set the pace.  Seeing all of that, I found myself smiling.  She was certainly rounding into the leader the Earth Mother had hoped she would become.  'Funny how a trip through the crucible of battle will do that.'  I mused. Downstairs the human leader showed equal poise as we began the difficult job of policing the base and taking care of the fallen.  Thankfully I quickly discovered the reason Justice had been so determined to protect the building he had made his last stand in, was the handful of unconscious and injured psyrens that were inside.  A battered but serviceable summoner was retrieved from the chaos at the hospital and we quickly revived them, their number including no less than Tovin, Magda, Ronin and Chi. I left them to recover without revealing myself, joining Legion and the echoes to return to the hospital.  There I found an exhausted Boost trying his level best to put as many wounded Risen back together as he could.  A hand on his shoulder refilled his goa and he looked back, eyes wide, to laugh out loud upon seeing me. "Max!  Hot damn!"  He cried, relief and happiness in his voice.  "You made it back."  He stepped in close to give me a tight embrace before stepping back to smile at me. "Yeah."  My return smile was sad.  "Just not in time." "Don't kick yourself too hard, my friend."  Boost quickly said, laying a sympathetic hand on my shoulder.  "We had eight second gen juggernauts here and they couldn't hold them back.  It was the perfect storm of violence and death.  And we were in the middle of it." I sighed and nodded.  Boost was right, of course.  If I had been here at the beginning, I may have become a victim of this massive assault instead of cutting away at the edges until it fell apart. "Speaking of those juggernauts, happen to know where they are?"  I asked and frowned when Boost slowly shook his head. "They were still topside when Tovin made the call for everybody to retreat into the base."  The veteran summoner said with a frown of his own.  "Probably thought they could make a difference with the extra room our people leaving would bring." "Except I didn't see them out there."  I revealed with a sigh.  Then I was pasting a smile on my face and giving Boost a slap on the shoulder. "Going to go and help with the clean up.  Let me know if you need anything, eh?" "Of course, of course."  Boost said and I could feel his eyes follow me as I stepped to the door leading outside. I managed to clear the doorway before, hitting me hard enough to knock the wind out of me, Twitch flung herself into my arms.  She clung to me as she cried hoarse, body-wracking sobs. "Shhhh, it's okay."  I said, awkwardly stroking her short shorn hair.  "It's over." "It's over."  She echoed with a tear-frogged voice.  "New Retribution, our team, everything." I frowned at that, an expression that was becoming all too familiar on my face. "New Retribution took a pounding but its still here, Twitch."  I said, trying to make my voice as reassuring as possible. "Maybe."  She said before pulling away from me, her pert face miserable.  "But Kat is dead.  So is Jolt.  With Charge already gone, there's nothing left of our team." What??  Kat?  Oh no, not, . . . Felix.

 

Operation Phoenix

I let a long sigh ease out of my nostrils as I stared at Felix's blood stained chair in the shattered remains of his work space.  While I didn't miss him like I missed Charge and Kat, since I never really got to fight side by side with him, the veteran tesla's death definitely left a hole in my life.  He had been a colleague and a good friend. Kat, on the other hand, . . . her loss made my heart hurt.  We had faced redeath together at Campton, had fought together at the hub raid and during the fight at the northern velkin base.  Nothing brings soldiers together faster than spilling the same blood in the same mud.  I could still remember with absolute clarity the first day I met her.  That bright smile, her saucy walk as she convinced the vampires to let us join them at what would become Fort Retribution, her bubbling energy, . . while I hadn't been her team mate as long as Twitch had, I knew I would miss her dearly.  Damn it, I already did. "We're all going to miss Jolt around here, sir."  Dante husked, interrupting my thoughts as he stepped out  to find me staring at Felix's chair.  He had been furiously trying to repair some power conduits when I came in a few minutes ago.  And he must've gotten curious when I didn't leave right away and decided to come take a peek.  The tesla was dirty and tired, his face smudged with bonding paste and grime.  And yet there was a purpose about him, a resolve that I could see even at a glance.  However he had been involved in the fight to save New Retribution, Dante hadn't let the horrible destruction and redeath get him down.  If anything, it had filled him with a grim desire to work even harder to see this war won. "He was an experienced and valuable asset to the cause that mentored not only myself, but all the teslas under his command.  He will be sorely missed."  Dante finished by bowing his head. I sighed again and wiped away the tears I hadn't felt my eyes shedding.  You had no idea, pal. "They will all be missed."  I husked, the muscle in my jaw dancing with tension. We held a small ceremony for the fallen after we finished cleaning up the base's interior and sealing up the holes the aliens had made.  The sun was just peaking up over the horizon as Ambriel and I were joined by a handful of other Risen by a memorial Hannibal and the echoes had carved from a piece of granite brought up out of the mine's depths.  On the stone, a two metre high obelisk with a polished place for the names, they had engraved the names of the Risen who gave their undead lives to protect New Retribution. After a few words spoken in remembrance, we all bowed our heads for a moment of silence.  Following the moment of silence they quietly filed off, with Ambriel last to leave after she gave me a silent but comforting hug. Then I was once again alone, staring at the names of those who I had made into soldiers to fight the Earth Mother's war.  Some I had barely known, their faces a blur.  Those I skipped over quickly.  Others, however, . . reading them was like a punch to the gut.  Felix, Kat, Helo, Jace, Vanessa, . . they began to blur as the tears returned unbidden.  For a moment Jace's blond hair danced in my mind's eye, along with the feel of her lips on mine, . . . "Well, aren't you a sight for sore eyes, Max."  A quiet voice pointed out with a familiar Celtic lilt.  My brow lifting in astonishment, I turned and found an exhausted, bloodied and dirty Firinne staggering towards me. Two step and I caught her before she sagged to the ground.  And as she collapsed into my arms, I caught a whiff of an all too familiar scent of ozone, the smell that accompanied the blasts that dropped during an orbital bombardment.  And I realized in that moment why we hadn't seen the juggernauts return to the base. "Aw damn."  I husked as she looked up at me with tired eyes.  "You were caught in the bombardment before we could bring the ships down." "We had gathered to begin retreating back into the Bat Cave.  Jen wanted to keep us close in case we needed to support the retreat.  That's when the blasts started dropping out of the sky.  I couldn't get out of the way."  She husked, eyes closing as she leaned against me.  "It took everything I had to pull my charred body out of the hole the blast put me in and put myself back together.  Then I had to steal some clothes from a dead Risen before I collapsed back into the bushes, unconscious."

I slowly shook my head in astonishment.  What were the odds that all the juggernauts would be in the same place, at the same time just as an orbital blast was dropped on them? "Firinne."  I quietly said and her eyes flickered open.  "Did any of the other juggernauts get clear of the blast crater along with you?" The redheaded juggernaut thought a moment then shrugged. "I don't know, Max."  She admitted.  "My eyes were burnt out of my skull.  I couldn't see.  I had to fumble in the dirt to get myself clear.  That's all I remember." I nodded tightly then she was gasping as I filled her to the brim with goa. "I need you to lead me there.  Now." It was a massive hole, nearly twenty metres across, where three or four blasts must've hit at the same time.  Looking down into it from the charred and glassed rim, my lips pursed in grim thought. "They saw you."  I noted in a low voice, still staring down into the crater.  "The velkin saw you gather and knew they had to take a shot at you."  I looked over at a thoughtful Firinne.  "All of the juggernauts in one spot?  It would've been impossible to ignore." "It certainly would've."  She agreed, returning my gaze with a great deal of unhappiness in her face.  "We became vulnerable when we put ourselves together like that." I nodded in agreement before I hopped into the crater to walk to what appeared to be a charred skeleton.  As I came closer, I saw that it indeed was a skeleton, and a small one at that.  That close I quickly saw why it was still laying there unmoving.  Somehow it's neck had been shattered, separating the head from the body. Seeing that, my face tightened.  How was it possible that a juggernaut could've had its neck broken?  I pondered that as I knelt beside the tiny body.  There was only one juggernaut that size: Aria. Realizing that I had found someone, Firinne hastened down into the crater to join me.  It didn't take her long to also realize who the tiny skeleton belong to. "Oh Aria."  She quietly husked, tears appearing in her eyes.  "She fought like a tigress in that battle.  Sometimes even turning a particularly brutal attack by herself.  To be brought down like this, . . ."  She stammered into silence. "She died doing what we are all called here to do, Firinne."  I gently said, standing to put a comforting hand on her shoulder.  "She died in battle, as we should all hope to do.  She's gone to her well deserved rest." Nodding, the red haired juggernaut hugged herself in silent misery.  They had been reformatted together, had fought together, and were friends.  It would be hard for her to forget the petite juggernaut who had given her undead life so that others could carry on to fight another day. Something caught my eye as I looked past Firinne.  Damn it, another skeleton.  Stepping by the grieving Scottish Risen, I moved closer.  And immediately grimaced when I found this one had its neck shattered as well. Kneeling again, I reached out and touched a charred leg bone.  And watched as it fell apart like flimsy spun glass.  I sighed at my discovery.  Somehow the blast had made the bones brittle, so when the flesh was seared off and the Risen fell to the ground unconscious, the impact made the bones break apart, like a heat-seared glass took little force to shatter.  Both Aria and this one had hit the ground just right so their necks took the brunt of the impact, breaking them. Unfortunately all I could tell from this skeleton was that it was male, with an average build.  A couple of the male juggernauts were built like that: the East Indian Dack, and Hammer.  Unfortunately I would need to find the survivors to figure out who it was.

Firinne pulled herself together when she caught sight of me rising to my feet once more. "Is that, . . is that another body?"  She managed to ask and I curtly nodded.  "Can you tell who?"  She sighed raggedly in relief when I shook my head.  "I, . . I can't see any others." "Neither can I."  I rasped, looking up at the crater's edge.  "They may have had enough strength to pull themselves clear, like you did."  I looked back over at her.  "I'm going to take a look." "I'll come with you."  She said, mopping away the last of her tears with the back of her hand and together we strode up the side of the crater. Almost immediately we found another charred skeleton, claw marks in the ground revealing that it had indeed pulled itself out of the crater before the last of its strength failed it.  I quickly knelt on one side as Firinne knelt on the other. "The other two died because they were caught at the epicenter."  I said, looking over at Firinne.  "The heat there was so great, it crystallized their bones, making them brittle." "So that's why Aria's neck was broken."  The redhead said with an understanding nod.  "She must've fallen with those brittle bones and hit just right to make her neck shatter." "So I figured."  I said before carefully reaching out to touch the unmoving skeleton's leg.  Phew!  It had almost normal consistency. "Looks like whoever this is, their bones weren't made so brittle.  A goa boost should revive them."  Firinne nodded in agreement and also held out her hand.  Together we sent a flow of goa into the charred body and watched as Violet reappeared, reassembled layer by tissue layer until she was laying naked on the ground. The brunette juggernaut sucked in a ragged breath, then twisted to look first at me then over at Firinne with wide eyes. "Uh."  She began.  "Hello." "Hello."  Firinne said with a smile.  "And welcome back."  The redhead continued even as I knelt beside the startled and confused Violet to carefully wrap my jacket around her. Violet twitched as I began to put my jacket around her before twisting once more to stare hard at me.  Then she was collapsing against me to sob quietly.  Putting my arms around her, I looked up at Firinne as I gently rocked the brunette juggernaut back and forth. "Put in a call for a psyren or two, and several kits of clothing."  I said, cradling Violet against me. "On it."  Firinne said. By the time Ronin and Tovin winked into view along with Boost, the three of them carrying several duffels with clothing in them, Violet had calmed down enough to climb to her feet, staying close to Firinne and I. "Max."  Tovin greeted me in that smooth, soft voice of hers.  Yet I could feel the weight of her gaze from beneath her hood like somebody dropped a velkin tank on my head.  She hadn't attended the small ceremony we had at the obelisk as she was still recovering from her injuries so this was the first time I had seen her awake since returning. "Good to have you back." "Good to be back, Tovin."  I replied, careful with what I said.  The veteran psyren hadn't exactly endorsed my impromptu jump to Moscow.  In retrospect, she was wise not to.  That had been 95% disaster, with only 5% success, . . at best. "Sorry I'm late." "We all are."  She quietly replied.  Yet those three words hit me like a battering ram, each further propelled by that weighty gaze of hers.  I couldn't help but blink in reaction before sucking in a deep breath.  Before I could speak, however, she went on.

"And we are also thankful that you arrived in time to defeat the velkin that nearly destroyed us." "Without a doubt."  Ronin chose that point to interject.  The veteran psyren was easily one of the strongest, most consistent of the first wave of second gen Transcended we had managed to make from the handful of shamblers we had found while at Fort Retribution seemingly forever ago.  So it made perfect sense that she would be one of those that survived the massive velkin assault. As I looked over at her, she inclined her hooded head in my direction. "You have our utmost thanks, commander."  Ronin added.  "Without you, we are truly lost." I sighed at that, momentarily unable to find the words to reply.  Thankfully Violet saved me as, having dressed behind a drape Firinne had held up for her, she stepped up and gave me another fierce hug. "And, thanks to you, sir, we are found."  She said with a big smile. "So you are."  I replied before taking a quick look at the surrounding woods.  "Now, let's go find the rest of you, shall we?" Even with Tovin and Ronin actively scanning with their telepathy, it took us the better part of three hours to locate the remains of the rest of the juggernauts, each still a skeleton.  Some managed to crawl a considerable distance into the undergrowth, blind, deaf and unable to know where they were.  And in doing so, very effectively hid themselves even from a determined search. So it was almost noon by the time we recovered the last one,  Which, coincidentally enough, was Jen. "Oh Max!"  She quietly sobbed as she clung shivering to me even while Firinne and Tumult tried to get a blanket around her naked body.  "Thank the Earth Mother you are alive!" "I could say the same thing about you, love."  I quietly replied.  Instead of crying even louder, which I half expected, she leaned back from me instead and laughed through the tears. "I can imagine."  She said with a brilliant smile.  "What was left of me?  A couple neck bones attached to a skull?  I swear, that shot hit us right on!"  I grinned at hearing that, pleasantly surprised at Jen's new found strength and maturity.  Had her brush with command in my absence done her good? "Shots."  Firinne corrected her as Jen finally stepped back enough to let the redhead and honey blond Tumult put the blanket around her.  "Max figures they were watching us work.  And when they saw us gather all in one spot just as the evacuation started, they couldn't pass up the chance to hit us all at the same time.  Three of the second wave of ships fired on the same spot simultaneously." I nodded in confirmation when the exotic brunette looked over at me with a question on her face. "And now I can officially welcome you into the Crispy Critters Club, Jen."  I turned to look at the rest of them.  "All of you.  Although you have a ways to catch up."  I said with a half smile.  "Since I got hit again in Moscow." "That's our Max."  Simon said with an answering grin.  "One shot takes us all out and two haven't even slowed you down, bro."  Then he looked around.  "I see just about everybody here.  Except Aria and Dack.  Have we not found them yet?" I sighed. "Simon, we found them first." The juggernauts were silent as they looked down at the two brittle skeletons in the center of the massive blast crater. "Oh Dack!"  Brin quietly said, her voice froggy with emotion.  She and the East Indian had been reformatted together.  Then she was turning to bury her face in Simon's chest, the West Coast native juggernaut holding her close and murmuring words of comfort as he did.

For her part, Jen had fitted herself to my side, both arms looped around my torso.  Despite the sadness on her face, there was also a note of acceptance in her voice when she spoke. "I almost can't believe Aria is gone.  I remembered her standing right beside me before the shot hit." "A lot of Risen died today."  I gently pointed out.  "I'm just glad you're not one of them." She looked up at me with a brilliant smile.  Then she was reaching up to cup the back of my head with her hand to tenderly pull me towards her so she could kiss me deeply. "Because you came looking for me."  She said after our lips parted a while later.  Then she made a gesture that took in all the surviving juggernauts.  "You came looking for all of us." I smiled. "Only because Firinne let me know you had all somehow survived the bombardment.'  I said, throwing a smile over at the redhead, who had looked in our direction at the mention of her name.  Her return smile was as brilliant as Jen's had been. "Now that you've managed to reconstitute the juggernauts, Max, what do you intend to do next?"  Tovin quietly asked from where she and Ronin had been silently hovering, allowing the juggernauts their moment to grieve over fallen comrades. "A good question, old friend."  Boost added from where he stood close by.  He had worked hard along side Firinne and I to put the juggernauts back together and looked tired.  Not like he had spent the better part of the night putting Risen survivors back together before that.  The guy was a steely eyed super soldier. "The base is in disarray, our forces are seriously depleted and the enemy knows where we are." I slowly nodded in acknowledgement of every point.  My instinct was to answer fire with fire.  With Legion on hand, we could construct K'ethik tech weapons and pound the living shit outta the gobbies. But instinct had tossed me a world away to Moscow in response to a distress signal that may or may not have been sincere.  And in doing so, I left my command to their own devices in the face of a massive velkin assault.  An assault they almost didn't survive.  As it was, we took horrible, horrible losses. So I cudgeled my brain for an answer that was more than instinct, better than gut reaction.  Something that could actually advance our cause in this war.  As I did so, I thrust my free hand into my right pocket, with my left over Jen's shoulders.  And my fingers found something buried at the very bottom. Frowning, I pulled it free and looked at it.  And recognized it as the scrap of fabric Daria had handed me with the cryptic 'if Ulyana finds out I gave this to you, she'll kill me'.  But, . . it was just a piece of cloth.  No writing on it, no mystic symbols, . . Or so I thought. "Max!"  Tovin suddenly exclaimed.  "What is that, that you have in your hand?" "This?"  I held up the piece of fabric. Instantly Tovin was beside me, staring at it. "May I see that?"  she asked carefully.  I shrugged. "Sure.  But it's just a piece of a shirt, . . ." "That has been impregnated with psionic images and data."  Tovin finished for me, her voice hushed in astonishment.  "I am seeing protocols for new types of offensive psionic attacks, including something called a psychic shock, a pyrokinetic cocoon and TK battering rams." I blinked in stunned shock.  Those were Valkyrie battle protocols!  But Ulyana had made it a strict point to keep all that inhouse.  That way the advantage would always remain with the Valkyries if it came down to a Risen on Risen fight with Vorinov.  If I was hearing Tovin correctly, Daria had basically sold Ulyana out, to make sure the psyrens in the rest of the world had the Valkyrie protocols in their fight against the velkin.  I had to shake my head in amazement.  What a gift this was.

Then Tovin was reclaiming my attention. "Where, . . where did you get this?"  She asked, her eyes burning into me with an intensity I hadn't felt before from her. "The Valkyries.  They were a female-only group of Risen just outside of Moscow that trained their psyrens to fight in combat." "Astonishing!"  Ronin breathed, having joined Tovin in examining the scrap of fabric.  "These protocols change everything." "And nothing at all, Ronin."  Tovin was quick to remind her.  "As you know, psionic power is finite.  If a psyren decides to use her energies in battle, instead of her traditional support role, she won't have enough to telepathically communicate with the rest of her team.  Or to teleport that team out of harm's way." "It's definitely a trade off."  I said.  "While it was amazing to see the Valkyrie psyrens work, dropping velkin left and right, they couldn't teleport more than twenty metres at a time in any direction.  And telepathy was sparse at best during combat." "I will have to gather the surviving psyrens to discuss this discovery and how we can best utilize it going forward."  Tovin said firmly.  "That is, if I have your permission to keep this data."  She held up the scrap of fabric. I quickly nodded. "Of course.  At this point, with our numbers so low, we need every advantage we can get."  I said.  Before I could continue, however, Ronin was leaning in to stare at the scrap. "Wait."  She breathed.  "I see something else.  Something encoded on the very bottom.  It's a series of numbers and letters in sequence." "Oh?"  I looked over at Boost and pantomimed writing.  He quickly fished out a notebook and a pen and tossed it to me. "Can you read the sequence out loud?"  And I wrote the numbers down as Ronin then proceeded to say them out loud. Once they were done, I stared down at them. "What do they mean?"  Jen asked with a frown as Boost and the juggernauts crowded around me to take a look at the sequence. "Looks like some sort of code."  Hammer suggested.  "Like a password." I nearly slapped my forehead as I realized why the sequence looked so familiar. "Or a satellite uplink code!"  I exclaimed.  "We need to jump to the control center and put this past Felix, . . "  I paused to sigh as a pang of loss rippled through me before I could stop it.  "Sorry.  Past Dante, I mean.  If this is an uplink code, . . ." Then with a wink of light we were standing in the control room, a few feet away from where Dante had nearly finished repairing one of the work stations.  I glanced over at Tovin and Ronin. "Thank you, ladies."  I said.  Then I was striding over to where Dante was working.  "Dante, I have a code I need you to punch up for me.  It's a satellite code i got while I was over in Moscow." "A Russian bird?"  The tesla asked as he stood up from the computer core he had been working on to take the notepad.  "That could give us an angle of access that we didn't previous have."  He dropped into the work station's seat and quickly brought everything on line.  "Thankfully the gobbies didn't damage the external comm array."  A satellite access interface appeared on the screen in front of him.  After glancing at the code, he then typed it into the general broadcast field and sent out a ping to see if anything would answer. "Now, if this bird is still active, a ping with the code should activate an uplink request."  Dante explained, looking over his shoulder.  It was then that he noticed the other juggernauts and his face split into a huge grin. "Ha!  You found your missing colleagues!  But where?" Before I could answer him, the screen beeped and an uplink request appeared. "Wait."  Dante turned back to the screen.  "I know Felix could've done all this stuff with one eye closed and both hands behind his back but I need to focus."  His fingers danced nimbly over the interface for a moment then he sat back with a smile. "There!"  He declared, looking back at me.  "I've got us an uplink.  Now, all we have to do is find out what kind of bird this is, . . ." The tesla said, turning back to the screen.  Where his voice immediately died as he found it completely filled with information, scrolling in endless streams both horizontally and vertically. "Is there, . . a problem?"  I asked, staring at the screen.  In reply, Dante's fingers returned with a vengeance to the interface, dancing over the keys as if they were possessed. Then he was quietly swearing under his breath before he said:  "Damn it, they did it.  They actually did it." "Did what, man?!"  I pressed.  Dante took a deep breath then pointed at a line of text at the bottom of the surging screen of data.  Looking closer, I saw a name: Gagarin Space Dock. "Gagarin?"  I asked, looking over at Dante.  "As in, Yuri Gagarin, the first man in space?" Dante nodded vigorously. "They were in the planning stages when I was at Athena.  But a bunch of us never thought they'd actually get it off the ground." I frowned. "Any time you want to be less vague, Dante, I'm all for it."  I deadpanned.  "What did they get off the ground?" "Sorry, sir."  He said with a chagrined and apologetic smile.  He then tapped the name we had read at the bottom of the screen. "The Gagarin Space Dock, the first fully robotic ship building facility in Humanity's history.  They built it in Lagrange space and, if I'm reading this data stream properly, it's active and powered."  He looked back at me.  "That code you gave me was a primary access code.  The kind that would've been given to a person with full command status over the facility.  Like the chief engineer, or the military boss responsible for overseeing the yard's operational." I frowned at that.  Could Daria have been one of those?  Was that how she got the code?  And why the hell would she give it to me?  If she wasn't back in Russia, I'd be dragging her in right now to get some answers out of her. As it was, however, all I had was an access code that turned on perhaps one of the most important pieces of human tech leftover from the invasion. Then Dante recaptured my attention. "However you got that code, sir, it's activated the command interface with the yard's primary build computer."  He announced with a smile as wide as the Grand Canyon. "And it's asking me what kind of ship it can build for us!"

 

Undead Salvage, Inc.

"Not so fast, Dante."  I cautioned.  "That robotic shipyard can certainly build us a ship or three.  But with the technology the velkin easily defeated fifty years ago." Dante sat back, his smile fading as he considered that. "Ah, good point, sir."  He looked at the screen with its scrolling lines of data.  "So where do we get the tech to upgrade a ship to where it can take on the velkin?  Do we reverse engineer more velkin tech?" I slowly shook my head as I considered that. "We want something better than velkin tech."  I said musingly.  "Something that will handily defeat it.  Because I'm fairly certain the first ship we're going to build is going to be a warship." "That'd be logical, sir."  Dante agreed.  "And while we're considering upgrading our tech, we should also get some designs in.  The shipyard will have some premade designs programmed into its factory settings.  But again, those designs may have flaws the velkin have already figured out how to exploit." "True.  Unfortunately the only person we have even remotely resembling a ship designer would be Zara."  I frowned.  "And I don't even know if she made it through the last battle." Zara's tousled head popped up from behind another work station under reconstruction. "I did, sir."  She reported with a smile and I chuckled. "Outstanding.  Did you catch our conversation, Zara?" Standing, she began cleaning bonding paste off her hand. "Just some of it, sir."  She admitted.  "To tell you the truth, I wasn't really paying attention until somebody mentioned 'warship'."  The tesla's smile broadened.  "Since that's a personal interest of mine, that's when I started eavesdropping a little." I chuckled at that then sobered to quickly give her an overview of what Dante and I had learned about the Gagarin Yards.  By this time the rest of the juggernauts had filtered into the control center and were standing in a loose gaggle around us as I finished. "And so, if we could design and build a small to medium sized ship, hopefully with some stealth capability so the velkin didn't see it coming, along with a good sized weapon system, that is key.  We can worry about FTL capabilities after we clean up our own damn system."  I said and Zara, who had produced a notebook to start jotting ideas down in a move that was eerily Felix-like, nodded as she also finished what she was working on. "I've got a few ideas already that I think would work very well."  The tesla engineer said as she looked up from her notebook, trying very hard to contain her enthusiasm for the project. "Speaking of ideas and tech, has anybody asked the echoes about contributing K'ethik tech?"  Simon asked from where he and Brin were cuddled together to watch the proceedings. "K'ethik tech!"  I exclaimed, slapping a hand to my forehead.  "I've actually got one better than that, Simon.  We now have an actual K'ethik here, as an ally!" "What??"  The juggernauts and teslas both said almost simultaneously.  Laughing out loud at the looks of astonishment on their faces, I switched to broadband. - Anybody have eyes on Legion? - - Is that the K'ethik, sir? - One of Chi's Fort Hill psyrens quickly responded. - It is. -  I confirmed. - I have eyes on then, sir.  It's outside, breaking down the velkin bodies and armor to build a number of different things, including missile batteries.  -  There was a slight hesitation, then: - I think. -

- I need to talk to it.  Mind jumping me out to where it's working? -  I asked. - No problem, sir. -  And the control center disappeared in a wink of light. Legion looked up from the device it was working on when I appeared a few metres away. "Max Niekro."  It greeted me.  "You walk with purpose.  Do you bring news of some importance?" "I do."  I confirmed as I strode towards it.  A glance behind me revealed this location was just outside the entrance to the hanger deck.  There the psyren who had teleported me out was working with the vipers and a number of other psyrens to clear the rubble blocking access.  The vipers were using their goa-forged blades to cut the boulders into small pieces before the psyren and a couple of her colleagues floated it out and dumped it with telekinesis. "We recovered information that's led to the discovery of a human-built robotic shipyard hanging in one of the Legrange points between the Earth and its moon." "Legrange point?"  Legion repeated with a frown, not familiar with the term as it wasn't mentioned often in my memory. "It's our term to describe the point in space where the gravitational pull of the Earth is equal to that of the Moon."  I explained.  "So anything built there wouldn't have to fight against being pulled into either body." "Logical."  Legion conceded.  "And because this station is robotic, you thought I would have some technology to improve its operation?" I grinned.  Damn, this bastard was fast on the uptake. "Not so much to the shipyard itself."  I said.  "Although, in retrospect, that could be a good thing as well.  But to the ships that we ask it to build for us." "Ah."  Legion replied with an all too human confirmation of understanding.  "Again, logical to assume that K'ethik technology would improve on any human craft this shipyard could construct.  However, I must point out that my people do not possess space faring technology.  It is one of the reasons that I sought an alliance with the Risen, since Humanity possesses such technology." "Fair enough."  I replied.  "We're not so concerned about the vessel's ability to fly beyond our star system.  More how it'll stack up in combat against a velkin warship, which will most likely be far larger." "Considering the scale of their individuals to yours, that is also a logical assumption."  Legion said, its features now schooled into an expression of thoughtful contemplation.  "I have recently made a number of discoveries myself.  As an effect of the fusion process that created me, several protocols were satisfied that enabled the unlocking of a number of encrypted memory files stored in parts and in random fashion on the various K'ethik insect forms involved in my creation.  Once those files were reassembled and unlocked, I gained access to the data within.  Which included the design of the missiles we recently used to destroy those orbiting warships." It looked over at me. "Already I have identified a number of technological enhancements that could be incorporated into the design and building of a human vessel that would vastly improve its ability to stand against a velkin vessel.  The least of which being zero-gap armor."  It paused.  "What sort of raw materials does the shipyard have on hand?" "I'm not actually sure.  We haven't gotten that far into seeing what the station was about.  I wanted to get you on board with any effort to build something there with K'ethink improvements first." Legion nodded. "This is a step towards crafting a vessel that will return my people and I to our home.  Of course I am on board, as you say.  Let us contact this shipyard and examine its data repository more closely."

"Sounds good."  I said out loud.  - Can Legion and I get a lift back to the control center, please? -  And the battered territory surrounding the hanger deck entrance disappeared in a wink of light. This time it was the juggernauts who looked up in astonishment at our arrival. "Damn."  Hammer breathed.  "It's like an echo on steroids." "Except no echo has armor like that."  Bojay pointed out, peering close.  "And what the hell are those things in those little blisters?  Are those bugs?" "Alright, you lot."  I said, motioning for them to step out of the way.  "Freak show is over.  I'll make introductions and explanations once Legion has taken a look at the Gagarin Yards." Silent as it stepped through the midst of the cluster of juggernauts, Legion only started perking up when it saw Dante's workstation.  And the data stream now pouring across multiple monitors. "Is that, . . is that a K'ethik?"  Dante stammered as Legion leaned close enough for the tesla to reach out and touch, the neo-shell intent as it examined the screens. "A special kind."  I said with a nod of confirmation.  "Legion, this is Dante, one of our senior electronics and communication experts known as, . . ." "Teslas."  Legion interjected to supply.  "Yes, your memories have outlined all types of Risen, Max Niekro."  It then pulled its eyes off the screens long enough to look over at Dante and nod.  "Greetings to you, Dante.  I am aware of the tesla's ability to gather information on internal structure of electronic and mechanical devices through a tactile interface.  Please be advised; an omni field is active around my body.  Any attempt to touch me without my knowing to gather information on my internal workings may result in the dissolution of your body."  It then turned back to the screens. Dante stared wide-eyed in shock at Legion for a moment.  Then he was looking back over at me. "Is he, . . . is he serious?"  He hoarsely whispered. "Deathly."  I replied and Dante scooted his chair as far away from Legion as the space within the circle of monitors allowed. For its part, Legion pointedly ignored the stunned tesla, focusing instead on the screen. "From what I can derive from this data dump, the shipyards were abandoned by maintenance personnel when the velkin invaded fifty years ago.  Abandoned but not deactivated."  It reached out and touched one of the screens that was filled with data streams.  There was a flicker, then the screen cleared to show several differing views of the massive shipyard, which stretched for a number of square kilometres in a number of different directions.  Then we watched as massive velkin warships came into view on several of the screens.  Flickers of light around them revealed the presence of much smaller human vessels attempting to slow them down.  Then the first wave was past and space was empty for a moment. Without warning several more of the massive warships appeared.  These ones, however, turned and began flying towards the shipyards, quickly filling the various vista with their bulk.  And just as quickly they were moving off, not finding anything worth going in for, the ships arching away to follow the ones that had originally gone by. A couple more waves of ships went by then the screens went empty and remained that way until Legion took its hand off, allowing the display to return to the streams of data.  The neo-shell then turned to look at me. "After a year, it put itself into standby, waiting for a signal from the surface to tell it to go back online.  The signal you recently sent, along with the access code, was what it was waiting for and the shipyards are powering back up.  However, a quick scan of their inventory shows their raw material stores are completely empty.  The yard possesses the ability to salvage, so we could feed it pieces of the ships that we destroyed earlier and it would be able to break those down with only small modifications to its systems."

"Did the yard have any ships already on its manifest as complete?"  I asked and Legion nodded. "Salvage shuttles, a small fleet.  They're as automated as the rest of the station.  Nothing bigger, though." I turned my attention to Dante. "Think you could get the shipyard to dispatch those shuttles to the wrecks sitting in geosynchronous orbit over our heads to begin salvage?" Dante quickly nodded as he turned back the work station.  After a quick glance at Legion, the neo-shell having not moved from where it was examining the data streams, he began to quickly type on his interface. "It'll take a moment or two to call up the various command menus, . . ."  He began to say.  Then Legion was moving forward to touch the screen once more.  A second later: "Shuttles have been dispatched."  It reported before going back to studying the screens.  "They should reach their destination in approximately ten minutes." Not bothering to ask how the K'ethik had managed to establish an interface that quickly with the shipyard, I turned my attention back to Dante. "Let's see if we can get eyes on both the salvage shuttles and the wrecks.  I want to monitor their progress." "Yes, sir."  Dante said, shifting his focus to the interfaces he had already established with a number of surveillance satellites we had in orbit.  The screens quickly shifted to give us a view of the shuttles, a cluster of ungainly vessels that were all thrusters and manipulating arms.  Another screen cleared to show the destroyed vessels hanging unhappily in the darkness above the bright, horizon dominating vista of Earth spreading out below them. "Okay, we have eyes on both the salvage shuttles and the wrecks."  The tesla reported just as Zara reappeared, her notebook in hand.  She took a long look at Legion before looking over at me, her eyebrow lifted in question.  I made a subtle shake of my head and she sighed before turning her attention back to the screens Dante had called up. "A salvage run?"  She asked and Dante nodded. "Gagarin should be able to break down what's left of those ships that tried to burn us out of existence."  He glanced at Legion then looked over at Zara.  "I'm not sure about exotic metals, though.  Remember how we couldn't get certain things to work until we put the K'ethik extruders online for the printer?  I can only think their warships would incorporate even more of those strange materials and metals in their construction to give them added strength and resilience.  We might have to make several modifications to the systems to allow them to break those materials down." By this point the juggernauts had drifted closer to satisfy their curiosity both in regards to Legion, and to what we were attempting to do with the salvage shuttles.  Thus Simon, the only other engineer in the company, overheard what Dante had pointed out. "Extruders would be a good idea, especially if we want zero-gap metal for structural components."  He said with a smile of greeting.  "Not sure what the conversion ratio was from raw to finished for the printer, though.  If we knew that, it'd give us an idea of how much raw materials we would need to salvage, . . ." A flash of light from the screen monitoring the wrecks caught everybody's attention, interrupting Simon and bringing all eyes to the screen. "What was that?"  Tumult said, the honey blond juggernaut stepping closer with a frown.  Then we were all hissing in dismay as one of the salvage shuttles disappeared in a flash of light. "There must still be crew alive on those wrecks!"  I snarled.  "Legion, pull the rest of the shuttles back to the shipyard before they get destroyed."  Even as the neo-shell reached out to establish its interface with the distant station, another shuttle disappeared in a silent blossom of fiery death.

"So much for that."  Hammer growled in frustration as the rest of the shuttles quickly reversed course to race back to the shipyard. "Don't be too hasty to dismiss the salvage, my friend."  I said.  "We just need to jump up there and clean out those velkin first." "Jump up there?"  Violet said, looking at me with a worried look.  "Like into space?" "Like into space."  I said with a grin.  "We're undead, folks.  We don't need to breathe and our juggernaut shields will protect us from any radiation present, so we won't need suits.  We just need a psyren or two to send us up there and jump us back down when the job's done." "And the K'ethik?"  Tumult gestured at Legion.  "It would be handy up there." All eyes swung over to Legion, who was just leaning back from the screen before turning and returning our collective gaze.  I looked at it for a long moment, then shook my head. "Nope.  Legion would be more handy down here, interfacing with Gagarin and getting things ready for when we have the wrecks cleared.  It'll be just us in orbit, hanging ten in the cosmos." "Nice! I always wanted to be an astronaut."  Simon said with a broad smile and everybody laughed. It took about twenty minutes to assemble everything I thought we would need for our insertion.  That included zero-gap armor for Tovin and Magda, who would be coming with us, several high density particle beam cannons like the one I blasted into Retribution with, coils of nylon rope and grapples so we didn't accidentally float off into space.  The juggernauts were equipped with breastplates so they'd have something to attach their grappling ropes to. It was Zara who gave us the last briefing as Ronin prepped to jump us all into orbit via the satellite that had eyes on the wrecks. "I did some zero-g training as part of an immersive program at Valkyrie so we engineers would understand some of the forces at work on the pilots we were building planes for."  She began briskly.  "You'll have to remember at all times to remain hooked to something with your grapples as any motion will cause an equal reaction in the opposite direction.  That includes firing your particle weapons.  So make sure you are anchored before letting fly." " Also, as you won't be able to actually run on anything, unless the velkin equipped their vessel with artificial gravity and its still functioning, most of your juggernaut offensive capabilities will be nullified.  Hence the need for the cannons.  Your shields and control over your density should function just fine.  And keep your shields up to cut down on the amount of radiation you absorb while you're up there. The nearest goa source will be thousands of kilometres away.  If you get injured, you'll have to abort and have Tovin or Magda jump you back to the surface."  She paused to look over at the two psyrens who were letting a couple teslas fit them with the zero gap armor, looking rather subdued standing instead of floating and without their cloaks.  They kept their hoods though, the two psyrens' faces hidden in shadow so I couldn't tell whether they were excited or terrified at what we were about to do.  Oddly enough, the black armor, custom fitted closely to their bodies over their robes made them look like ninja jedi about to open up a can of Force whupass on some unsuspecting bad guys.  And I thought the Valkyries looked badass. If she thought similarly, Zara didn't show any sign.  Instead, she addressed the two psyrens in the same matter-of-fact voice she had used in giving us our instructions. "You two will need to keep your TK shields up, and as close to your bodies as possible to provide the same amount of radiation protection the juggernauts will get from their goa armor."  When both psyrens nodded in acknowledgement, Zara turned to the rest of us.

"Now, I could stand here and deliver two or three days' worth of cautions and things to watch for but we really don't have the time for that.  Just remember your positioning, keep yourself protected and stay on broadband at all times." "Copy that, Zara."  I said with a  smile.  "Thank you."  At her nod, I turned Legion. "Anything to add, Legion?"  I asked and the big neo-shell pointed to the screen. "I will monitor your progress from this point, Max Niekro."  Legion indicated.  "As soon as you signal the wrecks have been cleared, I will send the salvage shuttles.  In the meantime, I will begin to program the shipyard to refit its facilities with K'ethik-level tech, including extruders and dissolution projectors to enable rapid construction once the salvage process begins in earnest." "Sounds good, Legion."  I then turned to the rest of my juggernaut and psyren crew.  "Alright, you lot.  Let's keep it tight.  This will be everybody's first time into space so no snide remarks at the rubberneckers.  And above all, remember what we're going up there for." "To kill velkin."  Jen said with a grin and I nodded. "Exactly."  I looked over at Ronin, who was resting a hand on Violet's shoulder as she used the brunette juggernaut as a goa battery. "Jump us when you're ready, Ronin." The veteran psyren nodded and looked over at the screen that had the wrecks' firmly in focus. "Jumping in five, four, three, two, one, . . ."  *wink* The control center disappeared and we found ourselves floating twenty metres away from a massive chunk of one of the wrecks.  I could feel my skin writhe uneasily against the vacuum of space even fully densified and I slammed my shields up.  Feeling the sensation disappear, I then took a quick look around. Good; we were still in a tight group. - Okay, everybody. -  I began on broadband.  - Make sure you're hooked up to somebody, keeping yourself loose and your head on a swivel.  And what ever you do, don't look down until we're inside. - - Why? -  Brin wanted to know, Simon reaching out to stop her from doing so. - Because you'll be looking into the vastness of space, babe. -  The Native American juggernaut explained.  - And that'll freak out your sense of equilibrium. - - Oh. -  Brin replied, looking like she still didn't really understand. Chuckling, I looked over at Tovin and Magda. - Think you ladies can pull us inside? - - No problem. -  Magda replied and we began moving towards the hull fragment without feeling like we were moving.  A couple seconds later we were carefully climbing in through a rent that was nearly three metres tall and four wide, mute testimony to the force of the explosion that tore this vessel apart. The rent opened into what was left of a corridor, ten metres high and seven wide, some sort of service corridor being this close to the outside.  And apparently still under power as we found ourselves dropping to the floor as soon as we were inside, an effect generated by some sort of artificial gravity field. It may have been just a service corridor.  But, as Hammer and Tumult took point with their particle cannons held ready, we weren't taking any chances.  Good thing we did.  Almost as soon as we eased to the junction of the service corridor with a wider passageway, we found ourselves looking at several hunters, their armor buttoned up tight with atmospheric rigs of some sort attached to their backs. - You know, if we end up fighting the whole crew, we could be up here forever. -  Firinne pointed out.  - Can you make a quick sweep of this fragment to see how many hunters we have to worry about, Magda? -  The red headed juggernaut asked her fellow Celt. Nodding, Magda made a slow sweep with her hooded head. - Twenty seven. -  She reported, turning to look in Firinne's direction once she was done.  - Including the five here. - - Just what the hell are they doing? -  Bojay wanted to know. Easing close to the corner, Hammer peered around it. - They appear to be working on some sort of power junction. -  He glanced back at us over his shoulder. - Maybe maintaining the artificial gravity grid? - - Maybe.  Not that they're going to need it in a couple seconds.  Ventilate 'em. -  I commanded and, nodding, Hammer and Tumult stepped around the corner and opened up with their particle cannons. The hunters didn't even get the chance to look around before the lacing streaks of blue-white light cut them to pieces.  A couple more pulses into the junction box they were working on and suddenly we felt a little lighter. - Yep, definitely the artificial power grid. -  Simon noted, taking a wide legged stance against the fluctuating gravity field. - Five down, twenty two to go -  Tumult grimly noted and we carefully pressed further into the fragment. Considering each ship was easily the size of a full human city, the fragments themselves were dozens of square kilometres worth of corridors, machinery and metal.  If we had been searching them blind, it would've been a nightmare to clear each section with any sort of speed. Even with the psyrens helping us, it still took the better part of an hour before the fragment we had first boarded was declared free of gobbies. - I hope the next piece is quite a bit faster than that one. -  That from the Asian juggernaut, slender Pan.  - This is taking far too long! - She didn't talk much so when she did, we all took notice. - Amen to that. -  Bojay rumbled as he slung his cannon over his shoulder in anticipating of jumping to the next nearest fragment, a good eight or nine hundred metres away.  After killing the last velkin on this fragment, we had immediately headed for the nearest hull breach so we could jump to the next piece of wreckage. - But we'll need to clear that piece there. -  He pointed at the one immediately visible through the tear in the hull before shifting over to another piece just barely visible.  - And that one there, before the salvage shuttles won't get fired upon as they approach. -  He looked back at me. - Maybe we should just focus on the strategic pieces, Max.  Ignore the ones that won't have LOS on any approaching shuttles until we've just about cleared the entire debris field. - - I wouldn't think we'd need to clear the entire field. -  Violet countered.  - Just enough to get Gagarin the materials it needs to build us a ship.  Then we can come back and pound any piece with velkin on it into dust. - - A combination of both is what I would go for. -  Jen interjected to say.  - Identify the ones that are strategic and provide us with enough materials to get Gagarin on its way. - - Sounds like a plan. -  I said then pointed at the piece visible through the rent.  - Starting with that piece.  Let's move! -

 

Broken Arrow

The metal underfoot vibrated slightly as the remainder of our small company landed and took positions. - Tovin? -  I asked as I peered into the gloom ahead of us.  Some sort of emergency lighting was active in this piece, along with a partial gravity field, its shifting making my stomach feel a little uneasy. - Eighteen hunters. -  The veteran psyren immediately reported.  - Most are clustered in the fragment's center, with smaller groups scattered throughout. - - Likely repair teams, love. -  Jen pointed out as she moved in beside me, a particle cannon held ready in her capable hands.  - We should focus on that cluster in the middle, and sweep the repair teams later. - I nodded in mute agreement.  It was a pattern we had followed for seven wreck fragments now, and it had worked very well.  Yet, .  . I frowned as I took a slow look around the battered corridor we had landed in.  There was something different here, something I couldn't put a finger on. - Stay frosty, all. -  I tightly commanded.  - This place is giving me a weird vibe. -  Jen threw me a quick, concerned look and her eyebrow lifted at seeing the hard, wary expression on my face.  Then she too had to focus as I directed Hammer and Bojay to the point and our small company began to move with intent into the wreckage. I saw it first, a dark shape crouching in the shadows cast by the flickering emergency lighting.  It was velkin, just going by the size.  But a hunter not boldly standing out for everybody to see.  This one was ready for an attack the way we would've been ready.  This was no hunter.  This was a soldier. - Hold up. -  I sent, waving everybody into cover while keeping an eye on the massive shape in the shadows maybe twenty metres from where we were.  - I think we got a problem down the hallway. -  I looked over at Tovin. - Are you reading anything, Tovin? - There was a slight pause.  Then: - Single velkin and it definitely knows we're over here. -  The veteran psyren reported. - Then why isn't it doing anything about it? -  Violet wanted to know. - Maybe it's waiting for something. -  Simon suggested. - Like what? -  Violet immediately countered.  - Velkin don't wait for anything.  They just charge right in, trusting in their size and tech superiority to defeat any enemy. - - Two more velkin are moving down the corridor. -  Magda abruptly reported.  - They also know we're here. - My eyebrow lifted at that as I looked past the crouching, partially hidden velkin  in the shadows and down the corridor to see two more massive shapes moving closer.  And, like their hidden comrade, these two were keeping to the shadows as best they could, moving slowly and carefully with an oddly shortened version of their rifles held at the ready.  At least, it looked like a stub version; they were doing a damn good job staying to the shadows, thus making a clean visual nearly impossible. Then the closest was abruptly standing up, pulling what looked like over-sized side arms from special holsters at its waist to fire double handed at us.  And it wasn't plasma being sent our way.  Instead, it was some sort of packaged hyper-energized particle shot, scintillating in a broad rainbow of colors as it darted across the intervening space to slam into the walls all around us. At the same time the two late comers started discharging their modified rifles, which also fired a round that was distinctly unvelkin-like with a bright blue profile, energy tendrils dancing around each round as it screamed towards us.  Both were slower-than-light, much like the plasma rounds, but far faster than any slug thrower.  We barely had time to react with our juggernaut-enhanced senses before several of the blasts were slamming into us.

Already off balance thanks to the initial barrage the first had fired after stepping out of cover, these new rounds staggered several of us with their power.  Our shields held, but each round had a significant concussive punch, the impacts knocking Brin, Simon and Pan off their feet. And the juggernauts weren't the only ones targeted.  Even as the two in the back targeted us, the one who initially fired with its double hand guns dropped its aim slightly and began peppering Tovin and Magda with shimmering blasts that hammered into their protection.  That forced both to keep their telekinetic shields up tight and prevented them from extending those shields over us. - Damn it, we're pinned down! -  Bojay growled, those of us not knocked on our asses forced into a crouch to reduce our profle in the hopes of becoming a harder target to hit. - Like hell we are. -  Hammer snarled and abruptly stood to let loose with his particle cannon.  He sent bright blue bolts stitching across all three of the strangely acting velkin.  And we watched in amazement as some sort of energy shield came up to protect each of them, absorbing or deflecting the particle cannon ordnance into the bulkhead. - Damn it, they've got some sort of shields good enough to take beam fire. -  Hammer pointed out the obvious even as he sprayed them again, reversing course to hit the one closest to us last.  And he was rewarded by seeing the energy shield flicker as it regenerated in an attempt to repair the damage his beam fire had done to it. - But barely.  Bojay, come up here with me and give 'em hell. - Nodding, the broad shouldered juggernaut ducked several powerful blasts to step in beside Hammer and together they filled the shadows with seething particle energy.  Readying my own cannon, I watched as the nearest velkin's shield failed.  Half expecting it to then get cut apart by the particle beam fire, I was astonished to see it it tear off a piece of loose plating from the wall instead to act as an impromptu shield. Made of exotic metals, the plating took several shots before the beams began to burn through it.  By that time the velkin had located what it was looking for and, in one smooth motion, it dropped the plating and grabbing a massive piece of charred machinery from the wall and with a surge of strength, hoisted it at Hammer and Bojay.  In the fluctuating gravity, the piece of wreckage shifted several times in flight before it slammed into the two stunned juggernauts. Hammer was knocked aside, flung against the far wall when the piece of wreckage brushed against him.  Bojay wasn't so lucky.  He managed to get off a - Damn. - before it hit him direct on, pinning him against the deck. Apparently not satisfied with merely hoisting a piece of the ship at us, the nearest velkin then retrieved its hand guns and again opened up with both, sending energy blasts howling in and around our ears.  From my position, I opened up with my cannon.  Its shielding, now somewhat regenerated in the time it took for it to use up the plating and throw the piece of wreckage, took several shots without penetrating.  That let the velkin rip off another piece of plating to use as a shield as it backed up towards the two that had been pounding us with their rifle blasts the whole time, keeping most of my team pinned down. Then, with blinks of light similar to the one we had seen destroy the salvage shuttle, the two equipped with the rifles fired a pair of rockets at us.  'You've got to be kidding me!'  I silently shouted.  Then the rockets, easily the length and thickness of my leg, were slamming into the walls just above our heads.  The impact ripped metal into shreds that slashed against our protected bodies and the warheads detonating emitted a pulse of energy that washed over us.  I immediately felt my shielding shiver in reaction.

- What the hell was that?? - Violet snarled.  - My shield nearly dropped. - - Some sort of electromagnetic pulse. -  Simon was quick to say.  - And my shield is not firming back up.  Whatever that pulse did, it's messing with the local space-time fabric. - Then we were ducking as two more rockets impacted hard into the walls, the ripples of energy emitted when they exploded finishing the job the first two had started. - My shields are down! -  Brin cried.  - Mine too. -  Violet snarled. Turning to see how bad we were hit even as I tried to bring my own shielding back up, I was perfectly positioned to watch the slender Asian juggernaut Pan slowly topple over.  And, as she did, dark blood spurted from the massive wound in her neck to form globules that slowly spun away from her.  In almost slow motion she hit the deck, her body bouncing as her head tumbled away from it, revealing the presence of a heavy shard of wall that had somehow penetrated her densified flesh to sever her neck. - Damn it, Pan is down!  Whatever the hell that pulse was, it's also affecting our density! -  I barked onto the broadband.  - We are out in the open without protection.  Tovin, Magda, can you extend your TK shields to give us cover?  We need to withdraw, ASAP! - - Tovin's out. -  Magda reported with a heavy voice.  - A piece of wall from that last explosion managed to penetrate her shield and pop her on the head.  Only her zero-gap helmet kept it attached to the rest of her. - Then I was grunting as an energy blast slammed into my shoulder, searing through what was left of my shield to bite deep into my flesh.  Yup, I'd say my density was affected as well. Spinning with a silent snarl on my face, I opened up with my cannon to send bolt after bolt into the chest of one of the velkin that were now firing from deep down the corridor.  It's shield quickly maxed out under the steady barrage even as the other two sent blast after blast biting into my body.  The shield flickered then died and the velkin's armor began soaking up particle beam fire. The very fact that its armor was soaking up beam fire concerned me.  That spoke to more exotic metals at play, the mottled stuff in no way resembling the standard gobby green the hunters favored.  Then I was ducking another volley of rockets, hissing as shards of metal slashed into my body when the wall exploded behind me. - Brin is down! -  Simon howled.  - Still alive, but non-functional. - - So is Violet. -  Firinne reported, scooping up Violet's cannon to join Jen in stepping to my side.  Together they focus fired on the same velkin and it finally went down, several beams slashing through it's chest.  Then the red headed juggernaut was staggering back as a concussive blast smashed into her chest.  Unprotected, it caved in her upper body and she managed to get off another couple shots before she toppled backward. - Sonofabitch! -  I roared both in dismay and frustration. This was fur balling in a seriously rapid fashion!  If we were going to get out of this SNAFU, we needed every gun we had.  And that included any currently buried in wreckage.  I twisted to start cutting apart the piece of wreck pinning Bojay down.  With much of it also constructed out of exotic metals, the piece actually managed to resist my cannon on auto fire a few seconds before it began to melt. - Hammer, get your ass off the ground and start returning fire, man! - I shouted at the same time and watched as Hammer finally found his footing to join Jen in returning fire.  A heart beat later I had cut away enough of the piece that Bojay was able to get some leverage to flip the last big piece off him.  Freed, the African American rolled to his feet, density and shielding intact.  Seeing that, I quickly motioned him forward.

- That piece of wreckage protected you from the EMP, Bojay.  You're the only one that is still full juggernaut!  Take point. -  I said before getting spun around by a concussive shot hitting me in the shoulder, severing my right arm and forcing me to drop my particle cannon. - Max! -  Jen cried, turning to look at me as I dropped onto the deck. - No, keep firing. -  I commanded, grimacing as fiery pain slashed through me.  - Use some of that shit that Bojay kicked off for cover.  It has some sort of exotic compound in it that renders some protection against that pulse.  Use it to buy time to build your shields back up. -  I rolled over as best I could with one arm even as more rockets pounded the walls around us. This time, however, a TK field hummed into existence around me.  Me and everybody else as Magda floated forward.  Just in time to deflect several shards that would've cut me into ribbons if they had the chance to hit me. I turned to look to where Hammer, Bojay and Jen were sending an almost constant stream of particle beam fire down the corridor, forcing the two surviving velkin to steadily retreat. - Simon!  Get up here, man! -  I gritted my teeth against the pain as I forced myself to sit up.  Just in time to have Simon step over me to scoop up my gun and add its fury to the cannons spitting death down the corridor. Then he was turning to the spot where the original velkin had been hiding in time to cut apart a squad of regular hunters that had appeared from a branching corridor on the run, weapons ready. - Shit! -  Bojay rumbled.  - That bitch called in reinforcements. -  He continued to pour fire after the two retreating velkin heavies while Simon dealt with the remaining hunters.  Then the heavies were out of sight with a final volley of rockets that Magda's shield barely held off us. Jen joined Simon in destroying the rest of the reinforcements before she dropped to her knees beside me. - We need to get you out of here. -  She hissed, her eyes burning into mine. - We need to get all of us out of here. -  I replied, feeling consciousness slipping away.  Not only had I lost a limb, but I had several holes burned or punched through my body that was sapping my onboard goa as it tried to keep me alive. - Magda, can you get a link to the surface? - The redheaded psyren nodded. - Just linking through that satellite that brought us up here now. -  She reported.  - Traveling the downlink signal to the surface.  There!  I've got New Retribution.  Stand by for emergency evac in five, four, three, two, and, . . . - I almost breathed a sigh of relief when the med facility appeared all around us.  Then goa was snarling out of the ground to bite into my body and my head flung back in a silent scream as it began putting my body back together again. I must've blacked out.  Because I went from feeling the goa storm putting me back together again to three of Boost's summoners lowering me onto a hospital bed.  Boost himself was doing a quick check, his hands glowing with goa. "Boost."  I mumbled, bringing his attention to me.  "What the hell?  How did I get in here?" An eyebrow lifted on Boost's face. "Well, after Magda came in hot and dumped your shot to hell team in our laps, I scrambled every summoner I had left in the Cave and started putting you lot back together again."  The veteran summoner crisply explained.  "You were the only one badly wounded that was able to summon goa to do the bulk of the repair work.  But the trauma and its subsequent repair was too much for your brain to handle and you fell unconscious."

"How, . . how long have I been out?"  I groaned, feeling echoes of my wounds still rippling through my body. "Maybe ten minutes."  Boost supplied.  "Not long, brother.  If you're okay, I've got a psyren with shrapnel damage I need to attend to." Tovin!  I nodded as Boost's summoners let me swing my legs around so I could stand up. "I'll come with you." Boost shook his head as he pulled an exceptionally long piece of metal out of Tovin's torso before turning and dropping it into a metal tray, the summoners assisting him stepping forward to seal the wound. "I can honestly say I've never seen wounds like this."  He admitted, looking over at me.  "This metal didn't shred like normal metal does.  It seemed to tear longitudinally, with the pieces becoming spears instead of daggers.  No wonder Pan didn't survive that shot to the neck.  The piece that killed her was wider than her neck was.  She might as well have been guillotined." He accepted a piece of cloth from a female summoner acting as a surgery nurse and mopped Tovin's blood off his hands. "And the neural trauma; it's like you were all microwaved.  I am reading disrupted neural tissue in both your central nervous systems and all throughout the periphery.  If you weren't already dead, that alone would've killed you." "They had this weapon."  I began.  "A rocket that sent off a small EMP when it detonated.  It disrupted our shields and took our density back to normal." "They?"  Boost repeated with a frown as he waved a glowing hand over my arm. "Yeah, some new kind of velkin."  I said with a grimace.  "New armor, new weapons, new tactics; they were like real soldiers, damn it, taking cover, using the environment to their advantage."  I frowned as I realized something.  "They treated us like equals, Boost, like a threat worth their attention.  And they packed a heckuva punch with those weapons they had.  I'm thinking whatever they had, and whatever gear they were wearing, it was definitely not standard velkin issue.  Because a squad of regular hunters showed up near the end of the fight and we cut them to pieces even half dead like we were.  Yet those three heavies kicked us around a good bit and we only managed to kill one of them." "Well, whatever they are, that rocket you describe them firing showered you with a great deal of radiation."  Boost revealed.  "If my template data files are correct, I'd say these absorption profiles I'm seeing in your tissues are consistent with tissues exposed to a nuclear weapon's fallout." "What??  Are you saying those bastards were shooting nukes at us?" "Very small, very clean ones.  I'd call them pinhead nukes, for the amount of radiation I'm seeing here.  It'd also explain the neural trauma."  Boost continued, letting his hand drop.  "And I don't think the EMPs those pinhead nukes generated disrupted your shields or your density.  But they did disrupt your neural networks, which govern your juggernaut abilities." I slowly nodded as I digested Boost's explanation.  It made sense; when I was knocked out in Moscow, I lost control of my juggernaut density there and had a part of my head chewed off.  While the EMP didn't knock us out, it did disrupt enough of our neural traffic that we lost full control of our abilities.  That's why our shields gradually dropped, along with our densities, instead of all at once.  As the trauma in our nervous system accumulated, our control degraded until we finally lost it all together. In light of that, it was even more fortuitous that we didn't have Legion along for the ride.  EMPs and robots with all of their electronics don't get along very well.  So, unless its omni field had the ability to stop an EMP, Legion would've had its internals flash burned into so much junk.  It might've even been killed. Then I was pushing that aside as Tovin abruptly sat up.  I'm not sure how she managed to do it, but miraculously her hood still hid her face despite being knocked out, operated on and laid out on a bed. "Welcome back."  I said with a warm smile.  "How do you feel?" Tovin looked from me to Boost, a gloved hand gingerly touching her torso where that last piece of metal had been extracted. "You've repaired me, Boost?"  She asked in her quiet voice and he nodded. "Good as new, Tovin.  Healer's guarantee."  He said with a smile of his own.  Nodding, she turned back to me. "To answer your question, Max, not as well as I would like.  But happy to be on the ground and in one piece."  She said and my smile broadened slightly. "You and me both.  Now, let's go see how the rest of our beat up team is faring, yes?

 

Chapter 19: Reloaded

As I walked out of the medical center, Firinne joined me, the Scottish juggernaut giving me a bit of a nudge with her hip and a smile when I looked over at her. "Good to have you back, Firinne."  I said with a grin, putting my arm around her shoulders even as she slid one around my waist.  She gave me a quick squeeze, putting her head on my shoulder for a moment before straightening up. "Certainly wasn't something I expected to deal with as a juggernaut, Max."  She said, looking over at me with a quizzical look.  "What do you think those new velkin were?  Some sort of special ops?" I felt my face adopt a thoughtful expression. "That'd be a good guess."  I conceded as we angled towards the command center.  The Bat Cave felt empty now, with a full two thirds of the people I had staffed it with now dead and gone.  Our footsteps seemed to echo across the hard ground as we made our way towards the partially repaired command post with its array of electronics and antennae on the roof. "It stands to reason that not every sapient race the velkin target as prey are as easy as Humanity was to conquer.  Take the K'ethik, for instance.  They actually managed to defeat the velkin and drive them off their world.  Mind you, once the gobbies figured they couldn't eat those big robot insects they were going to leave anyway, but you get my point." I paused to take a quick look at a couple of spots currently being worked on by teams of Risen and humans.  One was the approach to the hanger deck and the vipers had jumped in to help there, clearing the last of the rubble and refinishing the approach so planes can be moved more easily back and forth.  The other was the quartermasters, the velkin having identified it as a supply depot during the battle and pasted it a good one. "So you'd think they would have a stronger soldier class to take on those more equipped and powerful races.  And use the hunters as harvesters." "You think these newer velkin are a specialized soldier class then?"  Firinne asked and I nodded. "Or perhaps some sort of elite guard for their leaders, trained to handle situations the hunters can't.  Either way they don't act like hunters, they're equipped far better and they see us as a threat they need to expend considerable resources to stop." Firinne nodded in agreement. "I can't think those rockets they were firing at us came cheap.  Or the exotic metal armor and those regenerative body shields."  She added. "Boost called them pinhead nukes."  I said as we approached the command center.  "Containing just enough fissionable material to generate the EMP that played havoc with our nervous systems and brought down our juggernaut abilities." "Our densities normalized and our shields dropped because of an EMP hitting our nervous systems?"  Firinne asked, eyes wide.  Again I nodded in confirmation. "So thinks Boost." "We just need something to protect our neural pathways then.  For the next time we face those bastards."  The Scottish juggernaut said. Dante looked up from the monitor he was staring at as Firinne and I approached. "Ah, good to see you back up on your feet, sir.  And you as well, Firinne."  He said with a smile. "Thanks, Dante."  Firinne replied. "Thanks, indeed."  I added with a nod in greeting.  "What's our status on Gagarin?" "Ah."  Dante turned back to the screen he was staring at.  "I was just working on that, sir.  Unfortunately I don't have Legion's ability to interface at will with the shipyard's primary computer core.  However, using your super user access code, I was able to pull up the primary interface screen that allows us to directly control the yard's central functions.  Including salvage and construction."

His fingers danced across his keypad for a moment before he reached up and tapped the screen to shuffle through a number of menus and screens. "There!"  The tesla announced, glancing over at Firinne and I.  "As soon as you cleared the first cluster of wreckage pieces, we rolled the salvage shuttles and managed a significant haul in the range of several thousand metric tonnes of material.  With each warship the size of a small city and the remains of six to choose from, you still cleared a massive amount for us to take advantage of even though you were stopped half way through by those velkin elites." 'Velkin elites?  I don't remember calling them that.'  I silently mused.  Still, it wasn't a bad tag for them.  Especially if they ended up being fairly rare.  Considering the hammering they gave us, I could only hope. "With Legion's refit program in place, the yard then began switching its capabilities over to utilize K'ethik technology in the form of extruders and zero-gap metal.  The refit was to be an all or none effort so all the yard's resources were thrown at it.  We should have, . . ."  Dante's voice trailed off as his fingers once again danced over the keyboard. "Yup, it's confirmed.  One full construction bay has been refitted with K'ethik tech and is ready to rock.  We just need a design to give it." "I say we make a gun."  Jen said as she joined us in the command center.  She greeted Firinne with a quick smile and me with a deep, passionate kiss before she continued. "And not just a gun, a cannon.  A big frickin' cannon.  Then we use it to blow every velkin ship out of the sky!" "I like that idea."  Violet chimed in, stepping in almost on Jen's heels.  "You know what they say about size and how it's supposed to matter." "Nice."  I deadpanned as the ladies giggled.  "As much as I like the idea of having a big frickin' gun that I can stuff up the gobbies' collective ass and pull the trigger, we need mobility.  Hunter-killers, with a handful of planes on board to create a defensive shell as well as provide precision strike capabilities and maybe a missile frigate or two in a small package that can detach to add some punch to an engagement." All three juggernaut ladies whistled at that. "I'd say somebody's been putting some thought into this thing."  Violet said with a grin. "Or reading my mind."  Zara interjected, the female tesla with a data pad in her hands as she stepped into the room from the other side.  She waved the pad at the closest monitor at Dante's station and we all watched a detailed schematic appear on the screen.  As she demonstrated in the Tiger Ray, this vessel was all smooth lines and contours, as if it were meant to plumb the depths of a celestial ocean instead of the cold expanse of space. Yet there was a menace to those curved lines, a coiled readiness that spoke of violence just waiting to be unleashed. "And I present to you, my friends, the Hammerhead class heavy cruiser.  I've called her the Iroquois, after the confederacy of native american nations early in North America's history that was never defeated in battle.  She'll have zero-gap bracing and skin, regenerative shielding, multiple beam weapon and missile batteries, with the ability to carry twelve Tigers on board in an internal hanger equipped with individual side launch capability.  Additionally she'll also carry two Remora class missile frigates attached to her belly."  Zara pointed out each feature as she narrated her way through the diagrams she presented and I found myself more and more impressed with each thing she described.   "The Iroquois will have plenty of leg with eight sub light overclocked impellers powered by a quad of cold fusion reactors, upgradable to matter/anti-matter reactors when available.  Additionally Engineering will have room for twin hyper light jump drives to get you into trouble and out again without breaking a sweat.  With quad redundencies in the power systems and multiple power routes and couplings, the Hammerhead class cruiser can take up to seventy percent battle damage and remain effective."

"You hope."  Dante interjected to say and Zara flashed him a broad smile. "I hope."  She said, her eyes bright as she turned her attention back to us.  "I've been using reverse engineered velkin, borrowed K'ethik and cutting edge human tech to build this ship."  She looked back at her schematic.  "Every ounce of my experience and training has gone into designing her." "Don't worry, Zara."  I said with a smile, putting a hand on her shoulder.  "She'll fly, and fight just fine.  We just need to build her." Zara's face brightened with a mega-watt smile. "Yes, sir, we do."  She agreed, vigorously nodding her head.  "Shall we upload the schematics to Gagarin?" I grinned, infected by her enthusiasm. "By all means."  I said, nodding to Dante in confirmation and with a laugh, he began setting up the data transfer.  "Now, to a slightly more practical matter: how many crew can your ship carry?  Because either we find us some shamblers and make some, or we all are going to need flight training." "Crew complement is four hundred fifty, sir, plus twelve Tiger pilots, and ten crew per Remora, putting the total at four eighty two." "Damn."  Violet said with a snort.  "We don't even have that many Risen left here, at Retribution." "Time to go shambler hunting."  Jen said, looking over at me.  "I just hope the velkin left enough nearby that we can get to them." - Um, anybody on broadband? -  A male voice suddenly spoke into our heads. - It's Max.  What's going on? -  I quickly replied. - Sir, you might want to come to the surface.  I think there's something you should see. -  The voice swiftly indicated. Glancing at my three colleagues and at the two teslas, I got five shrugs and puzzled looks. - Okay.  Whichever psyren is monitoring this broadband, could I please get a port to the surface for myself, and the three juggernauts in close proximity, please? -  And the control center winked out of sight, replaced by the dark green of the Shield forest that came up to the very edge of the northern part of the parking lot. There we found a handful of Risen, both Transcended and lower types, working to salvage more broken up pieces of tank to bring to Legion, who was visible in the distance working on converting the metal into more usable ingots.  It wasn't the fact that they were working salvage that caught my eye.  Such operations had been almost non-stop since we successfully defended the base a couple days ago. It was the fact that they all were standing close to the forest, each of them staring at something within, that made me frown. "What's going on here?"  Firinne muttered with a frown as the four of us took a hesitant step towards the group of Risen. "Alright, which one of you sent the broadband message?"  I asked and a lich in dirty fatigues turned towards me. "That would've been me, sir."  He said, his voice instantly recognizable as the one on broadband.  He was a wizened looking fellow, more mummy than anything else.  Yet there was an intelligence sparkling in those eyes, one that said whatever he had seen was worth coming to take a look at. "What do you have there, soldier?" Instead of answering me, the lich turned and pointed into the forest.  Curious, I stepped to where he was and followed his pointing finger.  And found myself whistling quietly in astonishment.

Shamblers.  Not just a dozen, twenty or thirty or even a hundred.  Thousands, their broken and shivering bodies filling the forest for as far as the eye could see. - You once asked if I could guide all the shamblers in North America to Retribution so you could build your force, my catalyst. -  The Earth Mother quietly reminded me in the depths of my mind.  - With most of the Risen now summoned back to the cold earth thanks in great part to the new velkin offensive, I have found additional strength that I could divert to bringing them to you.  Use them well. -  And then she was gone, leaving me shaking my head in astonishment. Damn.  We're going to need a bigger base. - Can I get connected to Tovin and Boost, please? - I said onto broadband.  - Tell them it's urgent! - Legion watched silently as shambler after shambler was led up to where we had formed several reformatting stations using the juggernauts as goa batteries for the handful of summoners we had left.  And it didn't say a word as Transcended after Transcended stepped away from the process in the close company of one of Tovin's or Chi's psyrens, using telepathy to calm and balance the newly freed mind. After balancing, it was a quick trip into the Bat Cave and down to the QM for kit and supplies before being directed to one of three orientation centers, Twitch running one, Justice another and Zara the last.  There they learned about our mission, about their own abilities and what our plans were.  And there was plenty to learn as all kinds of Risen were being reformatted : psyrens, summoners, teslas, javelins, wraiths and animus.  Even the more powerful Transcended were being made more rapidly and more easily than before, graced as we were by the Earth Mother's strength and presence.  Ballistas, vipers and even juggernauts found themselves walking away from the reformatting stations.  Although I seemed to have much more success at making the high end Transcended than my colleagues. It was only when I finished formatting another juggernaut and sagged with exhaustion to the ground that the neo-shell finally stepped forward to speak. "You sacrifice much, Max Niekro."  It quietly pointed out as it helped me back to my feet.  "Your very life force, your memories, your flesh; all is given in order for your people to survive." I looked at Legion for a long moment, the respect in its voice plain. "Can I do any less, Legion?"  I finally answered.  "The planet that gave me life will die at the hands of these invaders if I don't do everything within my power to stop them.  Including sacrificing everything that I am to see it done."  Then I was turning to give Boost and Tovin a nod to indicate I was ready for another one. "Just like you've sacrificed to see your people returned to their world."  Then a snarling tendril of goa reached up to plug into my side to recharge my depleted levels and I lost myself for a moment to its howling rush churning through my body. We reformatted for the rest of the day and through the night as well.  The next day past and we were deep into the second night when finally the numbers began to dwindle.  Four times Chi and Whisper led excursions to nearby NADF bases to gather more supplies to equip our burgeoning population.  And inside crews worked around the clock to expand our facility to accommodate the extra bodies. "If the velkin had even the slightest inkling of what we were doing here, they would send every ship currently in orbit to pound this spot until it was a glowing puddle of melted rock."  Boost quietly pointed out as the sun began to climb into the sky on the morning of the third day before rubbing his face.  He was visibly tired even though I recharged his and Tovin's goa at every opportunity.  It was understandable: we had been formatting for nearly 36 hours straight.

"I feared that, you know."  I admitted even as Tovin steered another shambler towards our conversion post.  "That they'd swing a ship over for some reason and see us frantically trying to convert thousands of shamblers into an army that would crush them.  Or those bastards in the wreckage would somehow manage to get a signal to them after seeing what we were doing." "That sounds like paranoia."  Tovin quietly pointed out, also sound tired.  She had rebalanced every mind that we had freed, literally hundreds of them since we began our massive conversion effort. "Just because we're paranoid, it doesn't mean we not actually being watched."  Boost countered with a quirky grin, earning himself a sniff from the veteran psyren.  That she actually made a sound was a sure sign of how tired the normally serene Tovin was.  Then she was focusing on holding in place the next shambler she had herded over. Sighing, Boost straightened up and looked over at me. "Shall we?"  He asked and I grinned. "Let's do this."  I said and stepped forward to put a hand on his shoulder even as his hands began to glow. The last shambler was reformatted into a psyren ironically enough sometime after two in the morning the next day.  To the man and woman, we sagged to the ground in relief when Tovin announced in a tired voice that we had exhausted the almost infinitely numerous shambler horde that had been using the forest as cover. "Thank the Earth Mother."  Boost muttered, head between his knees as he sat on the ground.  "I don't think I could've channeled another drop of goa if my unlife depended on it." I sighed from where I was laying flat on my back, staring up into the star-filled heavens. "At least Zara's got her crew for her heavy cruiser."  I quietly noted and Boost snorted. "And then some, brother.  And then some." "Two heavy cruisers?"  I said with a grin, twisting my head to look over at my friend in time to see him laugh. Before he could speak in reply, Legion was looming out of the darkness, its nascent K'ethik in their light filled blisters giving it an otherworldly glow.  Kind of ironic, really, all things considered. "Ah Legion!"  I said, sitting up with a groan.  "You've been absent for a few hours now.  Have you been working on a new project?" "I have completed a number of tasks that I set out for myself, yes."  The neo-shell indicated as it came to a halt beside me to look down at me.  "Including fortifications that will prevent another successful assault on your base's external entrances." - Before you go crazy checking out the super shell's frickin' amazing add-ons to the Bat Cave, you need to come and check out something in the command center, big man. -  Twitch's voice said into my mind and I grinned. - Were you listening in on my convo with Legion, Twitch? -  I fired back and she laughed. - Sorry, couldn't help myself, boss.  I was kinda curious as to what you talk about with that thing.  But seriously, you need to come to the command center.  Ronin, could you give him a lift, please? -  And the northern edge of the parking lot disappeared. I half expected it.  But to jump into a completely crowded command center was still a shock to my senses.  Teslas were bustling everywhere, every work station occupied by three or four teslas working at once and there was a low murmur of conversation as the velkin network was parsed, satellite feeds were monitored and base status was updated. Ronin was floating close enough to brush her robe against my arm as I winked in to find myself standing directly in front of my wraith commander, who was grinning mischievously.

"This better be good, Twitch."  I growled, taking a quick look around the crowded command center and grimacing.  "I'm not a big fan of being in tight spaces.  Makes launching a juggernaut run that much more difficult." "Oh, believe me, boss, you'll like this."  Twitch chortled before turning to the nearest work station where Dante and Zara were working.  Because of their seniority they were allowed to have the space to themselves, giving them a bit more elbow room.  Unfortunately we took that up the instant we stepped into it. "Dante, Zara."  I greeted them as Ronin kept close behind me, floating off the floor to give the illusion that she had all the room in the world. "Sir."  The two said simultaneously before looking over at a grinning Twitch.  "You just had to go get him, didn't you."  Zara growled and Twitch laughed again. "Hey, I thought it was pretty damn cool.  And knew he'd think so too.  Not to mention, a little good news nowadays goes a long way."  She looked back at me. "Right, boss?"  I couldn't help the grin that appeared on my face at her puckish expression. "Right, right.  Now, would you mind getting on with it?  All these bodies in here are making me sweat."  I urged. "Tada!'  Twitch said, pointing at the screen that Dante had been using to communicate with Gagarin.  There was a green flashing light in the bottom corner. "May I present the Hammerhead class heavy cruiser Iroquois, completed and running up her impellers for a final thruster test before launching for her shake down cruise?" What??  The ship was finished already?? "But that was only three days."  I began.  "There's no physical way a completed heavy cruiser, . . ." "And two missile frigates and twelve fighters."  Twitch added, her grin only getting bigger. I shook my head. "There's just no way."  I finished somewhat lamely. "Turn around normally would've been about three months."  Dante revealed with a look over at Zara, who nodded in agreement.  "That was the level of human tech before the velkin invaded.  Of course, anything bigger, or any more would've exponentially increased that number.  But with Legion reconfiguring the station's core to run more efficiently, then refitting the primary construction bay with K'ethik technology, it was ridiculously easy to build a single ship in a handful of days.  Like our 3-D printer, only on a ship-building scale." I could only shake my head, truly astonished.  I had swallowed down some serious advances in technology since my own time without batting an eye, accepting that it had happened so I could get on with being a Risen soldier.  Now, however, I had finally reached my limit of acceptance. "The man needs proof."  Twitch said, her grin becoming roguish.  "Seeing is believing, as they say.  Ronin, want to do the honors?"  And I felt the veteran psyren's hand drop onto my shoulder.  A heart beat later we were teleporting out of the command center. It felt like we hung in the darkness forever, a sure sign our jump was significant in distance, goa pulled out of me to make it happen.  Then we were winking back into existence on a clean, brightly lit battle bridge.  As my feet settled into the padded floor, I found myself looking around at something I never thought I'd see in my lifetime.  A space ship designed and built by human hands. It was almost too much to take in. "She's something, hey?"  Davinder, the viper commander said from where he was standing beside one of the work stations building into the bridge's curving edge.  He reached forward and touched something on the glossy interface in front of him and a crescent of screens lit up, dominating the bridge's curving front wall.  They showed ship status, tactical position, conditions on the planet and the surrounding space, all in bright images and read outs. "Some sort of polymerized liquid crystal."  The lean East Indian Transcended said with a toothy grin as he caught me staring at the massive man high displays.  "It responds to the tiniest of electrical signals to give you full display capability with such resolution the naked eye cannot tell it from the real thing.  And if that wasn't enough."  He touched another control on the interface and the screens cleared to absolute transparency to show the construction bay, the hundreds of construction bots hovering around the Iroquois and, beyond them all, the black of space. "You've got a room with a view."  Davinder finished. I slowly turned on the raised level I was standing on to make sure I got a look out of each of the windows.  The ones to the side showed the Iroquois' sleek side, her nose out the front. Then on the biggest screen, the one at the forward center of the room, a small frame model of the ship appeared in the bottom right hand corner, it's rear section flashing read. "Ah."  Davinder said with a nod of satisfaction.  "Engineering is signalling their ready to power up the impellers for a final thrust test."  He looked over at me.  "Would you like the honors, sir?" "Uh, sure."  I said, swallowing my astonishment.  "Engineering, this is Commander Niekro.  You are authorized to begin the final impeller test now." "Confirmed, sir."  A voice said from seemingly thin air.  "Ramping up power now."  And I could feel the thrusters' power made the deck beneath my feet vibrate. "Fifty percent, sixty percent."  The voice intoned.  "Seventy percent, eighty percent, ninety percent.  Bridge, we are now at one hundred percent power.  Impellers are performing flawlessly and we are reading green across the board.  Our ship is definitely ready to fly!" "Acknowledged, Engineering, excellent job!"  I said then laughed out loud.  Davinder and Twitch joined me, the merry sound echoing in the smooth, flowing space that was the cruiser's bridge.  I even sensed satisfaction emenating from the silent Ronin as she too soaked in the success of the moment. "Now we need to get the crew up here so we can take this puppy out for a spin!"  Twitch declared.  I quickly nodded in agreement. "Make the arrangements."  I said and as Twitch turned to speak with Ronin to work out the jump sequence for the waiting crew to be brought up, I once again looked out the Iroquois' front view screens.  Looked beyond the hovering bots and the bulk of the shipyard itself. Out into the darkness where the velkin fleet lay, waiting for us to come and find it.  And find it we would, before we blew it into oblivion.

 

Iroquois

It didn't take long for the rest of the Iroquois' crew to be jumped up to the waiting ship.  Many arrived with expressions similar to the one I had when I was jumped in by Ronin: eyes wide with wonder and astonishment, expressions of disbelief.  And while I could've blamed it on the fact they were recently liberated from the ranks of the shamblers, it was something way cooler than that.  They had come to the same realization I had: The Risen had a frickin' warship at their disposal. Of course, it took me just as long to seek out refuge as the ship went from completely empty to crowded in a matter of minutes.  I quickly found the back way off the bridge, a doorway that opened into a broad corridor stretching along the Iroquois' seven hundred and fifty metre long spine.  And just as quickly I found a computer access terminal, similar to those in the control center at a corridor junction. I reached out and touched the metre square screen and it immediately came to life with a schematic of the Hammerhead class heavy cruiser. "Welcome to the Risen warship Iroquois, Commander Niekro."  A woman's soft voice spoke from a hidden speaker.  "How may I assist you?" "Is this the ship's main computer?"  I asked, eyes narrowed.  Damn thing already knew my name. "An extension of my primary functions, yes, commander."  The voice brightly confirmed.  Good; then hopefully I'll get my answers quickly.  What did I want to ask, you say.  Well, it's pretty frickin' simple, chum: I needed to know how to fly a Hammerhead class heavy cruiser.  As far as I knew, no Risen that currently existed knew that.  Closest we had was Davinder and his vipers, and they were just Tiger jocks. No, the Iroquois was a whole new game.  And I was determined I would win that game and learn how she worked.  Before we went into battle against the much more experienced velkin and got our asses handed to us. "Can you tell me who your commanding officer is, computer?"  Might as well check the obvious first, to see if Zara had put some structure in place. "As senior Risen commander, you are in command of the Iroquois, sir."  The computer's voice informed me.  "While I am currently being crewed, none of those individuals have been identified as an officer, crew or engineering specialist."  'Of course I am.'  I silently mused.  Would've been too damn easy to have the crew properly selected and in place already. "Okay, second question, computer: do you have operation manuals that outline how to properly operate this vessel?" "Affirmative, commander."  The computer quickly replied, the answer sending a wave of relief washing through me.  "As part of my primary construction protocols, I was told to create operating manuals for all ship functions during assembly, based on Risen and human parameters." 'Good girl, Zara.'  I silently congratulated my tesla design engineer for her foresight. "I will need to see those manuals, computer."  I said.  "Due to the fact that I'll need a good level of familiarity with your operation before I can command you during flight." "Acknowledged, commander."  The voice indicated.  "Did you want them in hard copy, soft copy or direct neural transference?" "A what now?" "Direct neural transference, sir."  The computer repeated.  "If you like, I can download the data contained in the manuals directly into your neo-cortex, targeted to the specific regions of your brain responsible for storage, analysis and response." Well, didn't that sound like the way to go! "Neural transference it is, computer.  My need is great, and my time is short."  I settled back, arms crossed, expecting a bolt of energy to come out of nowhere to slam into me.

What I got instead was a flashing cursor on the screen. "This is your current location, commander."  The computer advised.  "A neural transference kiosk is available here."  Another flashing cursor in a different color appeared in a different location.  "Two decks down, in the training suite.  I have activated it for you and everything will be ready when you arrive." "Uh, okay."  I said, non-plussed.  "How do I get there?" "Just follow the glowing line in the floor, sir."  The computer advised and I looked down to see a gently pulsing line had appeared in the padded floor, the line running down the center of the broad corridor. So I did just that, the line guiding me quickly to a pneumatic elevator that dropped me to the desired deck before it dragged me along a couple more corridors to a bright, open room filled with inclined beds, equipped with a headboard that was part display, part electrical connections. "If you want to recline in the nearest terminal, sir, we'll get started."  The computer's voice said from yet another hidden speaker somewhere in the room. Nodding, I proceeded to the nearest inclined bed, turned and eased down into it.  As soon as I was stable, I felt a cold metal connection press to the base of my skull. "Transference lead set."  Another woman's voice, entirely different from the central computer's, said from the headboard terminal.  "Training subject: general operation of a Hammerhead class heavy cruiser has been inputted.  Standby for infusion." Infusion?  I had just enough time to wonder what that meant before a surge of energy and sensation slammed into my brain.  Overwhelmed, I blacked out even as a wave of imagery and information washed over my mind's eye.  Thankfully I wasn't out for long.  At least, I didn't think I was out for long. I woke up and my head felt, . . . strange.  Like it was somehow stuffed full. "Transference complete."  The terminal above my head intoned.  "Cerebral scans report full absorption."  Was this the level of human technology before the velkin hit?  We possessed the ability to simply transmit information directly into the brain?  'Cause, you know, that's pretty frickin' cool.  Not to mention, downright astonishing. "Please remain reclined for a moment for your cerebral cortices to adjust to the additional input."  The terminal advised and, after getting a wave of dizziness just from trying to lift my head, I let myself drop back against the inclined bed. "Sure."  I said weakly, fighting the urge to laugh.  Being a juggernaut had its advantages, like not feeling ill or injured very frequently.  So the dizziness was definitely a new thing for me in my Risen existence. As I lay there, waiting for the dizziness to pass, I found myself wondering if I had truly absorbed enough information to run the ship.  Idly I thought about the overclocked impellers and the quad cold fusion reactors driving them.  And abruptly I found my mind's eye filled with a detailed schematic of first the impellers then the reactors, data about reactor output in terajoules blending with thrust ratios and maximum velocity attainable in a blur that nearly overwhelmed me again. "Well."  This time I did chuckle quietly as I carefully pushed the images and the information to the back of my mind.  "I guess it worked after all!"  Now I just needed to get the crew all assigned to their posts and trained up so we can start practicing this shit.  Preferably before the velkin noticed we had a ship to fight with. "Computer, can you establish a communications link to New Retribution, please?"  Here's hoping Dante had his damn ears on. "Link established, commander.  I have Dante on the comm."  The computer reported.  Outstanding.

"Commander Niekro?"  Dante's voice replaced that of the ship.  He sounded astonished.  "How did, . . how did you manage to set up a communications link to New Retribution?" "Pretty simple, actually."  I said, slowly sitting up and smiling when I found my head wasn't trying to spin itself off.  "I just asked the Iroquois' A.I. to do it.  She's pretty smart, you know.  Legion probably had something to do with that." "I don't doubt it, sir.  Our K'ethik ally certainly has a way with electronics and systems of all sort." "That it does."  I conceded before sobering.  "Now, we've got the Iroquois going but she can't fight the velkin fleet all by herself.  Have Gagarin start on the construction of additional heavy cruisers and their complements of frigates and fighters.  The sooner we have four or five of these things going, the better." "Makes perfect sense, sir."  Dante replied.  I could hear his fingers dancing over his interface.  "I am inputting the request now.  When do you think the Iroquois will be able to leave the construction bay?" "Hopefully as soon as I can educate her crew on how to fly her."  I replied with a resigned twist of my mouth.  "Nothing like setting foot on a ship that's nicely set up to kick some ass and we don't even know how to turn the damn thing on." "Uh, yeah, that definitely would be frustrating, sir."  Dante wryly agreed.  "I take it then that you've found the Iroquois' training suite?" I stood and, finding my legs working properly along with the rest of me, I nodded. "That, I have.  And now I'm going to make sure the crew does as well.  Talk to you in a bit, Dante." "Roger that, Iroquois.  New Retribution out."  Dante replied and silence followed to confirm the link had been severed. "Okay, computer, time to get me back to the bridge."  I said, walking firmly towards the training suite's door. "I've got a crew to educate!" The bridge was still churning with activity when I arrived a few minutes' later.  Ronin and Twitch both greeted me with nods from their various locations around the curving room as they tried to make sense of the chaos themselves.  Davinder too was working to instruct a handful of teslas on how to access the main readouts.  Not the calmest person at the best of times, the fiery viper was looking a bit overwhelmed and frustrated by the flood of Risen all around him.  Kudos to him for keeping it together. "Davinder?"  I called out on the now crowded bridge as teslas mixed with summoners, psyrens, animus, wraiths and vipers in an attempt to find their designated spots and get to work.  The viper commander immediately looked up with a look that was almost relief on his face. "Sir?" "Do we have a status report on the crew jump ins?"  I asked tautly. The viper immediately nodded his head. "Ronin just reported to me the last have been brought up a couple minutes ago, sir."  He said. "Does that include a complement of vipers for our Tigers?" "And for the missile frigates, sir.  I'm commanding them both."  The lean viper added.  I nodded in acknowledgement. "Assigned?" "Volunteered."  Abruptly a brilliant smile appeared on his dark face.  "Couldn't give up the chance to fly in space, sir." I found myself smiling and chuckling in return. "Don't blame you there."  The smile faded.  "And we should get to the flying as soon as possible." I gave Davinder a nod, letting him return to his demonstration then settled back on the raised level to let my eyes sweep over the crowd.  Time to get this frickin' show on the road.

"Can I have your attention!"  I roared in my best parade ground voice and silence instantly returned to the bridge. "As of this moment, Risen Fleet Operations is in charge of this vessel."  Twitch, who had finished what she was doing while I was talking to Davinder and was making her way towards me, stepped close at that. "I didn't know we had Fleet Operations."  She whispered.  I looked over at her and grinned. "We didn't until just now."  I replied just as quietly and as she smiled mischievously, I turned back to the Risen thronging the bridge. "And to answer your collective question, Fleet Operations is the organization that determines crew placements and officer selection while we wait for Fleet Command to determine our mission and objectives.  With the successful test of the Iroquois' impellers, she has become the first operational vessel in the Risen intersteller navy.  So she now needs a crew, and an officers corp to begin her official service." I paused there to take a look at the Risen in front of me, each wearing whatever kit they were given after their recent reformatting.  They would need new uniforms to mark their entry into our fledgling navy.  I wondered for a brief moment how we would make that happen.  Then I was focusing back on what I was attempting to do. "Towards that end, you all were selected from our general ranks and systematically sent here to take your posting on the Iroquois.  You should've been given an aptitude test to see where you'll be serving, . . ."  I trailed off as a sudden wave of confused muttering began to sweep across the bridge. "What's this?  No aptitude testing was done prior to your jump in?  Tsk, tsk.  Very well, I will personally see to your placement."  I looked over my shoulder at an amused Twitch and a bemused Ronin.  "Ronin, if I could have your assistance for a moment." "Of course, commander."  She floated forward.  As she approached I lifted a hand and tapped my temple once. - Something you wanted kept from the crew, sir? -  She asked, switching to telepathy. - Yes. - I replied.  - We need to place these people.  As far as I understand, all they've had is a basic overview from Zara about space flight.  No combat training, no flight training, nothing.  We push them into a fight now without template support like we have as a ground force, and we'll get slaughtered.  So, you're going to do a quick scan of their minds when we present them with four images. -  I then focused on the images I had come up with: a complex piece of machinery, arming a missile and preparing it to fire, manning a work station on the bridge, and fighting in space. - Interesting. -  Ronin said musingly as she examined the images.  - I can see where each of these comes from, but what am I looking for in the minds that I scan? - - Interest levels. -  I replied.  - I want you to use telepathy to determine in order of decreasing interest which of those images our various crew members find to their liking.  Those that find interest in the machinery will join the handful of engineers down in Engineering, those that find armaments intriguing will be Weapons, work station people will becoming operations.  And those that think fighting in space is cool, will get tapped for Marines. - I paused to look over at the sea of faces that were pointed in my direction. - Once we get them placed, we'll start piping them through the training suite to get them brought up to level on what skills and knowledge they'll need to run their various stations.  Once they are completely trained, we'll do a more complex scan using scenarios to see where exactly we'll be putting them. - Ronin nodded. - I can do that, sir. -  She confirmed with confidence and I smiled. - Good.  Let's get started! -

It took about two hours to get everybody scanned and partially placed.  Another four or five hours to pipe them through the training suites and another hour after that to run the scenarios for final placement.  Then I had everybody assemble on the shuttle deck, the only spot big enough for the entire crew to meet at once. "Alright everybody, if I can have your attention."  I said and the low murmur that had been rippling over the assembly died into silence.  "Thank you.  Operations has completed it's placement cycle and you've all been given your assignments, postings and shifts.  Just in overview, the Iroquois will run on a three watch system, with each watch being eight hours long.  And, as a warship, we only have four major divisions: bridge, operations, weapons and engineering.  You'll note that, according to how you placed in your aptitude scanning, you were assigned to that specific division." I paused to glance at the holographic clock set by the shuttle deck's command room's observation window. "It is now seventeen twenty seven on the twenty four hour clock, two hours and twenty seven minutes after the beginning of the second watch.  Those who are assigned to duty stations for the second watch need to report to those stations now.  Those not on second watch, report to your assigned quarters, stow your gear and standby.  Section heads, please monitor placement.  Division commanders, oversee and when placement is complete, please report to me.  All sections, all divisions, we will have a full test of all capabilities in a battle drill in thirty minutes.  Make sure you're ready.  If we pass that test, the Iroquois will then be cleared to drop moorings and depart Gagarin.  Any questions?  No?  Okay, let's go, people!"  And the crowd quickly dispersed. I watched them thoughtfully for a moment.  Then I was joining the exodus out of the shuttle bay.  I wasn't heading for a duty station, however.  I was heading for the bridge. "Admiral on deck."  Davinder called out as I stepped onto the bridge.  I threw him a hard look, which had the effect of making him grin like a madman before I stepped to the three stations that made up the command cluster on the raised level. Already the crew assigned bridge duty were finding their places and logging into their stations.  There was Navigation, there Tactical and over there Communications.  I took a moment to familiarize myself with every position before I dropped into the captain's chair and started pulling up status reports on the touch screens.  Thank the Earth Mother for the neural transference crash course in ship ops or I wouldn't have had a clue about what I was supposed to do. As it was, it still took a couple minutes before I gathered all the information I needed. "Computer, isolate the bridge for readiness exercise."  I said quietly, knowing the work stations on either side of me had audible receivers to pick up my vocal commands. "Bridge is isolated, Commander Niekro."  The computer quickly confirmed in a voice soft enough that only I heard it.  That would be part of the readiness protocol; the crew would be tested without prior knowledge of it being a test.  So the computer would direct its readiness updates to me alone. "Scenario?" "Catastrophic blow out of the primary power relays." "The scenario has been inputted.  Ready to run on your command, sir."  The computer confirmed. I slowly nodded as I took one last look around the bridge with various crew members settling in.  'Time to rock and roll!'  I mused.  Then, out loud: "Initiate."  And red lights and alarms started going off. It was the first of what would be a steady chain of readiness tests to see how the newly minted Iroquois crew would react to various scenarios ranging from systemic power failures to velkin boarding the vessel.  The last one was a little improbable, considering how much bigger the gobbies were than us.  But it didn't mean we wouldn't someday run into aggressive aliens that were more our size. The end of the second watch was approaching when the final scenario wrapped up and I looked at the scores.  Not bad; almost every department and division scored in the upper eighties to low nineties.  We'd need to get that better before we actually engaged the enemy.  But, for now, it was good enough to began our shakedown trials. Nodding as I settled back, I looked out across the bridge.  To make sure all the watches were properly evaluated, we had made sure to incorporate scenarios that called each crew person to their assigned stations.  Like the second watch bridge crew getting wiped out by a weapon punching through the forward view and detonating, forcing the first watch or the third watch to come off standby and go to full ready. Now the second watch had returned to station with only an hour or so left in their duty time.  Just enough time to get us out of dock. "Navigation, drop all moorings.  Communications, advise New Retribution that we've cleared readiness training and are maneuvering to leave dock.  Tactical, bring our shielding online, prep all energy weapon turrets and load the missile racks."  I barked the commands out rapid fire, each one sending the addressed station into a frenzy of activity. "Moorings away, impellers coming on line, maneuvering thrusters are green."  My navigator, a competent Asian wraith, reported as his fingers danced across the interface at his station. "New Retribution sends their best wishes, sir."  My communications officer, an intense African American javelin woman reported with a nod towards me. "Shields are online, sir."  My tactical officer, a grim Scottish javelin reported even as the decking beneath our feet began to subtly hum in response to the engines spinning up.  "All gun turrets report ready, all missile batteries report ready."  She flashed me a grin, brilliant in her formerly hardened features. "If we run into some gobbies while we're out there, sir, they'll nae know what hit 'em!" I grinned in return. "We can only hope."  Then I was looking over at Navigation.  "Move us out, Mr. Ling."  I leaned forward in my chair as the main view screen showed the mass of the Gagarin docks slowly begin to move by us. "Let's go see what's out there, shall we?"

 

Dust Up

"Thrusters on full."  My navigator reported.  "Impellers at five percent."  His hands danced across his station and various screens of data changed to displays of the Iroquois' status.  At the same time the main viewer split to give a real time visual of space in front of us with a tactical overlay of the Iroquois, north to south like it was displayed on the computer interfaces scattered throughout the ship. A touch on the interface and the overlay shrunk to the upper left hand of the main screen where it showed us moving through the docking array. "Gagarin reports all construction bots are clear."  He then said. "Take us to fifteen percent, Navigation.  Let's get us the hell out of here." "Yes, sir."  And the thrum beneath our feet grew stronger.  "Fifteen percent thrust.  We are two thousand metres from clearance.  Eighteen hundred, fifteen, twelve, one thousand metres." I looked over at Tactical. "Any sign of interested parties, Tactical?"  And she quickly shook her head. "Our sky is clear, sir."  I nodded. "Tactical, set condition three throughout the ship."  I said and yellow lights signalling the change in our readiness status flashed throughout the bridge as a klaxon gave a single, ship-wide alert to announce the status change. "Condition three has been set, sir."  Tactical reported.  "All stations indicate ready." "Sir, we have cleared the dock and are free to maneuver."  Navigation then said, earning a nod of acknowledgement from me. "Very good, Nav.  Plot us a parabolic course to put us in geosynchronous orbit over New Retribution and take us to forty percent." "Yes, sir."  The thrum became a low growl before the dampening fields could mellow its power and in response the Iroquois leapt forward. "We are at forty percent thrust, sir."  I glanced at my readouts at my command station and watched Gagarin's mass quickly dwindle behind us. The giant ship building complex was located at the L2 Legrange point between the Earth and the Moon.  This was where the gravity fields of the two moving bodies in space canceled each other out enough for a third object, the shipyards, to hang without being influenced by either.  Other Legrange points existed that were more stable, or larger.  But this one was the closest, and thereby the most convenient for Earth to use. However, it was still a fair jump away from the blue and green ball of muck and water we called home.  Returning my attention to the big main screen, I watched that ball begin to swiftly grow from something that looked like a softball at arm's length to something closer to basketball size. "We are at quarter light speed, sir."  Navigation reported.  "Sensor scans are detecting massive objects in an irregular pattern at our destination point." I pursed my lips thoughtfully.  That would be the wreckage we had been attempting to clear to give Gagarin its raw materials when we got jacked by those three elites. "Science, I need a sweep of the wreckage ahead."  I said, looking to my left to the ash blonde female javelin manning the Science station.  "Look for velkin life signs.  There should be some; we didn't succeed in clearing them all out before we were forced to withdraw." "Yes, sir."  She said in the clipped accent of a Canadian.  "Scanning the first major segment now.  Five life signs, clustered in the forward section.  I am also detecting power signatures and atmosphere."

"Not for long."  I muttered then, a bit louder: "Tactical, set condition one throughout the ship."  And, as red lights in the bulkheads flashed and the klaxon gave three alarms, I went on the ship-wide communications net. "All hands, this is Commander Niekro speaking.  We are approaching the wreckage of several velkin warships.  On those ships are a number of heavily armed soldiers that I intend on eliminating.  So I want everybody to their action stations." Switching ship-wide back off, I turned my attention back to Tactical. "Target that area with a Shrike, Tactical, maximum penetration, minimum yield.  I want to take them out without shattering the rest of the fragment." "Yes, sir."  The tactical officer's fingers danced over her keyboard as Earth swelled to dominate the view screen.  As it did, we caught sight of the debris field, the size of three cities spread out over hundreds of square kilometres of space. According to the operations manuals I had absorbed, a Shrike was one of Zara's little toys; a ship to ship missile meant to punch through armor and explode inside the ship with the intent of rupturing it open.  The Iroquois had a full complement, which led me to believe Zara was hoping she would be a ship buster.  Fine by me; whatever I need to drop these sons of bitches into a deep hole, I'm going to take it. "As soon as we're in range, Tactical, . . " I began before Science suddenly barked. "I'm reading another ship in the debris field, commander!  Relatively small craft with a crew of one hundred velkin.  Heavily shielded, with weapon systems hot."  She jerked around to stare at the main viewer just as the tactical display was painting the various pieces of wreckage.  And we all watched as one of the segments abruptly went red, far too regular in shape to be wreckage. "Damn.  The elites must've somehow called in a rescue mission.  Have they seen us yet, Science?"  I grated and my science officer quickly turned back to her station.  Now it was her turn to have her fingers dancing across the keyboard. "I'm reading no targeting scanners as yet, sir."  She looked over at me.  "I don't think they've seen us." I tightly nodded. "Excellent."  I growled before grimacing.  All they would have to do is pop up out of the debris field and we'd be right in front of them. 'My kingdom for some stealth tech.' I thought.  "Tactical, retask.  Full complement of Shrikes, maximum penetration, maximum yield.  As soon as we're in range." "Yes, sir!"  The tactical officer's fingers were furiously flying over her interface.  "Targeting is retasked to engines and bridge of the enemy vessel.  Six Shrikes are prepped for max penetration and yield.  We'll be in range in two minutes." Again I nodded. "Ready forward batteries.  As soon as any of those missiles punch through, I want everything we got hitting where we busted them open." "Yes, sir." "Navigation, slow to fifteen percent.  I don't want to overshoot."  I commanded. "Yes, sir."  The navigator replied as the thrum beneath our feet lessened.  "Slowing to fifteen percent." "Sir!"  Science looked over at me.  "Targeting scanners just went active." "Damn it!  Tactical?" "Twenty seconds, sir."  My tactical officer reported, tension tightening her voice. "Steady now."  I said, standing.

"We've been painted, sir."  Science warned.  "They are coming up out of the debris field!" "Damn it, we can't wait.  Forward batteries fire."  I ordered.  "Pin' em down."  And I felt the Iroquois twitch as her beam weapons opened up.  The viewscreen flared as several arching lines of energy darted between the chunky velkin frigate and ourselves.  Then we were watching as its shields came to life to absorb the first barrage. "Switching to high-density particle cannons."  Tactical hissed and again the screen flared as lines of light momentarily connected the two vessels together.  This time, however, the thicker particle beams punched through the shielding to slash heavy gouges out of the frigate's hull.  Then she was firing back, heavy supercharged plasma bolts that were considerably slower than our beam weapons.  But they had the potential to hit considerably harder. "Incoming!"  Tactical cried as the view screen filled with shimmering white bolts of superheated plasma. "Brace for impact."  I snarled then the blasts were hammering into us. The Iroquois immediately lurched, her forward momentum considerably slowed by the massive shots slamming into us. "Shields holding."  Tactical said with a relieved laugh.  "Only reading four percent output loss.  No other damage.  All other systems are in the green." "Range, damn it.  Are we in range?!"  I roared and she turned back to her board. "Missiles away."  She shouted as the Iroquois twitched again.  Eyes glued to the main view screen, I watched six dots of light dart away from us  "Locked and tracking. Twenty thousand metres and closing!" I found myself grinning tightly.  'Let's see if you elite bastards can live through this!'  I darkly mused as I unconsciously tensed for our missiles to strike.  Only to have my head jerk over to Science when she suddenly spoke. "She's engaged evasives and moving to get in the clear."  Science hissed.  "Her weapons hot and locked."  She twisted to look at me.  "She's taking another shot!" Again my eyes were dragged to the main viewer.  Just in time to see the Shrikes hit despite the frigate's attempt to get out of the way.  Two detonated on the hull, not making any significant damage.  But the other four managed to find the rents the particle cannons had made and we watched the frigate lurch as her engineering section abruptly ruptured into a fire ball. Then the Iroquois herself was being buffeted about by the frigate's second volley.  She bucked and twisted as the plasma blasts smashed against our hull for a moment then she was settling back down. "Shields still holding, sir."  Tactical looked over at me.  "Down by eight percent." "I don't think that velkin ship can say the same thing."  Navigation said and we all watched as the initial explosion continued to consume the frigate until she completely disappeared in a ball of light.  A few seconds later the Iroquois shuddered as the shockwave washed over her. But we didn't feel a thing as the bridge erupted into wild cheering.  We had done it.  We had struck first blood. "We did it, sir!"  Tactical said with a grin.  "We are the first Earth-based force to have successfully destroyed a velkin vessel with a ship of our own!" "That we are, Tactical." I conceded with a chuckle.  "But I still want some damn stealth tech on board next time to give us the advantage!" "Sir, we're being hailed by Retribution."  Communications said, looking over at me.  I nodded.

"Put 'em on, Comms." "Iroquois!"  Dante's voice sounded onto the bridge.  "Thank the Earth Mother you are still there!  We saw several flashes of light from the ground and Legion reported you had engaged a velkin frigate." "Damn right we did, Retribution.  And we dusted the bastard, too!"  I reported with a fierce grin.  "You can pass on our congratulations to your colleague Zara for designing an outstanding vessel!" "Thank you, sir."  Zara's voice came on the line, filled with jubilation and relief.  "I can't tell you how glad I am to hear both that, and that you survived your first encounter with an enemy ship." "Indeed."  I said.  "If I could only say we deliberately went looking for a fight, that'd be more impressive.  But the truth be told, I was moving the Iroquois into the debris field above Retribution to take out those elites that hammered the juggernauts a few days ago.  We just happened to stumble across a rescue mission picking those self-same bastards up.  And the rest, as they say, is history." "Regardless, sir, very well done!"  Zara said with a laugh.  "It's a confirmation that the design is sound and that we can roll out additional cruisers to bolster our fleet's numbers." "That, you can."  I replied.  "Now, we're going to finish our gobby hunt before returning to Gagarin.  I would advise you start picking out additional crew for transport to the station as soon as the next ship is ready.  If that frigate managed to tell the rest the velkin fleet that we're up here, they're going to come looking for us.  And I'd rather face them with a handful of cruisers, instead of just one.  No matter how tough she is.  And I wouldn't mind it if Legion met us up there with its assessment of the ship.  Iroquois out." I looked over at Science. "Now find me some more gobbies, Science.  And kindly leave surprise gobby frigates out of it this time, will you?"  And the bridge erupted into laughter. it took another three hours before we wiped out the last of the velkin survivors in the debris field.  By that point, Gagarin had already sent her salvage shuttles and large pieces of the wrecked vessels were being cut up and carted off as we swung back around to do one last sweep. By this point the third watch were now manning their stations, working as economically and efficiently as the second watch had.  From my vantage point in the captain's chair, I found myself nodding in satisfaction.  'Looks like not only is the Iroquois a solid little ship.' I thought.  'But that method of neural transference to bring everybody up to level on how to run her, worked like a charm.' I slapped the comm link on my left hand work station. "Davinder, launch your Tigers.  I wouldn't mind a combat umbrella to give us some added mobility and your pilots some experience flying in space while we make our way back to the shipyards." "Roger that, commander."  Davinder immediately replied.  "And I'll scramble the missile frigates as well, for the same reasons.  They'll fly flank and the Tigers will take up positions forward and above the Iroquois." "Sounds good, Davinder."  I said.  "Good flying." "Thank you, sir.  Davinder out." Almost immediately both Tactical and Navigation's boards lit up announcing the Tigers and the frigates launching.  At the same time, I could feel the Iroquois shiver with each ship leaving her. "Our birds are away, sir."  Tactical reported, this one a caucasian male animus with just a hint of a southern drawl. "And they are taking up CAP positions according to standard procedure, sir."  That from Navigation, the third watch navigator an African American javelin male with a touch of an East Coast accent.

"Very good.  One more sweep of the wreckage, Nav, then we'll return to Gagarin." "Yes, sir."  And the navigator turned back to his board. The sweep, as expected, finished quietly.  Which was good, since that told us we truly had caught the frigate by surprise and it hadn't gotten off a signal to another velkin ship.  Of course, that just meant we wouldn't be facing one right away.  I had little doubt that the frigate would eventually be missed and a bigger ship would be sent to investigate. Which was fine by me.  I just wanted to make sure we had a little back up next time.  Because, just like we found a true soldier type amongst the velkin hunters, giving their military a much harder bite, I was fairly certain the bigger ships would have much more than just plasma blasts to greet us when we ran into one of them.  And so I wanted to have a few more ships behind me when that happened. "Iroquois, this is Tiger One."  Davinder's voice sounded in the bridge, pulling me from my reverie for a moment.  "All birds are returning to the barn before docking at Gagarin.  I repeat, all birds are returning.  Frigates first." "Roger that, Tiger One."  Coms replied, a brunette wraith with a midwest accent.  "Oneida, you are cleared for docking to pylon one." "Roger, Iroquois."  One of Davinder's viper jocks acting as the Oneida's pilot, replied.  "Steady, steady, . .."  There was a slight bump over the com line, then: "Oneida is docked, Iroquois and crew are deplaning." "Acknowledged, Oneida.  Mohawk, you are now cleared to dock, pylon two." "Roger, Iroquois."  A female viper this time was the one that replied.  "Moving in.  And capture; we are deplaning." "Frigates are locked in, Tiger One.  Shuttle bay is open and awaiting your arrival." I settled back in the chair, the process of bringing the frigates and the Tigers back on board almost flawless.  Just in time; the giant metal spider that was Gagarin was looming out of the darkness.  Already I could see a second heavy cruiser almost completed within it's robotic cocoon, three more in various stages of construction. "As soon as the Tigers are aboard, Nav, prep to dock on the outer ring, position four." "Yes, sir."  The third watch navigator replied as I stood. "I'll be in my quarters.  Advise me when we've docked."  Then I was turning to stride off the bridge. Again, as expected, it didn't take long to get all the Tigers back on board.  Nor did it take long before we were docking on the massive station's outer ring.  It was almost as if I was just settling in front of the work station in the captain's quarters when a soft chime sounded. "Sir, we've completed docking procedures." "Thanks, Nav."  I said, standing from the work station.  Time to go see the K'ethik. The powerful neo-shell was waiting for us in the arrival lounge of the docking bay four, silent as the crew streamed past it.  Only when it saw me, did it stir to motion. "Max Niekro."  It greeted me in its usual fashion.  "I extend to you my congratulations on the successful completion of the Iroquois and winning your first battle." "Thanks, Legion.  And thanks for the K'ethik tech you gave to Zara to make it happen."  I replied as I came to a halt in front of it.  Legion immediately inclined its head. "Of course."  It said.  "It was the least I could do for the people that will help me carry the K'ethik autonomous units back home." I smiled at that before catching sight of a pedestal map that showed the layout of the surrounding area. "Fair enough."  I said, taking my eyes off the map to look over at it.  "I wish I could say it's the last we'll need to borrow from you.  In fact, I have a couple questions I wouldn't mind asking." "I hope I have a couple answers for you."  It retorted. "Outstanding.  C'mon, we'll take a walk to stretch our legs and we can talk about it."  It fell into step with me as I strode towards what looked like the exit out of the arrival lounge, much like the rest of the crew were doing.  After a brief pause to examine the map I had seen, I picked a destination and we started walking. According to the station layout I had called up just before we docked, there was a significant living section where the yard's human crew was expected to live.  That section was evacuated in the early hours of the invasion and so its living area, common recreation centers, parks and shopping malls were eerily empty as we walked into it.  Not that we'd have much interest in much of that, since it was made for the living. "You observed the battle from the ground?"  I finally asked as we stepped onto the simple concrete pathway of one of the living area's many parks.  The station's robots had kept the park, complete with small streams, trees and views of the shipyard stretching away in all directions, in such perfect condition I almost expected to hear birds singing in the trees as I crossed a small bridge over the park's babbling brook. Legion nodded. "It was, . . . interesting."  It confessed.  "According to my memory files, most of the battles we fought with the velkin were on the ground.  Space battle is foreign to my kind." "Ah.  So you wouldn't have an opinion on how we did." "You won."  Legion bluntly stated.  "Is there more analysis required beyond that?"  I chuckled at the neo-shell's response. "Since you put it that way, not really.  But I was hoping to pick your memory files for some additional info.  First, did the K'ethik have any stealth technology that they developed either prior to, or during the velkin attack on K'eth?" Legion went silent as it searched its memories. "I'm afraid not."  It confessed after a quick search.  "However, the principle behind wanting to be hidden from one's enemies is a simple one.  I will consider several possible solutions based on both K'ethik technology, and our understanding of velkin technology." "Excellent, thank you."  My expression went from thankful to thoughtful.  "Speaking of the velkin, you didn't happen to run into something considerably more powerful than the hunters that we encountered on Earth's surface, did you?" "Like the elites the juggernauts faced while securing the wreckage?"  Legion asked and I nodded.  "Yes.  They were a small, but well equipped and trained force that inflicted considerable damage on any K'ethik force we sent against them with non-standard weapons and equipment.  We hoped we didn't fight against them often.  If they would have had them in any greater numbers than they did, the velkin would've defeated us and destroyed K'eth."  Legion paused to frown. "I can only hope your people have more success against them." I sighed.  Going by our first encounter with those big, tough bastards, that was going to be a stretch.  Still, if Legion could give us half of what it used to destroy those ships in orbit from the ground, we might have a chance. "As do I, Legion.  Perhaps if you can put on a memory stick everything your people have with regards to these elite troops, that could give us some advantage in our next encounter with them." "You think you will engage them in battle once more?"  Legion asked even as it prepared a memory stick from several it held in a compartment around its waist. I grimaced. "If we continue to make ourselves a nuisance, Legion."  I began, looking over at the big neo-shell.  "I can almost guarentee it."  I sighed again.  "But enough of that.  We'll worry about that when the time comes.  For now, I invite you to come and take a tour of the Iroquois."  I smiled. "After all, you helped build her."

 

Star Shrine

I fought the urge to sigh as I stared through the giant observation window at a third sister cruiser under construction down in the yards.  The great vessel, nearly a kilometre in length, was a very impressive sight indeed with its powerful engines, internal fighter bay and launchers and multiple weapon emplacements.  Yet I didn't see the graceful lines and the menacing power that was taking shape right before my eyes with my attention consumed by the churning maelstrom of thought that occupied my mind at that moment.  'No stealth tech and the elites had given the K'ethik problems too.  If that isn't just frickin' great!'  I silently grumbled.  I just hoped we finished building our ships, found the siphon from the vision and destroyed it before we were figured out.  Or we faced the very real possibility of getting our asses kicked. It wasn't like Gagarin was hard to miss.  If the velkin wanted to, they could easily fly one of those city-sized warships over here to take a look out of shear curiosity and see ships being constructed in its bays.  Ships that could do nothing to defend themselves.  And after we destroyed that frigate in the debris field, curiosity should be something they were feeling.  Once they figured out that it was missing, of course. This entire discussion would be academic if I could've discovered some way to hide it all.  Behind a cloaking field we could've built our fleet at our leisure and made sure we were ready to go looking for that giant gobby sippy straw from space before it sucked the Earth Mother's essence dry. Now, . . well, now we had to rush to get as much built as was physically possible before we were discovered. - Commander, are you available to take a communication from the surface? -  Ronin telepathically asked.  - I have Dante asking for you. - This time I didn't hold the sigh back. - Is he now. -  I replied with a grimace.  My irritation must've leaked through to taint my mental voice because Ronin immediately spoke up. - Something wrong, sir? -  She asked and I sighed again.  This time I tempered my irritation before answering. - No.  Just frustrated at how certain things are moving too fast to deal with and other things aren't moving at all. - - Ah.  Very understandable, sir. -  The capable psyren replied. - Indeed.  Where can I pick up Dante's communication? -  I asked.  And for a reply I watched the observation deck disappear and the station's primary control center, a dull gray and lifeless place, appear all around me an eyeblink later.  The dark and cold space, filled with silent work stations and machines, was empty of anything moving save Ronin's cloaked and hovering form.  She pointed a gloved hand at a nearby console where several winking lights indicated it was active. "You can take it there, sir."  Ronin quietly indicated. "I'm guessing you got a telepathic signal first, to say this call was coming through."  I said after nodding in acknowledge to her gesture and stepping to the communication console.  She returned my nod to give me my answer then I was thumbing the communication link open. "Niekro here.  Go ahead, New Retribution."  I said. "Commander."  Dante greeted me.  "I have several parties here that are interested in joining your efforts at Gagarin.  First, three complete crew complements that need to be brought up and introduced to their vessels." I looked over at Ronin at that, eyebrow raised.  At her quick nod, I said: "No problem.  We'll start jumping them up shortly.  Who else?"

"The echoes, sir.  They're feeling a little left out of the fight, now that Legion has been invited to join you up at the shipyard." Again I looked over at Ronin. "Also doable, Dante.  Anybody else?" "The juggernauts, sir.  They said they're done licking their wounds and they want back in.  As soon as possible." I grimaced at hearing that.  And just what would they do?  Play cards while the cruisers took it to the enemy?  No, they'll command the marines. "Very well, we'll make arrangements to bring them up.  If we're taking this fight off the planet, then we might as well bring up the big guns while we're at it." "Very good, sir.  I'm sure they'll be happy to hear that.  Dante out."  And the com line went dead. I stared at the board for a long moment before finally lifting my gaze back to a thoughtful Ronin.  Before I could speak, however, there was a sound from the shadows in a far corner. "Taking the fight off the planet may create additional problems, juggernaut."  A soft, hoarse voice pointed out.  I immediately turned to face it and I could hear Ronin's shields come up.  Yet, there was something familiar about it.  Something that kept me from going juggernaut.  My thoughts churned for a moment before I finally recognized it. "You're a long way from the Shrine, Earth Seer."  I dryly pointed out.  "The Earth Mother expended considerable goa getting you here, didn't she." The shadows shifted. "She did indeed, juggernaut."  The soft voice confirmed.  "She is afraid that taking the fight into space will take her children away from the power that gives them strength: goa." I sighed as I nodded in agreement. "She's not wrong."  I admitted.  "I've had those thoughts myself.  Especially following the pasting that we got at the hands of the elites that illustrated how vulnerable even juggernauts were without a nearby source of goa.  But to keep the velkin off Earth, we need to take control of the space above the Earth.  Only then can we prevent them from bombarding our bases again, and devastating our forces." The shadow paused as if relaying what I had said to her distant mistress. "The Earth Mother doesn't disagree."  An object flashed out of the shadow and arched towards me.  I caught it with a frown and looked down to see a small crystal. "You will create a shrine here, in the shipyards, useable as a repository of goa that She will replenish from time to time from her own essence.  And you will have a crystal room on each of the cruisers, where goa can be stored for long periods of time and used when needed.  This is the will of the Earth Mother."  The shadow quietly directed. "And just how the hell am I supposed to do that, Seer?"  I fired back, looking up from the crystal to find the corner empty of shadow.  "Huh.  That figures.  Just when I need answers." "An interesting development."  Ronin pointed out and I glanced over at her. "That'd be a gross understatement, sister."  I returned my attention to the crystal.  I had intended to continue talking about how the need for goa could shape how we fought this war from this point on.  Only to find my tongue freezing in my mouth at what I found my eyes staring at.  Was, . . was it my imagination, or had the crystal doubled in size?  I suddenly got the feeling that I needed to find a spot to put this thing as quickly as physically possible. "Think you can jump us down to the arboretum?  This crystal needs a new home.  Might as well put it amongst what plants have survived the station's evacuation."

"Of course, sir."  She replied and the gray and dusty control room disappeared to be replaced by the trees, grass and artificial streams of the arboretum, the artificial forest Gagarin's builders put in the middle of the habitat. Strangely a mound in the exact center, surrounded by what appeared to be mid-sized oak trees, caught my attention almost immediately.  Nodding to myself, I began walking towards it.  By this point, the crystal had gone from a sliver to something the size of a medicine bottle.  And, as I stepped onto the mound, a curious Ronin in my shadow, it expanded again to the size of a water bottle. "Is that, . . is that crystal growing?"  She asked in an astonished voice. I looked down to see the crystal, a dark, multi-faceted cylinder of dense material, shiver and double in size in my hand to the point where I had trouble gripping it. "Yeah."  I began to cast around for a spot to put it.  "Although growing is perhaps not exactly what it's doing.  It's more expanding than anything else."  There, right in the middle of the mound.  Kneeling and pushing aside some of the lichens and ground cover that had survived on the dry stuff, I used both hands to put the crystal end down into the dirt.  And I watched as, with a flicker of green and blue light, it doubled in size again to dig in deep. "It, . . seems to be expanding at a rapid rate, sir."  Ronin noted.  "Perhaps you should, . . ." It was like a flash bang grenade going off.  In one moment I was staring at the crystal and listening to Ronin begin to warn me to move back.  And in the next, I was sitting on my ass nearly three metres away, blinking away blue and green afterimages. "Move back."  Ronin finished somewhat lamely before moving to my side.  I felt her hand on my shoulder as I woozily stared back at the crystal. Which, in the blink of an eye, had become nearly three metres tall.  And was now joined by four more crystals of the same size grouped in a loose circle around the mound, somehow taking it over without disturbing the trees planted there.  In fact, if anything, the trees seemed taller and straighter as they partially shielded the crystals. "Are you alright, sir?" "I think so."  I said, letting the psyren help me to my feet and I dusted off my pants.  All the while I kept my eyes on the crystals.  They seemed to be shimmering from within with the telltale blue and green light of goa.  I extended my hand towards them and felt the goa seething within the massive faceted cylinders even from three metres worth of distance. "Damn."  I breathed in astonishment.  That was, for the lack of a better word, incredible. "Is this the shrine the Earth Mother wanted you to build?"  Ronin asked, hovering to my side to also give the massive crystals a long long before glancing over at me.  "I haven't been to the original shrine in North America, or the crystal cathedral in New Retribution's depths.  Is it supposed to look like that?" "You mean, massive crystals throbbing with barely contained goa?"  I asked and she nodded.  I chuckled. "Yeah, pretty much.  I'm just glad it didn't come complete with an Earth Seer, rumbling around and making dire predictions.  Or Finlay."  I felt my features shift into a thoughtful mask.  "Now, I just have to figure out how and where to put a crystal in each of the cruisers so they can have a goa source as well." "Perhaps a visual will be more helpful, sir."  Ronin said and a data tablet appeared in her hand.  She silently handed it to me.  Taking it with a nod of thanks, I looked down at the crystalline screen.  And saw that it already had a schematic of the Hammerhead class heavy cruiser on it.

"Nicely done, Ronin."  I said, smiling over at her.  "Hopefully this'll help find a spot for a crystal."  I began scanning through specific sections of the ship.  "In the meantime, think you could start making arrangements to get those other three crew complements up here?  The sooner we can get them into the training suites, the better.  The echoes and the juggernauts as well, if you don't mind." "Of course, sir.  I'll leave you to your task."  And with that, Ronin disappeared with a wink of light. I was still examining the schematics when Legion found me, sitting in a bench maybe fifteen metres from the mound and the newly formed shrine.  It paused to look at the crystals for a long moment before looking down at me. "I see you've been busy."  It said somewhat dryly and I chuckled as I looked up at it. "Yeah, you could say that."  I returned my attention to the shrine for a moment before looking back down at the tablet.  "I was visited by the Earth Seer, a manifestation of the Earth Mother." "The entity that inhabits your world's core?"  The K'ethik asked and I nodded.  "Fascinating.  My people haven't considered the possibility that K'eth could actually be alive.  To establish a rapport with it would be beyond my ability to describe with words." I nodded in understanding. "It blew me away at first, too.  I mean, I had lived my whole life without realizing the Earth was alive.  Like truly alive, with a soul and everything.  It took me dying to discover that.  And now She speaks to me on a regular basis.  In this case, telling me to create a shrine here as a goa repository." "So the Risen will have a nearby source of energy with which to repair and supplement their enhanced forms, instead of being forced to return to the planet."  Legion nodded in appreciation.  "A very wise entity, this Earth Mother of yours.  I would very much like to meet Her one day.  Before I carry the K'ethik autonomous units back to K'eth." "I'm sure something could be arranged, Legion."  Again I looked up from the data tablet to spear him with a look.  "Now, while I'm sure this discussion about the newly formed shrine is fascinating, I'm also sure it wasn't the original reason you came looking for me." "You are astute, friend Max Niekro."  Legion quickly replied, handing me a data crystal.  My eyebrow lifting in curiosity as I took it and slipped it into a slot on the tablet's side to read it, I began pulling up the information the neo-shell had embedded on it.  And found myself whistling in both admiration and appreciation as, with carefully detailed diagrams and explanations, I watched a presentation on the tech that could be used to stealth our craft.  And not just our craft, the shipyards as well. "Legion, this is incredible!"  I said, scrolling past screen after screen of diagrams and information.  "You found the tech to cloak our ships!" "As much as I would like to take credit."  Legion began deprecatingly.  "I must say I got the idea from Commanders Twitch and Whisper and their wraiths.  Diffraction physics being what they are, the denser the media, the more light will bend trying to penetrate it.  All we need to do is project a graduated energy field so minute yet so dense that light will be forced to bend all the way around it as it attempts to penetrate through it, like a wraith's cloak.  Yet not so dense as to appear as a solid object that light will then reflect off of."  It nodded as I came to the last page, which showed the actual field projectors installed on the hull of a ship. "I just had to take a bit of time to perfect the technology before I presented it to you." I looked at it at that, eyebrow lifted in curiosity yet again. "You've got it working?"  I asked and in reply Legion touched something on its forearm.  And I laughed out loud as it faded from view. "I guess I have my answer.  If it's already scaled to cover a Hammerhead, or even Gagarin, we need it installed as soon as possible.  Can you make that happen?" Legion bowed. "Consider it done, Max Niekro.  I will have the Iroquois refitted first, a task that will be completed within the hour.  I will then split Gagarin's maintenance drones into parties that will simultaneously fit the projectors to Gagarin itself, and the remaining cruisers." "Sounds like a plan, Legion."  I smiled, my frustration from an hour ago almost completely obliterated by the shrine's creation and Legion's tech discovery.  And I felt my thoughts spin back up as the neo-shell turned and began walking back towards the entrance, a definite air of satisfaction surrounding it. Yet again the situation had changed.  With the cloak tech perfected and installed, we could strike at will, slicing out of the shadows to hammer the velkin fleet whenever they threatened ground targets.  And that should give our people the time and space they needed to begin pushing the velkin ground forces back.  What had begun as a frustrating day, had suddenly become a very, very good day. Because any day I found a new way to kill velkin was a very good day, indeed! It was as I pondered that, I spotted the room I could use as a crystal room on the cruisers.  It was an upper observational lounge, long, narrow but tall enough for the crystals if they were laid out horizontally.  Easy to access and without impacting the weapons or sensory systems, it was perfect.  I just had to figure out how to get a crystal in there. Pondering that, I stood and stepped to the nearest crystal to lay a light hand on the warm surface.  It was absolutely smooth, as if polished.  Just like the crystals I had touched in the cathedral, deep under New Retribution.  And I could feel the goa within moving like a living thing, tickling my skin as it pulsed with the very essence of the Earth Mother. I then sighed as I pulled my hand away.  It would be impossible to get one of these giant crystals into that space without teleporting it in.  And I would have to steal it from the shrine on top of that, without knowing if the shrine would replace it, itself. It was as I considered that, that I became aware of something in my hand.  Looking down, I found myself looking at a duplicate of the crystal shard the Earth Seer had thrown to me in the control room an hour before.  'Well, that answers that question.'  I mused.  Then I frowned as the crystal twitched and visibly doubled in size.  "Ah, for pity's sake!' - Ronin!  I need a transport to the Iroquois' upper observation lounge, now! -

 

Chapter 20: Upgrade

I heaved a sigh of relief as the crystal I had brought into the Iroquois' upper observation lounge allowed itself to be put into a large metal brace I had a handful of engineers quickly rig up for it.  It hung from the ceiling, awash in the light pouring in through the upper windows and literally seething with goa.  Reaching up to touch the smooth crystal, I nodded in satisfaction.  'One down, four more to go.'  I thought. Then I was snatching my hand back in reflex as a maintenance drone flew past the window, a cloak projector in a pair of carrying arms, evidence that Legion was as good as its word.  Hopefully the neo-shell's schedule was spot on and the Iroquois would be completely refitted with the cloak in about an hour.  Speaking of schedules; - Ronin, how are the jump in's progressing? - - Good, sir. -  The veteran psyren quickly replied.  - The shells and the juggernauts both have been jumped up to the station.  And we're a third complete on the crew jump ins. - - Excellent.  As soon as you're able, brief some of the incoming psyrens on the placement process and start getting the crews sorted out and in the training suites.  I want them completely ready to fly as soon as the cruisers are ready for their shake down runs.  And have them start polling for captains, using images of being in command from our last battle. - - Yes, sir.  I'm pulling psyrens aside now. - - Outstanding.  Now, can you link me with Commander Davinder, please? - - You're linked, sir.  Go ahead. - - Davinder, Max here. -  I said. - Yes, sir.  What can I do for you? -  The viper commander's reply was easy and relaxed and I got an image of him crawling around the guts of one of the missile frigates, familiarizing himself with its workings. - The crew complements are hitting Gagarin even as we speak, complete with four complete sets of vipers for each cruiser's Tiger wings.  Now these are vipers that haven't been in a cockpit before, Davinder, so I need you to put them in the training suites to bring them up to level on what they need to know.  Then I need you to put together a training schedule that will get them some flight time before the cruisers are fully operational in the next day or so." This time I got the image of the lean viper swiftly extricating himself from the machinery, excitement visible on his face. - I am on it, sir.  New recruits?  Hot damn!  I'll have them combat ready in twenty four hours! - I chuckled at the burst of enthusiasm I felt over the telepathic link. - See that they are, my friend.  Keep me apprised of your progress. - Will do, sir.  Davinder out. - I turned to the handful of engineers that were now examining the crystal and its brace themselves, quietly commenting on how smooth the crystal was, and how warm to the touch it felt. "Alright, boys.  We're done here.  Ready to do four more?" By the time the last of the crystal rooms were set up in the cruisers, the space in and around Gagarin was busy with not only construction drones, but Tigers and missile frigates as well as Davinder put his people through their paces.  I paused on the observation deck to watch their maneuvers for a moment after finishing the last cruiser. "Ah, here you are, Max."  Hannibal said as he and his handful of echoes stepped onto the observation deck.  "I will have to remember to thank Ronin for her most excellent directions." I turned away from the tall window to the handful of shells walking towards me. "Hannibal."  I smiled in greeting, taking his hand to give it a human style shake before greeting the rest in turn.  "Welcome to the Gagarin Shipyards."

"Thank you.  We're excited to be here."  He said, the others murmuring in agreement even as they found their eyes drifting to the vast observation deck window showing a wing of Gagarin stretching away from the main hub, the third cruiser almost completed in her construction bay and the Tigers whipping in and out of the support pylons on exercises. "I can imagine."  My eyebrow lifted as I momentarily thought about how each of these echoes were feeling, considering all of them had been 'created' in a time far before Humanity had reached into space.  To see what they were seeing for the first time must've been overwhelming.  Then I was pushing that aside to focus on the here and now. "Now, I must admit, I'm at a bit of a loss as to what you can accomplish up here, Hannibal.  I mean, the Risen will be filling the crewing complements, so I don't have room for any of your people there.  And Gagarin is automated, so you really don't fit in there either.  So what exactly are you looking for up here?" Hannibal hesitated in answering, looking at his fellow echoes for a long second before replying. "Well, you see, Max, we're noticing the battle against the enemy has shifted from ground side to space.  And when we agreed to join in your fight against the aliens, we agreed to see it to the end.  And that means going to where the fighting is.  And now that we're here, we'll do what it takes to help you win this war.  Except digging latrines.  Caesar doesn't dig latrines." Eyebrow raised, I looked over to find Caesar slowly shaking his head. "No latrines."  The former Roman said, prompting a snort from Corraidhan. "That's because he's a lazy mac na bèiste."  The Irish warrior woman bluntly noted, earning herself a hard look from Caesar and a rolling of the eyes from Rasputin. "I once commanded the legions of Rome, you Celtic barbarian."  The Roman echo tautly informed her.  "I was her greatest general, and gave birth to the Empire that left its mark on the entire world.  I do not dig latrines!" "Seriously?"  I growled as Hannibal sighed. "Sorry, Max.  They've spent far too much time in each other's companies recently.  Nerves are becoming frayed." "You're telling me, Casper.  Mine are frayed from like two minutes of that shit."  Then, a bit louder: "Look, Caesar, Corraidhan, knock it off.  You won't be digging latrines.  You're in frickin' space, for pity's sake.  You can't have latrines in space."  I paused as a thought suddenly occurred to me.  "No, I know what I'm going to do with you lot.  You'll be joining the juggernauts as marines for each ship.  And don't worry, Corraidhan.  I'll make sure your Roman friend is on a ship different than the one you're on." "Max Niekro."  Legion stepped onto the observation deck and almost immediately the echoes went silent as the powerful neo-shell strode through their midst.  It paused when it reached me to turn and look at them. "And empty shells."  It was an awkward greeting, but all things considered far better than Legion ignoring them as it had before that odd conversation with Hannibal a few days ago. "Legion."  Hannibal replied neutrally with a nod of his head, the others either nodding and mutely waving their own replies.  That made my eyebrow climb, hearing the effort Hannibal was making to keep his voice level.  Was there something about Legion that the echoes were starting to dislike? Apparently satisfied with the greetings it received in return, Legion then turned to me, recapturing my attention. "I have completed the refit of the Iroquois, Max Niekro."  It reported in a matter of fact tone.  "She will be able to stealth for her next mission.  The shipyards are also now equipped and the cloaking field has been engaged, effectively hiding us from velkin sensors.  The new cruisers will also be equipped by the time they are finished their construction cycle."

"Excellent."  I smiled.  "Nicely done, Legion, and very timely." "Indeed."  Raven, the North American native echo said with a smile, stepping close with the obvious intention of giving Legion a comradely pat on the shoulder.  The neo-shell must've guessed what he was about to do because it immediately whipped around, hand up raised. "Do not touch me, empty shell."  The K'ethik tautly hissed.  "With my omni field active, such physical contact would result in me reclaiming the K'ethik body you have stolen, . . ." "Stolen?"  Caesar snarled, hand falling to the weapon he had slung at his waist.  "I am Julius Caesar of Rome, plebe, not some common thief.  I was a general and a dictator over the greatest empire ever to grace this world.  And I'll not have some mechanical man, no matter what abilities they've shown to possess, accuse me of such a thing.  These bodies we did not steal.  We took them in combat." "They rightfully belong to the K'ethik people."  Legion retorted, not backing down one iota.  "I grant that you took them in battle.  Now, perhaps I should take them back and call it a fair exchange."  And with a soft, metallic rattle, six Reapers were in the big neo-shell's face. "Try it, tvarisch."  Rasputin growled.  "And we'll see if your omni field can shed six simultaneous Reaper blasts to the head from close range." I stepped forward as I spotted Legion's hand abruptly morph into its cannon. "All of you just need to chill the hell out."  I grated, physically pushing the echoes back.  I then pointed a finger at Legion. "You, my friend, need to watch it with the inflammatory rhetoric.   You want us to build you a ship to carry you back to K'eth?  Then you need to learn how to play well with others."  I rounded back on the echoes.  "And you lot need to stop thinking Legion's going to reclaim you at every turn.  You won your bodies in combat, you'll be keeping your bodies regardless.  If you can't move beyond that, and continue to have the need to draw gun on our ally, then you're on the next teleport back to the surface."  My expression tightened. "Have I made myself clear?" "Very clear, Max Niekro."  Legion replied as its hand reappeared.  At the same time the echoes lowered their weapons and murmured their own confirmations.  The neo-shell watched them do that then suddenly stepped forward, a move that had all six nervously putting their hands back on their Reapers. "You have my apologies for my harsh words,"  it began, ignoring how the echoes once again held their weapons ready.  "As compensation for my poorly considered statements, I would like to extend a firmware and software upgrade to your bodies to improve your control over them." "Improve our control?"  That from Sarah, the former Salem witch. "Da, I thought our control was already absolute."  Rasputin looked at Legion with a frown. The neo-shell threw me a quick look, as if considering its next words. "To you, your control seems complete.  However, my sensors are indicating that you control only seventy percent of the shell's abilities and functions.  Which would explain why your armor is nicked and battered after seeing combat.  With full control, you would not only be able to repair your armor at will, since it would be as responsive as an organic's skin.  But you would also be able to change your body to suit the situation at hand, as I do.  The upgrade I am proposing will modify the shell's interface to more fully integrate with your type of energy field.  Once that is accomplished, the anticipated outcome would be greater control over the shell's functions."

"How is this possible?"  Corraidhan wanted to know.  "A moment ago you called us 'empty', because you couldn't read the type of energy that makes up an echo.  Yet you now propose to upgrade the software to more fully integrate with that energy?  How can it integrate with something your sensors can't see?" Legion swung its eyes onto the Celtic echo. "A logical enough question."  It quickly conceded.  "By virtue of the fact that your shells react to your control suggests an energy source at work.  K'ethik research into the subject has determined that only energy fields generated by living systems will motivate and interact with a shell, much like the humanoid body requires a soul.  Based on this, I've concluded your echo energy is sufficiently close to that required for shell animation to warrant the upgrade.  Additionally, I've the empirical evidence in front of me, of your shells moving and functioning." Again it looked over at me a moment before returning its gaze to the echoes. "If you, . . . echoes are to more fully contribute to the defeat of the enemy, you will need full control over your shells."  It finished. "Fair enough."  Corraidhan nodded and stepped forward.  "You can upgrade me first, fella." "Bah!"  Caesar also quickly stepped forward.  "I'll not let some face-painting lackwit from the provinces show greater bravery than me."  He threw a hard look at Legion.  "You shall upgrade me first, man of silver." Then every eye was brought to me by the decking beneath my feet complaining at my abrupt change in density. "If you don't give over with this attitude, Caesar, I swear to the Earth Mother, I'll turn your shell into a snuff box with you still in it."  I swept a hard gaze over the rest of them as Caesar dropped his defiant look in submission.  "And that goes for each and every one of you.  Lose the attitudes.  We are all equal in the sight of God and the Earth Mother.  Don't agree?  Let's throw down right now!" "I would recommend against it, echoes."  Legion said in a perfect deadpan.  "Your leader is more formidable than a company of K'ethik warriors.  None that he has faced, has been able to defend against his power." "That we know, machine."  Hannibal said before looking at me.  "We are with you, Max.  And from this point on, we will treat each other with absolute equality as well as Legion and the Risen." "That's good to hear, Casper."  I growled, returning his look with eyes still hard.  "I eagerly await the opportunity to witness the proof!"  I switched my gaze to Legion.  "Can't you just upgrade them all at the same time, Legion?" "Of course."  The neo-shell answered and its omni field began to glow more brightly.  The glow built for a second or two then, with a pulse of brilliance, it was gone. "Done."  Legion curtly announced and I turned to see Corraidhan, the closest echo to me other than Hannibal, gasp as her armor began mending itself. "Out-frickin'-standing."  I bit out.  "Now, I'll leave you kids to figure out what kinda new shit you can do while I go and see how the cruiser crews are sorting out."  - Ronin, where are the cruiser crews mustering? - - Arboretum, sir.  Made sense as it's the biggest open space on the station that has atmosphere. - - It makes sense indeed.  How goes the search for officers and captains? - - Very good, sir.  I have five excellent candidates already standing by for your final inspection. - - Now that is the kind of news I like hearing.  Jump me there, if you would, and I'll get started. - I looked up from the dossiers Zara had prepared for each captain candidate at the five Risen themselves, standing in front of me at ease in their new uniforms of dark blue, with white trim and green dashing.  The colors of our world; I thought they looked pretty damn good.  Didn't hurt that blue and green were goa colors as well. "Well, captains."  I began, closing the dossiers.  "You have passed our final screening.  Welcome to the fleet!"  I finished with a smile.  "Of course we're not going to sit around and do nothing while you're in dock.  As soon as you're capable, you'll be going through the training suites a second time on general operations of the Hammerhead class cruiser.  By that time, I'm hoping the last four of our first fleet combat element will be completed and you will be taking command." I set the dossiers aside to take another set of folders out of the briefcase I had brought with me.  I then proceeded to hand each captain a set, which they took with a smile of their own and individual thanks. "These are your standing orders.  What you are expected to do while not actively engaged in fleet operations against the velkin." The nearest captain to me, a latina psyren, nodded as she quickly skimmed over the first couple of pages before looking up. "How often will we engage the enemy with just our ship, sir?"  She asked in that quiet, confident voice all psyrens seemed to have. "While it's possible, I'm going to suggest you avoid that, Captain Isabella.  The Hammerheads are powerful vessels, but they would be overwhelmed taking on multiple velkin warships by shear size alone." "So we'll be fighting and flying in company with each other for the most part?"  Another captain, a male wraith who was also latin, asked as he too looked up from his standing orders. "For the most part, that'd be correct, Captain Mateo."  I said. "I see we also have patrols we will pursue."  That from the East Indian psyren, Daljeet. "Also correct."  I said to her before looking at all of them.  "The cruisers won't be idle in one area.  You'll also run surveillance of any additional fleet elements you find out there, in case the velkin didn't bring the whole smash into Earth orbit. "Absolutely do-able, sir."  The final female captain, an African-American  javelin by the name of Jacinda said with a broad smile as she closed her folder. "And I agree."  The last of the five captains, a white male wraith named Oliver added with a nod.  "No corner of this system will stand hidden from our eyes." I nodded in satisfaction.  Isabella, Mateo, Daljeet, Jacinda and Oliver; my fleet captains.  Alot would be expected of them. "Good.  Now, head into the training suites and get those operationals taken care of.  Once the training has been finished, we'll have a formal ceremony swearing the five of you in as captains and then the show is all yours." "Yes, sir."  They chorused then began heading towards the nearest exit, intent on obeying my orders.  I watched them go for a moment, my thoughts turning.  'Better be ready when you come back, you five.'  I mused before turning to look through the forest towards the center where the star shrine was nearly hidden by the rapid growth of the big oaks forming its shield, all done since I put the crystal in the ground a few hours ago. "Better be ready to fly and fight."  I said quietly to myself.  "Because the day is getting late.  And we have velkin that need killing!"

 

Back to Basics

I wore a thoughtful expression as I watched Dante's bank of monitors over the tesla commander's shoulder, standing just behind him.  It was several days after the completion of what the fleet captains were calling the Wolf Pack, the name taken from the infamous U-boat packs the Nazis used to such effectiveness in World War Two in the north Atlantic Ocean against Allied shipping.  Except our Wolf Pack was hunting velkin warships, not cargo transports.  And we were watching one such hunt now from New Retribution's control center. "There he is."  Mateo's voice was loud and clear over Dante's external audio.  "Titan class, full complement.  Looks like he's moving to join that patrol cluster we saw move through sector thirty two a couple of hours ago." "Not smart."  That was Jacinda.  "We've destroyed what?  Four titan class heavies in the last twenty four hours alone?  And every one of them caught by themselves." "Okay, cut the chatter, everyone."  Daljeet tautly ordered.  She had flotilla command today, a responsibility they rotated amongst each other every day.  "Shields up, cloaks tight, power to weapons.  C'mon, you know the drill.  Attack pattern epsilon, execute!" I folded my arms across my chest as I watched the tactical display show the Hammerheads closing in on the massive velkin vessel.  Then lines of light were painting themselves across the screen, connecting the stealthed Hammerheads to the city-sized warship.  Powerful cables of energized photons, the beam weapons worked by weakening the electron bonds between atoms.  The Wolf Pack had used them to a degree of success to disrupt velkin polarized particle shielding before pounding the hull with particle beam weapons and missiles with great success. Two Hammerheads went high, two flanked and one skimmed the massive warship's belly, the beam weapons painting both dorsal and ventral hull sections liberally with high powered photons.  Struggling to keep her shields up, the titan class ship started firing back even as its hull became scored with long burn furrows from the beam weapons. Much more agile than the massive velkin craft, the Iroquois and her sisters flipped around for another run, easily avoiding the massive pulses of plasma and photonic energy the titan class threw at them.  I frowned at that.  Somehow I still suspected the velkin were holding back, like they had better, more deadlier weapons than what we've seen so far.  Matched by equal or slightly better tech, their massive ships had gone from deadly to ponderous, effective only because of size and volume.  Unless, as I suspected, they had something up their sleeves.  Like those elites being far better than any of the hunters we had faced before then. But, as the Iroquois and the rest of the Wolf Pack flew circles around the titan class on the screen, I came to the conclusion it wouldn't be with this particular vessel that we'd be seeing it.  The titan class's shields flickered then dropped.  A heart beat later all five Risen ships opened fire first with their high density particle beam cannons, shredding the velkin vessel's skin like tissue paper.  Then Shrikes were darting in to punch through weakened metal and detonating deep within the softer materials making up the interior.  The titan class disappeared in a ball of light as the Wolf Pack retreated to a safe distance. A quick scan of the wreckage for survivors, then the Wolf Pack was moving in to land juggernaut and echo-led marines and do a sweep.  A couple quick skirmishes later, the marines were trooping back aboard and the Wolf Pack was cloaking and going back on the hunt. "Another successful encounter."  A light voice said behind me and I looked over my shoulder to find Ambriel standing there with a smile. "Ah, Commander Ambriel."  I said, returning her smile.  "I hope you don't think we've ignored your people with our efforts to clear Earth orbit of velkin warships."

Ambriel glanced at the screen still showing the Wolf Pack moving away from the wreckage of the ship they had destroyed and shook her head. "My people have rapidly climbed back to a certain level of comfort with technology."  She admitted with a quiet laugh.  "But that level of comfort isn't high enough to let us go into space.  So we don't feel overlooked in the slightest."  Her smile faded as she returned her attention to me. "But our level of comfort is certainly high enough to get excited about taking out the velkin still planetside.  And work to free the rest of my people from the cull camps." I found myself smiling at that.  Yet again, the woman the Earth Mother had selected as the leader of the humans was showing her true self.  Determined and resolute, and always mindful of her people.  And once more I was impressed. "Then that's what we'll do, commander."  I said with a nod.  "With the Wolf Pack keeping the enemy from landing reinforcements, and Tovin's dream walkers recovering the humans at the cull camps, we'll make this rescue effort into a new ground offensive against the remaining velkin forces in North America." Ambriel's answering smile was brilliant. "Now that's what I'm talking about, sir."  She said with a bright nod.  "I'll prep my people right away for a dusk insertion." "And I'll get us a place to go."  I said, looking over at Dante as Ambriel jogged out of the command center.  "Do you have a readout of the still active cull camps within striking range, Dante?" "Just about all of them, sir."  Dante quickly replied.  "Most of our efforts were focused against military targets.  Outside of the mission to Kicking Horse that netted you Ambriel and her people, we haven't hit any of the dozens of culling camps scattered throughout continental North America." "Well, then, this should be easy."  I grinned.  "Find me the closest." Nodding, the tesla's fingers danced for a moment before a map appeared on a secondary monitor. "There we go.  Closest is southeast, just south of Lake Superior.  Large camp, pulling from sanctuaries both north and south of the Great Lakes." I nodded as I looked at the tally scrolling up the monitor of both expected human numbers and counted velkin in the garrison.  That place would do.  It would do perfectly! "Contact Zara and let her know we need some of her birds."  I said, still looking at the map Dante had brought up.  "Transports and a handful of Tigers for escort.  And tell her to prep them for a run over to the Lakes for an extraction of an unknown number of humans.  And tell them we need those birds ASAP!"  Then I was reaching into the broadband. - Tovin, I need some dream walkers for a human extraction run.  As many as you can spare.  We'll be going as long as we can. - - Acknowledged, Max. -  My psyren commander replied.  - I think they will be happy for the change of pace.  We've spent too much time watching your efforts in orbit and not doing anything about what's still happening on the surface. - - Right you are. -  I quickly conceded.  - And I'm changing that.  Right now.  Have your ladies ready as soon as possible.  I want wheels up on the transports within a half hour! - Zara, of course, was her efficient self.  Her birds, including a brace of escort Tigers and six transports, were ready in ten minutes.  As their thrusters hummed on idle, I took a quick jog down the ramp into the main part of the base where Ambriel had a couple dozen of her human fighters doing a final check on their gear.  Unlike Risen, who didn't have to worry about things like water and food, the humans had to have a full supply list, with medical materials, rations, enough water for an extended mission, shelter, and rechargers for their Reapers.

They were going through their final checklists when I arrived. "Right."  I said as several of them looked up at me upon my arrival.  They looked like a grim bunch, veterans all of the Phoenix campaign to keep New Retribution out of velkin hands.  They had seen some death, though thankfully no humans had died in that battle.  So they had that hard look to their faces, men and women, that I remembered seeing on the faces of the soldiers I commanded when I was serving. "As Commander Ambriel may have told you, this is going to be a full on extraction."  I began before a young man in the front snorted as he stood from his pack. "Yeah, she did."  He said, interrupting me as he gave me a hard, challenging stare.  "And she's in command of our unit.  So she'll be telling us what to do, not you." Another male joined the first. "Just what the hell are you doing here, man?"  The second man growled.  "We're saving humans here.  Not doing some shambler run to get you lot more corpses to reformat." The challenging questions made me frown.  Had somebody forgotten just who the hell got them off the velkin menu to begin with?  Along with shelter, food, clothing and just about everything else to perpetuate their species? Before I could say anything though, Ambriel was quickly stepping forward. "I am, . . so sorry, sir."  She stammered, her face red.  "Please forgive their rudeness.  I've had them working too much in isolation from the Risen, trying to get them ready for operations, they're simply unaware of who you are."  Then she was spinning to face the two males, who suddenly looked uncertain. "That's right, I'm in charge of the human contingent here, at New Retribution."  She bit out tightly.  There was no mistaking the anger in her voice.  "And I don't remember giving you two permission to open up your big mouths and insult the juggernaut who not only built this place, but was primarily responsible for saving you from being an alien brown bag lunch!" "J-juggernaut?"  The one who first spoke, stammered as he looked at me, eyes wide. "No, man."  The second hoarsely whispered, his eyes just as wide.  "The juggernaut."  Then, a little louder: "I'm so sorry for that, Commander Niekro.  It's just that we're getting amped up for this campaign, adrenaline is flowing, . . ." Ambriel cut them both off with an abrupt chop of her hand. "Save it."  She hissed.  "And just consider yourselves lucky that one of the most formidable warriors ever to grace the face of this planet is coming with us, and lending us the support of his psyrens.  Our percentage of success just went from seventy five percent to a hundred and ten." I looked over my right shoulder as Tovin and several of her psyrens floated towards us. "Inspecting the troops before they embark?"  The veteran psyren quietly asked as Ambriel continued to dress down the two male human soldiers.  I nodded first in greeting to her and her company before returning my attention to the human commander. "Asserting her authority."  I said. "Ah."  Tovin replied in understanding. As if she sensed our silent scrutiny, Ambriel quickly wrapped up the rest of her dressing down. "So if this man tells you to jump, you go.  No questions asked.  Do I make myself clear?"  The grim blonde snarled and the two human soldiers snapped crisp salutes in reply. "Sir, yes, sir!"  they barked in unison and, nodding in satisfaction, Ambriel turned back to us. "Sorry about that."  She said again before looking to Tovin.  "Commander Tovin.  Good to have your ladies with us for this."

"It's our pleasure to extend our capabilities to our human comrades."  Tovin smoothly and easily replied.  "I only hope our efforts this night will be as successful as that night we freed you and your comrades." "As do I, commander."  Ambriel fervently said.  "As do I."  She looked up the ramp, the sound of the idling thrusters making their way down the curving entry way to the hanger deck. "Birds ready?"  She asked and I nodded. "I was just about to give your people a pre-flight but, in light of this little exchange, perhaps I can leave that job to you."  I handed her a tightly furled tube of extruded thin-sheet plastic.  "Just the particulars about what target we're hitting, how long it'll take to get there and what sort of surprises to expect once we're on the ground.  You know, the usual stuff."  I smiled and Ambriel couldn't help her dry chuckle. "Usual for you, commander, after fighting a hundred battles against the aliens.  This will be only our second engagement." "Then we probably shouldn't delay further, and make your people even more nervous than they are."  Tovin indicated and I nodded in agreement. "Agreed.  Wheels up in five, commander."  Then I was turning to lead the psyrens up the ramp. The transport pilots were just starting to spin their thrusters up when Ambriel came jogging up the ramp, pack on her back and her command trotting behind her.  To the soldier they looked grim and resolute, and completely ready to go. "You good?"  I asked as Ambriel clambered into the transport Tovin and I were riding in.  She nodded as she secured her pack. "We're good."  She said, flashing me a brilliant smile. "Outstanding.  Let's go save some heart beats, shall we?"  I said with a smile.  - Zara, we're loaded. - - Roger that, commander.  All pilots, this is Flight Control.  You are cleared for launch.  I repeat, you are cleared for launch.  Tigers are in the air, and will rendezvous with you ten klicks out.  Good luck and good hunting! - I nodded as I caught the lights and motion of a Tiger matching our speed about a hundred metres off to the right as I hung out the open door, the winds of passage swirling around me.  Davinder's guys were good; they were on us as soon as we reached the designated altitude, far lower than what we would've gone to if we were strictly a Risen company, as we had to make sure the humans could still breath.  Then I found myself falling back into memory where, in a similar transport and packed so tight we were like sardines, my friend Charge and I flew into battle together for the very last time. I shook my head, sorrow washing through me in a cold and bitter wave.  'Man, if I only knew half of what I know now, maybe I could have saved you, old friend.'  I thought.  And only if I hadn't of gone to Russia on a whim, I could've been there for Kat and Felix, for Jace and Helo and for all the other Risen that died during the Phoenix campaign.  It was enough to squeeze a sigh out my nostrils, the sound and the air quickly snatched away by the cold winds hissing by outside. "No regrets, Max."  Tovin said, hovering in the passenger cabin despite the fact that we were traveling hundreds of kilometres an hour and nearly a kilometre off the ground.  I knew her skill was such that she'd never falter to the point where she'd fall out.  She would never falter period.  She had been the steadying force in my post-living existence ever since Twitch found me in that cull camp.  A quiet voice of confidence and assurance that would make sure I did my duty to the Earth Mother before I found my own way back into the ground. "No regrets, Tovin."  I replied, looking over at her.  "Just bitter memory."  Then the floor beneath me shifted as the transport began its descent. To remain as stealthy as possible, I had the transports land us a good kilometre from the cull camp's outer perimeter.  With all that was going on between us and the aliens, there was a fair good chance they were ready for an attack here.  Which was exactly the reason why we were going to sneak in.  My suspicions were confirmed as soon as we came into visual range of the fence line and found it lit up with the pale yellow lights the velkin favored, leaving no gaps for us to sneak into. "Bah."  I said in a hoarse whisper as I examined the fence line through a pair of powerful binoculars, seeing both the lack of shadows and the constant patrols walking the line.  "My kingdom for a hand of wraiths to clear us a port in point inside the fence line."  I dropped the binoculars to look over at Tovin.  "Can you teep us a clear spot to jump into close to one of the holding pens, Tovin?" The psyren looked up from a data pad that was displaying current satellite imagery of the cull camp. "I believe so.  But we will be deep inside the camp.  If things go poorly, we will be relying heavily on you to get us out." I nodded my understanding then looked over at Ambriel. "Have a handful hang back and set up a recovery point, commander."  I instructed.  "The rest we're going to blind jump into establish a beachhead close to a holding pen.  They will need to hold that spot without unnecessary aggression until Tovin's team can move in." "No problem."  Ambriel said, turning to her command which were crouched low in the darkness, weapons held ready, their faces smeared with camoflague paint and quickly pointed to several of them.  Those humans immediately broke off and began pulling tents out of their packs.  The rest she moved close to us. "Ready for jump in."  She reported and Tovin nodded. "Jump in three, two, one, mark."  She said and the humans disappeared in a wink of light and the huff of displaced air. I immediately looked over at Tovin, who nodded. "I have a lock on Ambriel."  She said, her voice slightly quieter than normal as she focused on keeping track of the distant humans.  "They are egressing from the jump in point and establishing a perimeter."  The hood swung in my direction. "They have secured the ground." I nodded. "Commence jumping in your team, Tovin."  I said and the darkness around me winked out of existence.  A heartbeat later I was crouched beside the organic metal fence that marked the edge of the holding pen Tovin was using as a marker. A quick look around found Ambriel and her people, each wearing a faint UV marker light as a friend or foe identification, the humans in ready crouches with weapons ready. - Going to broadband to maintain stealth. -  Tovin indicated as she appeared beside me with the last of the psyren dream walkers she had brought with her.  - Commander Ambriel, do you read me? - - Five by five, Commander Tovin. -  The human leader quickly replied.  - We have eyes on.  Initiate your extraction whenever you're ready. - - Acknowledged. -  The hood swung towards the pen.  - We have fifteen humans inside, nine females, six males, all currently unconscious.  All psyrens, we are initiating dream walking on my mark.  Mark! - Hearing that, I settled back, my eyes vigilantly scanning the dimness around us.  It would be a while before the first human would be recovered sufficiently to start jump outs.  In the meantime we were ten klicks inside the heart of a heavily defended cull camp where we could get discovered at any time.  And I had the feeling they wouldn't sound an alarm.  They'd just start shooting. I could only hope our human friends were ready to handle it. 

 

Recruiting Day

As expected, the first recovered humans woke in a complete panic, forcing Tovin to expend goa and effort to calm them down.  Only then did she start jumping them out to the recovery point Ambriel's soldiers had set up where they would wait until we had cleared the camp before loading everybody onto the transports.  It would be a pattern we would repeat over and over again that night until I could do it blindfolded. Once the pen was clear, I led the way through the gloom to the next one, pausing several times to stay in the shadows as much as possible as patrol after patrol moved close.  And yet again I found myself wishing I had some wraiths.  They could've easily stealthed their way to the next objective before establishing a jump point for the psyrens to move us. But this was a human campaign and so I wanted to lean as much on our human comrades as possible.  Thankfully all the drilling that Ambriel had them do paid off as they moved with as much stealth as a non-cloaked Risen would've managed. - Now everybody stay frosty. -  I urged as we moved to the fourth pen.  - As the volume of humans in the pens decrease, the risk that the hunters will smell the humans in our company will increase without the scent mask of the recently culled to hide them.  So pick up your visual scanning and all humans make sure your zero-gap armor is in place.  Because a Risen can go home in a bag and still walk away from the experience.  You cannot. - - Copy that. -  Ambriel replied even as I watched her take a quick look along our back path.  It was summer now, and the heat that normally pounded North America in the summer months had already baked the ground dry and hard.  Which had the fortunate side effect of reducing the amount of trail we left behind us as we moved.  Reduced, but not removed.  If the hunters looked close, they would be able to see that a group of smaller beings had moved through here recently. And so she had assigned herself to periodically checking the back trail to make sure it wasn't glaringly obvious.  Smart move.  Then I was easing up beside the fourth pen and Tovin's psyrens moved in to begin their dream walk, still moving crisply. We had learned from our first dangerous foray into recovering humans via dream walking where I didn't recharge the psyrens after we jumped out of the camp and nearly got us caught out in the open when they started falling unconscious, their goa levels dangerously low.  Instead of waiting until they got tired, this time I recharged the psyrens after every extraction to keep their goa levels constant.  So far it was working; we were recovering humans at almost triple the rate of that first attempt. Pen after pen we cleared.  Until: - That's it. -  Tovin announced.  - The camp has been cleared.  And, . . . -  The plasma blast caught one of Ambriel's perimeter guards directly in the chest, the bright splash of light picking him up and throwing him almost five metres before he dropped.  Thankfully the zero-gap armor was more than up to the task, completely blunting the blast's devastation and letting the human roll to his knees, his weapon to the ready. "Patrol has sniffed us out."  I growled, my density climbing.  "But we've recovered everybody so you're clear to return fire."  And with actinic growls, the Reapers opened up on the handful of velkin that loomed out of the darkness, their massive weapons ready. The giants quickly went down under the hail of focused energy bolts launched from the Reapers, the hunters only managing a handful of shots in return before they were all dead.  Then I was turning to Tovin. "Full evac.  Now!  Before we get swarmed."  I ordered and the cull camp winked out of sight. A heart beat later we were standing just outside of the recovery point camp, which now bustled with activity.

"One hundred and forty two."  Ambriel said as she stepped close to me in the gloom, her brilliant smile visible through the darkness.  "Not a bad haul, for our first run." "Not bad at all."  I agreed with a nod and a smile of my own.  "And now you need to answer a couple of questions along with celebrating this success.  First of which would be: will your facilities be maxed out with this lot?  Or can you handle another run or two?  Remember, you'll have to supply and equip each, and make sure you have enough food and water on hand to support them for at least six months." Ambriel nodded with each point as she fished out a data pad and made some quick calculations. "Space and QM we have covered."  She immediately replied before shifting some more numbers around.  "And food and water as well."  She looked up at me.  "I calculated before we initiated this recovery op, that we could absorb nearly five hundred additional personnel without significantly depleting our resources.  But those numbers are based on what my people are currently consuming.  It's been my experience that, as a human population grows, its consumption of resources becomes exponential instead of linear." "I would agree with that."  I said.  "Start planning for supply runs to the NADF bases within range of New Retribution so we can stockpile and account for that until we've cleared enough of the aliens off the surface to start agricultural and husbandry operations for fresh, sustainable supplies." Again Ambriel nodded as she made notes. "Sometimes I envy the Risen."  She said, finally putting the data pad away and looking over at me.  "For your ability to subsist solely on goa, without the need for sleep, food or water.  Makes planning so much easier." "That, it does."  I conceded.  "However, beyond reformatting, we possess no means to increase our numbers.  There are pros and cons to each condition of the Earth Mother's children, Risen or Warm." "I suppose you're right."  Ambriel replied before looking at the distant lights of the cull camp.  Even at this range we could hear the shouts of alarm as the hunters discovered pen after pen emptied. "What are we going to do about that camp?  They'll miss quota without the humans we took and will hit the sanctuaries again to refill the pens." The ground beneath my feet grumbled as my density maxed and my shield settled around me with a shimmer of green and blue. "I thought as much."  I rumbled.  "Follow me in.  And tell your people to shoot anything over two metres."  And then I was exploding forward, breaking the sound barrier two steps away from the human leader and leaving her shouts as she commanded her soldiers into action, far behind. As I smashed through the perimeter and ran a handful of velkin over, their armor crumpling beneath my fists and driving feet, I felt a momentary sense of satisfaction.  This was what I was meant to do as a juggernaut.  Smash through enemy barricades and crush their forces without mercy.  Not command space fleets or build infrastructure.  While I had the command acumen to do those things, and do them well, I wasn't truly happy unless I was hulking out on some giant green bastards.  Hulk, . . . smash. I skidding around a corner and dashed into the generator building, driving through the heart of the reactor core as I did.  At the same time, I reached for the broadband. - Tovin, can you tell me where our escort's at? - - Standing at station, ten klicks out, waiting for our launch signal. -  Was her immediate reply. - Advise them that they are authorized to make a strafing run on the cull camp.  And to do it now, before the humans move in through the breach I've made in the outer perimeter.  Then they'll have to pick up their visual scanning while they focus on parts of the camp away from where the humans are fighting. -

- Copy that.  Sending the particulars through now, Max. - I twisted in place and went out the side of the reactor, nodding in satisfaction as it exploded behind me.  After facing the elites in the wrecks a few days ago, taking on standard hunters felt like a cake walk.  There simply was no comparison between the two types of velkin soldier. Then the Tigers were whispering by overhead, weapons firing and more explosions began to rock the cull camp. - Command Niekro, this is Ambriel.  My team has re-entered the base through the egress we established earlier and have engaged the enemy. -  The human leader reported over broadband.  In confirmation of her words, I heard Reaper fire from somewhere to my southwest. - Copy that, Ambriel.  They'll come at you in waves, both because they'll know you're human and because I'm driving them out of the camp's center.  Let me know if the pressure gets too much. - - Will do, sir.  And the Tigers?  We see them going overhead.  Do they know we're down here? - - They absolutely do.  No friendly fire deaths today. -  I assured her.  And I turned to watch a fireball climb into the sky as the communications building exploded.  - And I'll make sure they hit installations well away from your location. - - Thank you, sir.  We appreciate that greatly. -  Ambriel replied. It was close to a half hour later that we finally withdrew, the cull camp a burning ruin behind us.  Outside of light cuts and scrapes, the humans were unharmed and none of the Risen personnel suffered any injuries.  So I was calling it a successful raid. The humans, after a quick round of celebration, were swiftly brought back to earth by a grim Ambriel. "Save your energy for when our entire planet is liberated."  She growled as I passed by where she was debriefing the team she took into the camp the second time.  "Yes, it's nice to get a little payback against those big bastards who thought they could make meals out of us.  But there's still a lot of territory to take back from them.  And we still have work to do this night.  So grab some food and a bit of water and get ready to move out." I was already several steps past her impromptu debrief, talking in low tones with Tovin about the dream walk, when she caught up with me. "I know you were a soldier in your previous life, sir."  She said, falling into step with Tovin and I as we walked to where the rest of the psyrens were waiting for the transports to return.  They had taken the opportunity while we were in the camp wreaking havoc to send the rescued humans back to New Retribution.  Good thinking as always by Tovin to kill two birds with one stone. "Can I get a quick evaluation on how my team performed on this op?"  Ambriel finished by asking, looking over at me with a question in her eyes. "I will, with the caveat that I was engaged for the most part further inside the camp and didn't have a chance to truly see how your people were deployed."  I replied.  Ambriel nodded. "Whatever feedback I can get, will help."  She said, breaking out her data pad to take notes.  I nodded and quickly began outlining the things I had seen in the deployment of her soldiers.  I was consise and terse, making sure to be as objective as possible and only point out things that were relevant to the situation. In the end she was still jotting down notes as the transports dropped out of the sky several minutes later. "I hope I didn't overwhelm you there."  I said, holding my hand up in front of my face to shield it from thruster wash as the first transport settled close to where I was standing with Tovin and Ambriel.

"Not at all, sir."  Ambriel replied, making a final notation before slipping the data pad back into her gear.  "Your observations are extremely valuable.  I already see several areas that I can improve during our next deploy." "Outstanding."  I said with a smile as we climbed into the transport and it began to lift off the ground.  "I look forward to seeing those improvements." As it turned out the next deploy was less than a half hour later.  And it was considerably hotter than the last. - Transports, we've got several bogeys triangulating your position. -  The lead Tiger pilot abruptly announced.  Then the sky around us lit up with weapons fire. "Damn!"  One of the humans snarled as a blast narrowly missed coming in through the open door. "Heads down, and get your flaming helmets on!"  Ambriel barked.  "They won't save your lives serving as paper weights.  Do it now!" I grunted as a blast caromed off my shielded body, forcing me to renew my grip on the edge of doorway. - Escort One, any way to peel these bastards off us? -  I tautly sent via broadband. - Working on it, boss. -  The lead Tiger pilot tersely replied, tension naked in his mental voice.  Then I was leaning back with a grimace from the door as a velkin flyer dropped past us not three metres away.  Blue-white flames licked hungrily from its cracked hull, its interior filled with fire as it tumbled to the ground several hundred metres down. Then I was forced to once again tighten my grip as the transport bucked hard.  Whoa.  That wasn't turbulence from flyers exploding around us.  That was something else entirely.  I leaned out just enough to take a look around us.  And saw rapid flashes on the ground before several heavy bolts of focused energy streaked by all around us, a number of them slamming into the transport's zero-gap belly armor. "Great."  I growled.  "They've got anti-aircraft batteries." Two more solid strikes and I was forced to scramble to regain my footing as the transport lurched abruptly downward.  I was just climbing to my feet when I heard the soft hum of a nearby impeller drive.  Was it one of the Tigers come to check on us? Then I looked up and out the door and found a velkin flyer moving sideways as it matched our speed. "Ah, damn."  I said.  Then I was getting pelted by plasma fire as the flyer fired it's energy cannons into the open cabin, my shielded body taking the brunt of the attack. Just when I thought the stream of energy would finally knock me free of my grip, I caught the blue-white brilliance of a particle beam cannon lancing down from the upper left, slicing through the flyer like it was so much tissue paper.  Then a couple hard shots from fixed pulse guns and a Tiger was diving right through the much larger flyer, ripping it apart with an explosion that rocked the transport almost over onto its side. I reflexively threw an arm over my eyes as the flyer erupted, filling the sky with temporary brilliance.  And, in doing so, didn't possess sufficient grip to keep me anchored when the transport almost flipped over onto its side.  I barely had time to realize what was happening before I had tumbled free of the cabin to drop into the darkness. Well, shit. - Tovin, I am free falling.  Can you get LOS on me? -  I quickly sent as I fell through the night sky filled with the flashes of weapon fire and exploding flyers. - No. -  I could hear Tovin's frustration like a barely suppressed snarl.  - It's too dark and the EMP interference from the plasma discharge is interfering with a telepathic lock. - Sweet.  I'm going to belly flop onto the ground.  Again. Maximizing my density and making sure my shield was up tight, I just began to brace myself when I slammed into the ground with enough force to rattle my teeth despite being full on juggernaut. - Okay, I'm down. -  I took a quick look around and found one of the anti-aircraft batteries, a modified tank, a couple hundred metres away.  Perfect. - We need to either withdraw or get everybody onto the ground. -  The ground shredded beneath my feet as I launched at the battery.  It exploded very nicely when I ripped through it's power plant. - While the zero-gap armor will keep the transports in one piece, they just don't have enough protection for people riding in the passenger cabin. -  Wait.  What was that shape there, beside what looked like the burnt out hulk of another tank?  Then it was leaning around to fire an all too familiar rocket at me.  A pinhead nuke.  And that could only mean, . . - Belay that. -  I immediately sent, twisting hard and sprinting away from the missile which hammered into the wreckage of the battery. - Get the humans out of here.  Now! - -  The humans want to stay and fight. -  Tovin fired back.  - They need a good reason to withdraw or they won't. - I grimaced as the crouching shape crabbed sideways, keeping me in its sights despite me moving close to the speed of sound as I circled around.  And felt a drop in my stomach when two more shadows detached themselves to also move out into the open. - There are elites down here. -  I sent, hazarding a look skyward in a vain attempt to see our black painted transports in the night sky. - If the humans land, they'll get cut to pieces! - Then I almost cried out loud as a pair of rockets darted into the night sky, immediately finding two of our transports and hammering into them with a shimmer of exotic energy.  They stayed aloft, mute testimony to the strength of Zara's design and the zero-gap armor.  But I didn't think they could take another shot like that. - By the Earth Mother! -  Tovin nearly screamed back over the broadband.  - Whatever they just shot at us, nearly destabilized the very molecular structure of the transport.  The pilot is struggling to keep it in the air! - Damn it! - Get 'em out of here, Tovin. -  I skidded to a halt to line myself up with the trio of elites that were staying well covered by both the downed tanks and the destroyed battery.  Weapon fire, shimmering bolts similar to what I had seen up in the wreck, started slashing around me with enough fury I could feel them through the shield. - We can't just leave you down there to face them alone! -  The veteran psyren countered, concern tightening her voice.  She had seen what these bastards could do to juggernauts.  One against three was decidedly in their favor. - You've got no choice, . . uhhhh! -  A shot hit me hard enough to stagger me.  Stumbling a couple of steps, I fought to regain my balance. - Like I said, the humans will get slaughtered.  Get them out of here.  That's an order! -  Then I took another shot full on in the chest and it was like getting hit by a freight train. I was instantly stopped, my whole body reverberating with my shield's efforts to shed the power of the elite's exotic weaponry.  Then I was digging in with a grimace, summoning goa with a ferocity that made tendrils as thick as my arm howl as they clawed their way out of the ground to slam into my body.  You bastards may have had the edge in space, with your exotic gear and tactics.  But you are on Earth now.  This is my house.  No-one comes into my house and throws down.  No-one!  'Let's see if you can stop this!'  I silently shouted, my body filled with as much goa as I could possibly hold.  Then I was slinging forward like I was shot out of a gun.

 

Compromised

I had gone maybe two or three steps when I heard a detonation and a heart beat later felt the rippling wash of an EMP discharging nearby.  Then I staggered as my nervous system began to destabilize.  'No!'  I silently howled, bending the whole of my strength of will to forcing my nervous system to obey my commands.  And I nearly heaved a sigh of relief when I felt my density stabilize and my shields firm up. Still I dove for cover behind a chunk of the dead anti-aircraft battery, rolling up to it and putting it against my back to I could take a cautious look around the edge of the shack-sized piece of ragged metal.  There they were, weapons up and in ready crouches as they carefully advanced.  And as soon as I poked my head around the corner they were firing, forcing me to jerk back behind cover even as their weapons chewed big pieces off the piece of wreckage I was hiding behind.  Damn, these bastards were good. More than good; even as I put my back against the piece of wreckage, it shuddered with multiple impacts.  And a heartbeat later several EMPs were rippling over me.  Instantly my shield was down and my density was dropping. Gritting my teeth as my head swam from the effort to stay conscious even as my nervous system was brought to the brink of shutting down, I flipped onto all fours and frantically scrambled at right angles to the attack through the darkness.  Hopefully going perpendicular to their advance would counter their anticipation of my next move.  If not, they would cut me apart with my density back to normal and my core shield down. Behind me a couple more pinhead nukes slammed into the piece of wreckage, pushing it over even as the compression shimmers of the EMPs ballooned away from the points of detonation.  By this time, however, I was far enough away that I managed to reestablish control over my rebellious nervous system and I felt my abilities come back online.  I found a slight depression in the ground and flopped into it before turning over and looking back along my path of travel. And so I was in the perfect position to watch the three finish their advance on the piece of wreckage.  Two of them crouched, sweeping the area with their weapons while the third tossed from behind cover what looked like a grenade into the spot they anticipated me being.  It erupted with another shudder of compression, sending yet another EMP pulse washing outward.  Frickin' bastards had pinhead nuke grenades too??  Those sons of bitches weren't taking any chances that I'd recover enough to give them trouble. Then they were easing around the piece of wreckage, all three weapons focused on the spot I was supposed to be.  And immediately heads were up and looking around when they found it empty.  'Yeah, surprise, surprise, you elite assholes.  Not as easy to frag as you thought, hey?' But I was far from out of the woods, my situation abruptly worsening when two more elites eased out of the darkness close by for a total of five on the ground.  The two groups quickly exchanged a series of hand signals in the flickering light cast by the burning wreckage before the newcomers turned to move back into the darkness.  As they did so, I spotted something akin to night vision goggles now over the front of their helmets.  I quickly lost sight of them, the pair doing an amazing job of melting into the darkness despite their size.  'Damn it.'  I thought darkly, returning my attention to the original three.  'What I wouldn't give for a Valkyrie right about now.  Or even a frickin' animus, who could see in the bloody dark!' At least I was still fully loaded with goa.  If the EMPs had robbed me of my store in addition to disrupting my neural network, I would've been in serious trouble. - Tovin, are you still out there? - - Max!  Thank the Earth Mother you're alright.  What happened? -  The veteran psyren quickly fired back.

- EMPs and lots of them.  These elites seem to have a keen awareness of a juggernaut's strengths and weaknesses, maybe from their friends we faced in orbit.  I managed to scramble out of range of the last few, but I got pounded when I charged them.  And I am now dealing with no less than five elites. - - Five??  We need to get you out of there, Max. -  The concern was naked in her voice.  And I didn't blame her.  She had a front row seat to watch my entire juggernaut contingent take it on the chin from just three elites.  And here I was, a long gunman facing down five and maybe even more. - No, you don't. -  I tautly directed.  - As far as you need to be concerned, I am lost.  You will either take those humans back to New Retribution.  Or you will continue to the target.  With this force out here, there's a good chance we've gotten their attention enough to take their eyes off that cull camp. - -But, . . . -  She began before I roughly cut her off. - No buts, Tovin.  That's an order.  Now hop to it. - - Yes, Max. -  I heard the resignation in her voice, and a great deal of unhappiness.  She didn't like leaving me to fend for myself.  Hell, I didn't like to be left out here.  These guys were going to chew me up and spit me out, double time.  But there wasn't much choice.  I won't have anybody sacrificing themselves to pull my ass out of the fire. - However you're not getting out of this existence that easily. -  Tovin suddenly returned to tautly point out, her voice cutting through my dark thoughts.  - You vowed you'd do everything within your power to defeat the velkin before you returned to the Earth Mother's embrace.  I'm holding you to your promise. - I grimaced as I listened to that.  To tell you the truth, it hadn't crossed my mind.  But looking at it from her point of view, I could see how she'd think that. - Don't worry, Tovin.  The plan is to stick around.  I've no intention of getting my head blown off today. -  I grimly reported.  - But this location is completely compromised.  I'll do my best to extricate myself but putting anybody else down on the ground at this point would be pointless. -  I paused as I gathered myself. - I'll see you back at base. - - See you back at base. -  Tovin replied, emotion interwoven through her mental voice.  Not that I blamed her.  The last few weeks had seen a good chunk of her old team killed in battle.  And now she was looking at the possibility of losing what should've been the most powerful and invulnerable member of that team.  It had the potential of being a crushing blow, if I indeed died. I slowly stretched my muscles as I readied them for what could be a final attack.  I just had to make sure that didn't happen, was all. A look over at where the three elites had gathered revealed them gone.  I half expected that.  Why stay out in the open, vulnerable to attack?  It's what I would've done with a company of Rangers in a similar situation. That thought almost made me groan out loud.  What if there was an entire company of elites out here?  They could easily destroy New Retribution and quash the Risen uprising with little effort.  I found myself hoping that Legion was right when it said the elites were few and far between.  Because if they weren't, we were in serious trouble. Then I was pushing that aside to slowly lift myself out of the hollow I had used for cover.  At the same time, I picked up my visual scanning.  Sure, it was dark, and granted, these guys were dangerously good at what they did.  But seriously, how long could a giant hide and not get caught? A shift to my right drew my attention there and my eyes narrowed as I caught one of the elites from the second group easing its way through the darkness, weapon held ready.  I froze, hoping my initial motion hadn't been caught and inwardly heaved a sigh of relief when it continued past behind me, moving without a sound.  Then I was fighting the impulse to drop flat as the second one of the pair eased in front of me, also with weapon up and ready as it scanned the darkness, missing hitting me in the head by maybe a half a metre as it went by.

That close I got a good look at its hybrid armor, which appeared to be made out of something similar to the zero-gap metal we were using.  I also felt the energy field that was layered over top for additional protection, giving the elite proof against both projectiles and beam weapons.  We had seen that protection at work in the wreckage a few days back, where the armor actually took a high density particle beam head on and held its own for several seconds instead of being sliced to ribbons.  If I had any hope of using a juggernaut attack to penetrate that armor, I would have to make it focused as much as possible to exert maximum impact on a single spot.  No more sweeps and broad movements. Watching the second elite move silently by me through narrowed eyes, I silently counted to see how long it took them to move a certain distance.  While they didn't use the great steps their less skilled and equipped hunter comrades did, the elites still covered quite a bit of territory with each careful step forward they made.  Even moving slowly in comparison, they were almost as fast as a man running at full tilt. I nodded to myself as a quick calculation gave me their rate of advance, which I also applied to the first trio of elites that was undoubtedly moving through the darkness with equal caution.  Using that, plus what I observed in the way of how the elites advanced in slow, curving lines instead of straight forward rushes, I began to make my own anticipations of where the elites would be.  And was quickly rewarded by seeing one of the original three appear where I determined they would, the giant elite moving in that same ready crouch its comrades were using. Knowing I was still alive they were now using stealth and caution as they hunted me down instead of merely peppering the area with pinhead nukes.  That was both good news and bad.  Good news, because it meant I could move around with my abilities intact.  Bad because it meant they were expending considerable effort to make sure I was dead. I waited until I had two more confirmations of my movement estimates, both members of the original three elites I had spotted before I decided to move myself.  If I timed it right, I should have two elites intersecting paths about thirty metres east of my current location.  Counting under my breath, I reached the threshold I was looking for.  Then I was exploding forward. It was surreal enough to go full speed during the day, where my surroundings would fade into a multi-colored blur.  In the moonless dark, it was something entirely different.  Almost as if I was detached from the rest of the world, wrapped on a cocoon of ebony where only the sensation of air rushing over my skin told me I was moving. Almost without warning two massive shapes loomed out of the darkness, slowly moving towards each other as they continued to scan around them with those night vision-looking things on the front of their helmets.  'Perfect.'  I thought in grim satisfaction and went to full speed. The two elites twisted towards me at the 'boom' of the sound barrier being broken.  Using my speed, I jump onto the nearest one's leg, running up its chest before launching into the air towards the other one.  A tight corkscrew twist in the air to gain momentum then I was slamming a heavy fist into the side of the second one's head. As expected the reinforced armor merely dented instead of completely collapsing at the blow.  But it was enough to drive the giant to one knee.  In testament to its discipline, the first kept its weapon trained on me but didn't fire while I was close to its colleague.  Only after I hit the ground did it unleash its weapon's power, sending a tight stream of energized photons howling towards me. Anticipating that, I used every iota of my juggernaut speed to twist towards the first elite as soon as I hit the ground, my hands held cupped in front of me.  Adjusting their angle at the last possible instant, I was able to use my cupped hands to deflect the first flurry of energy bolts into the kneeling giant's head and chest area.  And I watched in satisfaction as its shield flared to brilliance in an attempt to hold the firepower back before abruptly collapsing to take several shots directly on the armor itself.

Again, as it had in space, the exotic metals in the giant's breastplate actually managed to absorb several of the blasts before a pair coming in hot one after the other knocked the already dazed giant flying back.  Not waiting to see the other elite's reaction to watching its partner get dropped, I bolted back into the darkness, more energized photons slamming into the ground all around me. And in doing so nearly ran into another elite, one of the second pair, coming in quick from the north.  I darted between its legs before it could react, then took a hard turn to the right and raced for several large pieces of fitfully burning wreckage that were laying there strewn haphazardly about.  I managed to get into their midst before the first pinhead nuke went off behind me, the EMP pulse narrowly missing me. This time I didn't scramble for cover.  Instead, I grabbed a bus-sized piece of destroyed tank and, with every iota of juggernaut strength I possessed, I slung it at the elite I had narrowly dodged.  Having turned to pursue me, it actually managed to get off a couple shots at the piece of wreckage in a vain attempt to destroy it.  Then it was slamming into the giant, bearing it back and to the ground. Pinned by a weight it couldn't move off its chest, the elite instead of screaming in agony as I half expected it would, yanked out a side arm and continued firing at me, forcing me back into the jumbled wreckage to take cover.  Damn, these bastards were hardcore! I circled around to the far side of the debris field until I could get LOS on the downed elite.  And did so just as a second appeared out of the gloom.  It rapidly stored it's rifle-like weapon to put a shoulder to the piece of wreckage while the downed elite covered them both with its hand gun.  But, after heaving with all its strength, it could only shift the massive piece of ragged metal and plastic a few centimetres one way or the other and, after a moment's struggle, backed off. The two looked at each other for a moment.  Then the one pinned beneath the debris began removing things from its armor and handing it to its comrade.  'What the hell is it doing?'  I wondered as the standing elite took possession of the fallen one's weapons before it took a careful step back.  Then I was throwing a hand over my face as the one on the ground abruptly disappeared in a brilliant flare of light and sound. What the, . . .?  Did that bastard actually trigger some sort of self destruct??  With afterimages dancing in my eyes, I returned my attention to the spot where the trapped alien had laid.  And found it filled with a melted and scorched lump of metal and nothing much else.  'Wow.  I'm guessing they didn't want us getting a hold of whatever tech it had on its armor that it couldn't pass to its partner.'  I darkly mused. Speaking of the second elite, it had finished stowing whatever gear it could recover from its fallen comrade and was now moving cautiously towards the debris field.  Even as my eyes found it, I watched it launch a pair of pinhead nukes into the heart of field, spaced just enough that their overlapping EMPs would cover the whole space. That forced me out into the open, not wanting to have my abilities dropped by the EMP.  There I hesitated for the merest instant as I considered trying to find more cover.  Then I was running right at the elite, eyes forward and jaw set.  I was frickin' done hiding. Again the velkin specialist turned towards me when I broke the sound barrier.  This time I used a piece of wreckage as a ramp, my speed allowing me to scale the side of the house-sized fragment in two leaping steps before hurling myself through the air.  I took two or three shots in the chest before I was too close to shoot at and the elite tried backpedalling.  But by that point I was already within their personal space. Angling to take hold of the giant by the helmet, I let my speed and momentum torque me around before I managed to get my feet on its shoulder to apply further leverage.  There, with a heave of strength, I snapped its neck before throwing myself free of the abruptly limp and falling body. I was still falling through the air when the first pinhead nuke hit me square in the back, the explosion smashing me forward as the resulting EMP scrambled my nervous system, dropping my shield and sending my density to normal.  And that made the second one hit that much harder without anything to blunt the blast.  I felt a white-hot flare of agony as it too hit me in the back then everything went dark. I wasn't sure what jolted me back awake.  The impact with the ground, or the subsequent flare of pain.  Either way I returned to consciousness with a gasp, my left eye unable to focus.  And, as searing pain ripped through what was left of me, a quick inventory told me that I was missing most of my left side. Gone were my arm and shoulder, leg and hip and most of my torso.  And they were gone, not just separated from me.  I couldn't feel them no matter how hard I tried.  Clawing at the dirt with my remaining hand, I managed to flip myself over and started to laboriously drag myself over the rough ground to a small piece of debris.  All the while I leaked blood and fluid onto the ground from my damaged body, each move forcing a tortured grunt of pain from my shredded throat even as blood oozed from my mouth and nostrils, and from my ruptured ears. Finally, after what seemed like forever, I reached the debris.  Using it as an anchor, I somehow found strength I never knew I had and pulled myself up to put what was left of my back against it.  Just in time to look up as two elites stepped into my severely restricted field of view, weapons trained on me. "Bastards."  I husked.  "You, . . "  I swallowed the blood filling my mouth and felt it trickle out the side of my ruined chest.  "You shot me in the damn back." Then, remarkably, the nearest one spoke as it took aim at my head. "Time to die again, juggernaut."  It garbled in passable English via some sort of external speaker on its helmet. I took what blood I had pooled in my mouth and I spat it in the direction of the velkin elite. "Fuck you."  I managed to say as I desperately reached for goa even though I knew I wouldn't be able to summon it fast enough to stop this bastard from toasting me.  And I watched as the velkin leaned in, obviously intending on firing. Only to jerk around at a high pitched snarl splitting the night air.

 

Chapter 21: Old Friends

For a long moment the two elites scanned the night sky, searching for the source of the high pitched sound.  Then the one that nearly shot me, was jerking up its weapon to open fire at something high above them, lighting up the night sky with a geyser of deadly light.  The other elite shipped its weapon to pull a tube from an equipment rack on its back before it extended it with a hard pull.  The tube then went onto its shoulder and it fired several rockets skyward as well, each darting into the heavens to explode hundreds of metres up. At first the missiles seemed to be detonating at random, reaching their programmed arch before exploding.  Then two went off almost simultaneously and at the same spot.  And, despite only having one good eye, I could see something up high got hit and now it was tumbling groundward. Despite that, the snarl never relented, growing louder as the object fell out of the sky.  Then, abruptly it changed timber, going from a snarl to a full out roar.  A heat beat later something was slamming into the ground with enough force I could feel a tremble beneath my hand. The elites ceased fire, even as four more joined them, all six with their weapons ready as they moved to where they had seen the object hit the ground.  I strained to see it through the dark with one eye, my left refusing still to work.  Yet one eye was more than enough to witness what slowly rose, black and silver out of an impact crater not twenty metres from where I had leaned against a piece of wreckage to make my last stand. Surrounded by the shimmer of its omni field, Legion looked ominous as it came to its feet to stare hard at the stunned velkin, who had obviously never seen such a creature before if I was to go by their frozen postures of surprise.  Then, as abruptly as Legion had come crashing to the ground, they unfroze and unleashed a wall of killing energy at the massive neo-shell. At the same time, Legion's hands morphed into its cannon and rapid fire small munitions and it actually managed to return fire before it was abruptly buried beneath that wall of light.  Crabbing sideways, the elites broadened their scope of fire, relentlessly pounding the spot where Legion had crashed.  Then the neo-shell was stepping clear to fire off several cannon rounds in a row, forcing the elites to crouch lower even as a couple of them had their shields flare. Back and forth they went for several seconds, trading rounds that were absorbed or deflected by energy shields and armor.  Then a pinhead nuke was streaking in to slam into Legion's chest and it staggered back, its omni field flickering in an attempt to compensate for the EMP pulse. That gave the elites an opening which they took without hesitation.  Two more pinhead nukes darted in to slam into the reeling K'ethik, each impact pushing it more and more off-balance.  Until one of the elites pulled a long barreled weapon out of its cache and sent a seething cable of blue-white energy pounding into the staggered neo-shell's body. As Legion staggered back in a half circle, finally pushed clear of the impact crater, its omni field flickered one more time.  Then it was gone. Instantly Legion's zero-gap body was being peppered by rifle and side arm bolts, each slashing in with deadly precision to leave glowing impact points in its dense metal shell.  Then its small caliber rapid fire weapon was a miniature rocket launcher and it sent a flurry of rockets howling across the space separating them, each twisting and turning until it slammed into an elite body.  Two were driving to one knee, the other four staggered. That gave Legion enough of a space to move sideways and away from me, sending two more volleys of the rockets twisting towards the squad of velkin specialists.  To their credit, the elites scattered in evasive patterns in response, forcing several of the rockets to detonate harmlessly against the ground.  At the same time they renewed their pounding assault on the K'ethik that was now attempting to flank them.

I wasn't sure what brought my attention back to the night sky even as the air all around me sizzled with discharging weapons and explosions.  For some reason, I tore my eye off the battle and lifted it to the velvety black vault stretching to infinity above me.  And thus I was in the perfect position to see one, then another, and another flash of light, another and two more, almost right on top of each other.  Then six flares of red light appeared as the sound of thrusters became audible to underline the vicious hiss and sizzle of the fire fight. The flares of light dropped quick at first before abruptly stopping just before they slammed into the ground.  There they winked out and more black and silver shapes were running out of the darkness towards me. "Jupiter's beard!"  Caesar hissed in dismay as he dropped to his knees beside me, silver eyes wide as they quickly took in my ravaged body.  "Dominus, what has befallen you?" Before I could answer, Hannibal and Corraidhan joined us.  Each moved more quickly and more smoothly than they ever had, their armor more ornate and protective, and a shimmering energy shield similar to an omni field now surrounded their bodies. The former Carthaginian general took one look at me then he was stepping past me, his Reaper up and discharging on almost continuous fire.  A silent snarl twisted his silvery face and he paused only to lift his left and fire a brace of rockets from his forearm.  Then Caesar and Corraidhan were beside him, the three echoes pumping superheated plasma as fast as they could pull the trigger at anything that looked remotely velkin. Their shields suddenly stung by weapon fire coming in from their flank, a pair of the elites turned towards the three echoes and returned fire.  Caesar took a shot off the shoulder, the impact half turning him before he reset to keep firing.  Then all three were twisting to the side to let a pinhead nuke dart in between them to hit the ground twenty metres beyond, the EMP not quite reaching the four of us. Reapers firing, Raven, Rasputin and Sarah came into view from my right, picking their targets and hammering as much energy into elite shields as was physically possible.  While their rate of fire was impressive, what was more so was the fact that they moved like soldiers.  Low, ready crouches, weapons up and ready to fire at all times, their movements steady and sure.  It was like watching the elites in miniature, painted black and silver instead of mottled gray. Catching sight of them at the same time, Hannibal quickly directed traffic, sending Raven and Sarah swinging around towards where Legion had dug in behind some wreckage to continue firing rockets and rapid-discharge small caliber arms at the elites.  Rasputin and Corraidhan he sent around the other way to flank.  Then he and Caesar went up the middle. I caught sight of Caesar's left arm suddenly becoming a zero-gap metal shield to deflect several rounds of weapons fire before he was forced to break off and move more evasively under pressure of the heavy weapons fire.  Then I was all alone.  Alone but not forgotten; even as the echoes moved out of sight, I heard Hannibal growl:  "We need to give Max time to summon goa and recover.  Raven!  Firm up that flank, damn you.  Uhhh, . . ."  The former Carthaginian's voice was roughly interrupted by the sound of a heavy impact.  There was a pause filled with Reaper fire and more rockets being fired before Hannibal's voice returned. "Hold.  For Max's sake, hold!" I reached out with a trembling hand, trying to feel the goa in the ground.  If I didn't repair this damage and get moving, the elites would knock the capable and game echoes aside to drop more ordnance on me and take me out for good.  That is, if they even remembered I was here.

With a throaty growl a pinhead nuke grenade went off nearby, well clear of the echoes but close enough to me that the EMP lapped against my remaining foot, making it tingle fiercely.  Knowing how accurate the elites were, I knew they hadn't simply missed with the grenade in an attempt to hit the echoes.  They were aiming for me.  'I guess they haven't forgotten me after all.'  I darkly mused.  And I used that realization to stiffen my will enough to summon goa. I screamed when the first tendril hit me, the fire brought on by the purified life force enough to make me feel like I was being dipped in lava.  Or slow roasted in a plasma fire launched by a warship in orbit.  And it nearly made me drop the summons.  I managed to hang on by the barest thread of will power, my throat quickly raw and my voice hoarse from my screams of pain. Half way through the reassembly, the pain finally overwhelmed my senses I blacked out, dropping the link.  Instantly the pain was halved and its hold over my awareness vastly reduced.  Free of the volcanic agony for the briefest of moments, I struggled back to consciousness.  To find a worried looking Hannibal standing close by.  His armor was smouldering from two powerful hits, each melting and cracking the zero-gap metal.  Yet, even as my eyes fell on it, I could see it repairing itself, slowly moving back into place even as his energy shield flickered and came back up. The Carthaginian waited until my eyes met his and he held my gaze just long enough to know that I was alright.  Then, with a nod, he turned back to the battle, ramming a fresh battery pack into his Reaper before he moved away, firing his weapon in tight, precise bursts. Once again I set myself.  Hopefully it wouldn't be as painful as it was, with my leg, arm and side mostly rebuilt.  Still I groaned out loud as no less than three full tendrils slammed into me at my summons, forcing me to grit my teeth against the wave of fire that filled me. Then it was over and, my body still echoing from the forces that had spun it back into one piece, I flipped over onto my hands and knees.  From there I rearranged what was left of my clothing to cover my midsection as best I could.  I then crawled around the piece of blood-streaked metal I had used as a brace to take a look at the battle. It was chaos, the darkness almost completely dissipated with the amount of firepower being slung between the two sides.  The elites had taken shelter in the wreckage of the tank I had originally used for the same purpose and were now slugging it out with Legion and the echoes.  However, this was no frantic discharge of weapons, no wild and random firing at anything and everything that moved. No, this was a fight.  Tight bursts from both sides lanced out to slam into shielding on armor that wasn't being protected by cover.  Rockets flew back and forth and each side shifted constantly to try and get better LOS and coverage, while remaining fairly defensible themselves.  Several times I watched as the echoes were forced to abandon their positions by well-aimed pinhead nukes that threatened to disrupt their shields and their hold over their shells. Each time, though, they returned to the fight, grimly swapping out battery packs or sending a flurry of rockets in to make an elite duck back behind cover.  The shield I had seen Caesar deploy was now almost constantly appearing on all six echoes as they used them to deflect weapon fire and give them a buffer against projectile weapons. For its part, Legion had abandoned the stand in the middle of the field and let fly tactic to a more conservative approach, keeping close to its piece of wreckage while firing rockets and those massive cannon shots.  Noticing that, I couldn't help but wonder if it was planning something, or building something with the metal harvested from the piece of wreckage to use against the elites. The elites must've wondered the same thing.  Even as I looked in the direction of where the neo-shell had taken shelter, four of the six were returning their full attention to the spot.  Rockets and grenades began exploding around and against the piece of wreckage in an almost constant roar of discharge, EMP after EMP pulsing through the space.  And in between the rockets and the grenades, the space was filled with weapon fire, so dense I could smell the ozone even with my poor Risen senses.

Just when I thought they had actually managed to cut Legion down despite all of its capabilities, the big neo-shell abruptly stepped out from behind cover.  Omni field down and sporting several smocking rents in its armor, it nevertheless lifted what looked like a rocket launcher to its shoulder.  And, in one smooth motion of aiming and firing, it let off a miniature version of the missile it had used to kill those warships in orbit. Impellers howling, the missile crossed the intervening space between Legion and the elites in less time than it took to blink.  There it exploded with a massive roar and a flash of noonday light in midair between two elites, sending a compression wave washing over them both.  Instantly one was flung roughly to the ground, its shields stripped off and its armor smoking.  The other was spun away from the point of explosion and against a piece of wreckage where it too lost its shields but wasn't dropped to the ground.  It managed to get its weapon back up and fire several shots in return, each slamming into Legion's metal body to cut even more gouges in the zero-gap metal. The other four quickly collapsed around the injured pair, one shipping its weapons to pick up the downed elite and throw it into a fireman's carry over its shoulders while the others laid down a barrage of cover fire.  Cover fire that was vicious and precise enough that Legion was knocked onto its back by a missile to the chest.  Sarah too was spun around and dropped by a missile strike, as was Raven, the two echoes hitting the ground where they lay unmoving. Satisfied with their cover fire, two of the elites then tossed a handful of basketball-sized globes into the space between our line and theirs.  As each hit the ground, it cracked open to spill a greenish smoke into the air, a whiff of which instantly began to burn my throat.  I coughed as Hannibal waved the others back, he and Caesar retrieving the fallen Sarah and Raven before they pulled back beyond the cloud's reach. Before they got out of range, however, the heavy greenish smoke brushed against their bodies and both echoes cried out loud before they managed to pull out of its way.  As they came closer, dragging their two unmoving comrades, i could see their armor and silvery skin had been etched by contact with the cloud, as if acid had been thrown on them. Then we heard several sets of thrusters igniting and lifting into the air, announcing the elites' retreat.  I peered into the darkness above the green smoke in a vain attempt to see which direction they were going in but they were too quick to get out of sight.  My eyes came down in time to see Rasputin and Corraidhan return, their armor also etched by the acidic cloud. "Nice."  I growled.  "A smoke screen and a weapon.  These elites just become more and more fun each time we meet them." "Max."  Hannibal said, the acid etchings on his face already closing as he approached me.  I could both hear the relief in his voice and see it on his face as he stepped near. "It's good to see you in one piece."  He finished with a smile.  I grinned in reply and took his extended hand, giving it a good shake. "Good to be back in one piece, Casper."  My smile faded.  "But I don't understand how you lot could've known I was out here.  It's not like I was in range of New Retribution.  And you were all with the Wolf Pack, up in orbit!" "It was Commander Tovin actually, dominus."  Caesar explained as Rasputin and Corraidhan knelt beside Raven and Sarah to check their vitals.  "As soon as her small human force was landed at the cull camp as per your direction, she was sending a telepathic distress call to New Retribution for a force strong enough to take on elites so we could effect your extraction." "Legion headmanned it."  Hannibal took up the thread from the former Roman general even as the K'ethik in question staggered out of the green smoke to join us.  With its omni field still down, the acid cloud had deeply etched long spidering grooves into its zero-gap flesh.  Yet, somehow the blisters filled with nascent K'ethik had remained untouched. The Carthaginian paused there to nod in greeting to the battered looking neo-shell.  A greeting the K'ethik quickly returned, the two now comrades in battle. "It wanted to see if its improved capabilities as Legion would give it an edge against the elites in battle."  Hannibal looked over at me.  "And we wanted to test our upgraded bodies.  So we got a psyren on our ships to jump us to Gagarin, where a link was established to New Retribution.  From there we boarded a transport while Legion made its own way over here." I nodded.  I knew I had heard that high pitched snarl before.  It had been the only other time I had heard Legion's flight form at work, at that Risen base in Sweden. "Once we had LOS, I instructed the psyren on the transport with us to teleport us to a point thirty or forty metres off the ground and we came the rest of the way on our built in thrusters."  The Carthaginian finished. "It was nicely done."  I admitted before glancing back at the acid cloud, which hung almost organically in space.  "And I will properly congratulate you on a well performed extraction once we get the hell out of here.  I'm not entirely convinced the elites have left this spot all together." "I would agree."  Legion said, finally speaking up.  Despite its appearance, it sounded exactly the same.  I guess K'ethik don't feel beat up the way we did. "We should withdraw before they return with reinforcements."  It too looked at the acid cloud for a long moment.  "And they will." Hannibal nodded as a communicator appeared on his jaw. "Command, this is Team One.  We've extracted the package, but we've taken casualties.  We need immediate evac!"  He said. "Copy that, Team One."  Dante's voice replied via a two-way speaker built into the comm device so we could all hear the exchange.  "We have LOS on your position.  Stand by for jump out in three, two, and one, . . ."  And the battle field disappeared in a wink of light. 

 

Dark Visions

Tovin was waiting for us at the bottom of the ramp leading down from the hanger deck.  I caught sight of her robed form as I came around the last corner several minutes after the transport that picked us up after our jump out, had landed.  And I could almost feel her relief when her eyes finally fell on me. "Told you I'd see you at the base later."  I quietly pointed out as I drew abreast. "That, you did."  She conceded in her quiet voice as she fell into step with me.  Well, relatively speaking, as she hovered above the ground.  "Yet, you only do so because I managed to get the echoes and Legion to serve as a retrieval team to extricate you from that situation.  And it must've been quite the situation for you to return to the base with only a scrap of clothing around your waist." I grimaced as I looked down at my woeful state of undress, knowing I couldn't really deny any of it.  Thankfully she didn't know the true extent of what befell me there, or I'd be getting even more of a lecture.  I hurriedly flagged down a nearby lich and asked them to retrieve a set of clothing from the QM for me before we continued on. "I couldn't do much about getting thrown out of that transport, Tovin."  I pointed out, looking over at her.  "But you're right: Legion and the echoes arrived just in time to prevent a disaster.  Thank you for that." "You are most welcome."  Tovin replied with a hint of satisfaction in her voice.  If I hadn't spent the last few weeks getting to know her as well as I did, I would've missed it.  Still, it was enough to make me chuckle.  But for only the briefest of moments; I quickly sobered as I pondered what had happened. "That being said, I must say I learned something in this recent dust up with the elites." "That even juggernauts need to be careful?"  Tovin quietly asked and I chuckled again, this time ruefully. 'That too."  I admitted.  "But even more than that, we need to be prepared for any eventuality, regardless of the situation.  Juggernauts included."  I sighed and shook my head.  "I won't always have my abilities to fall back on.  And when they're not available and I still need to resolve a situation, I need to equipped and prepared to do so."  I paused and frowned. "Speaking of equipping, . . ."  I looked over at Legion, who was walking with the echoes, discussing various aspects of the battle they had just fought.  And that included Raven and Sarah, who recovered from their battle wounds in the transport flight in.  "Legion, do you have a moment?" "Of course, Max Niekro."  The big neo-shell stepped away from the echoes and joined Tovin and I with a slight quickening of its pace.  "What do you require of me?" "Neural shielding."  Was my quick answer.  "I need something that can protect my central nervous system against the elites' EMP pulses.  They rendered me vulnerable and useless in that last battle with those.  I don't want that to happen again.  Ever." "Protection against EMPs."  Legion repeated, a thoughtful expression appearing on its silver face.  "I am aware of several substances that would function well to absorb or deflect the effects of an electro-magnetic pulse.  My people didn't consider them in depth as we haven't had to deal with artificially generated electro-magnetic pulses, and I'm uncertain how they would function as physical armor." "Fair enough.  I wouldn't use the material as physical armor anyway."  I indicated.  "More like close body protection for our nervous systems so our own abilities stay online.  If I was able to resist those EMPs in that fight we had just a few minutes ago, I would've been able to go juggernaut on those elites without the fear of having my density or my shields abruptly drop mid-fight."

Legion nodded in understanding. "That will be easy enough to design and implement."  It noted, looking over at me.  "I have your physical dimensions.  I will synthesize the compound most effective at blocking EMP energy and will use it to create a number of different armor types, which you will then test to see which works best for you." "Sounds good."  I said before nodding in thanks to the lich who had returned with a bag filled with clothing.  "While you do that, I think I'll head down to the cathedral and discuss this latest development with the Earth Mother." "I'll go with you."  Tovin indicated and I nodded in acquiescence.  A heart beat later she transported us deep into the earth beneath New Retribution. As I had the first time, I looked up in awe as I pulled on my new clothing at the marvel of the massive crystal columns that dominated the strangely reverent space so deep within the ground, and so close to the Earth Mother herself.  As this was her first time here, Tovin took her own time looking around by the pyrokinetic light she held aloft in her hand. "Exquisite."  She breathed, true astonishment in her quiet voice.  I had to agree, even after seeing it before.  If I didn't know that it had already been here, possibly for millennia, I would've thought it purposefully created for this single reason alone: as a place to commune with the Earth Mother. And she didn't leave us standing alone for long. "Hello, my children."  Her soft whisper lifted from the shadows, making us both turn towards them.  "Much has befallen you both since last we spoke, my juggernaut." I nodded in agreement. "It has, Mother."  I said, formally clasping my hands behind my back as I faced the shifting shadows from which the whisper seemed to emanate.  "And we have both learned much, and discovered much.  Like a new enemy in a velkin soldier class, and the need to spread more of our upgrade protocols to other Risen across the planet to truly make our efforts global.  If we're to win this fight, we need all Risen to be fighting with the same tools.  Not just us here, in North America.  I saw that first hand in Russia." "Many of your protocols have been spread to other groups of my Risen children across my face, my juggernaut."  The shadows quietly pointed out.  "However, not all have you in their midst, to drive the change.  Many have clung to the way they've been fighting the velkin for the last half a century and refuse to accept new methods, or to reach out to the shamblers as a resource." I sighed upon hearing the Earth Mother's words.  Unfortunately I saw that resistance first hand, also while I was in Russia, with Vorinov and his collection of old school misogynistic idiots.  They took the upgrade protocols and made more soldiers only to turn their aggression on the Valkyries. "Free choice is still an essential part of my children's existence."  The Earth Mother whispered.  "You could free a thousand juggernauts from the ranks of the shamblers and send them out to the scattered remnants of my Risen army with your methods and ideas, even offering to provide the conversion goa themselves.  Yet nothing would happen, if my children refuse to accept the change."  She paused as if considering something. "You must continue to serve as an example to the rest of the world of what a Risen can do against the enemy, so they will learn to understand and accept the new ways you have created and fostered." "Yet we've suffered great setbacks, Mother."  I grimly pointed out.  "The velkin offensive has shattered much of our infrastructure despite the mechanisms I put in place as your catalyst and has sent a great number of your summoned Risen back into your embrace.  And we had no intelligence or forewarning about these so-called elites, leaving us terribly exposed and vulnerable in battle against them.  If we had but known, we would've been better prepared, . ."

"Which has underlined the need for my children to do even more in gathering that intelligence, my juggernaut."  The Earth Mother gently interrupted.  "The creator has given me great ability and power to insure His creations live on.  But my reach beyond my own physical self is limited, as you witnessed in how much effort was expended in moving a seer to the floating space station my children built far from my surface.  I found out about the change in the velkin leadership and their intent to strike as it happened in near space above my surface.  The appearance of these new soldiers, however, coincided with your discovery of them and so I had no forewarning that I could pass on to you." I fell silent as I mulled that over.  Tovin, however, wasn't so inclined. "Forgive my impertinence, blessed Mother, but are you suggesting we already possess the capability to gather intelligence on the enemy?"  The veteran psyren asked and I got the feeling the shadow focused its attention on her. "That is indeed what I am saying, my psyren."  The whisper confirmed with the hint of amusement in the soft voice.  "My tesla, Felix, made great strides in penetrating the aliens' network before he returned to my bosom.  Build upon his work and you will find much opened to your eyes." The whisper fell silent and I got the feeling the Earth Mother had once again left us to ponder her words. "Felix discovered the key to the velkin network with the rosetta stone and his data spike."  Tovin thoughtfully noted as she turned her attention to me.  "But with his loss, our continuing efforts to mine the network for information fell by the wayside in our efforts to build bigger and better weapons with which to fight the enemy with." "That was obviously a mistake, now that we have the opportunity to reexamine the decision."  I bluntly pointed out as I returned her gaze.  "And I take full responsibility for that as I wanted those guns and those warships to take the fight to the enemy.  Instead of gathering information on what exactly we were facing."  I abruptly sighed and rubbed a hand over my face in an attempt to push back a sudden surge of frustration. "If I discover it's been staring us in the face this whole time, I'm going to, . . ." "Hold that thought, Max."  Tovin interrupted, holding up a gloved hand.  "I am getting an urgent request from the surface for you to return immediately and come to the command center!" I nodded. "You're the girl with the goa.  Make it happen, sister."  I said and the shadows and silence of the cathedral disappeared in a wink of light. Dante looked up as Tovin and I strode into the command center, an expression of concern on his Mediterranean features. "Thanks for coming so quickly, sirs.  There's something here I think you need to see!"  his fingers danced over the control surfaces for a moment than an image appeared.  I frowned as I looked closer then found my eyes flying wide in surprise It was Moscow.  But not the battered ruin I had left a few days ago.  This Moscow was flattened, most of it glassed char.  Including the area where the ramshackle apartment block that Vorinov had used as his impromptu headquarters was located. "The velkin have renewed their offensive, despite the Wolf Pack picking off their ships moving into orbit."  Dante grimly reported.  "Several cities all across the globe have been targeted once again.  Moscow, Stockholm, Rio, London, . . the list keeps going on."  The tesla looked over at us.  "While most of these centers have already been long evacuated, this attack keeps Risen forces across the globe off balance." "Off balance for what reason?"  Tovin looked over at me.  "Besides New Retribution and Gagarin, no other Risen forces were in a position to counterattack velkin forces anywhere, thanks in no small part to their first counteroffensive." "Off balance because they're planning something else, is my guess."  I said, my frown tightening.  "Did the attack on Moscow extend to her suburbs?  The Valkyries were located in Arkhangelskaya.  I'd like to know if they got hit as well." Nodding, Dante returned to his keyboard.  Before he could move the image over, however, there was a flash of light on his alarm monitor. "New Retribution, New Retribution, this is the Haida."  Daljeet's curt voice spoke from a speaker.  "Are you reading us?" "We've got you, Haida.  Go ahead."  Dante replied, turning away from his satellite images for a moment.  A keystroke and one of the monitors lit up with Daljeet's face, which looked grim. "Command, we were following a pair of velkin transports into lunar orbit and came on something that has our juggernauts flipping out."  Was the East Indian captain's terse report.  "They insisted we send these images to Commander Niekro."  Her eyes shifted to me, able to see me on her screen standing over Dante's shoulder. "They said you would understand what they mean, sir." "Send your images, captain."  I said with a nod and the three of us leaned forward as Daljeet's face disappeared to be replaced by one filled by the dark side of the moon, cratered and shadowed.  And beyond, hanging in space maybe a couple hundred kilometres off the moon's surface was a massive alien structure.  Yet, there was something familiar about it, . . . "Ramp up the resolution on that, Dante."  I directed and his fingers danced over his control surfaces, clarifying the image and bringing it closer. Four massive horizontal arms dominated the structure, stretching away from a base that connected them all.  And, if the ships that were moving around the structure gave any indication of scale, we were looking at something that was at least a hundred kilometres long.  But it wasn't the structure itself that caught my eye.  It was the familiar shape that was nearly finished within. "Damn."  I breathed, my eyes flying wide in recognition as my undead thudded uneasily in my chest.  Then I was snapping out orders. "Daljeet, I'm ordering the flotilla back to Gagarin.  And when you get there, I want every ship to prep for a full surveillance and recon sweep of that structure and the device being constructed within then return to the site under full cloak.  I need every angle of that thing examined and every reading possible taken." "Yes, sir!  Haida out."  Daljeet responded smartly before the comm line dropped.  Nodding in satisfaction, I turned to Dante. "Get a hold of Legion, will you, Dante?  I need our K'ethik friend in here as soon as physically possible."  And as he turned with a nod of his own to his communications array, I turned to look at Tovin.  "And I need to talk to Twitch and Whisper immediately as well.  So if you can get them on broadband, Tovin and get them over here, . . ." "Thank the Earth Mother you're okay!"  Ambriel exclaimed as she stepped into the command center.  A handful of running steps and she was throwing her arms around me. "When you were thrown out of that transport, we feared the worst."  She said, her voice muffled by being pressed against my chest, but still clearly emotional.  Having grown somewhat used to how emotional humans got about things, I returned the hug to give her a bit of comfort. "No worries, Ambriel."  I said with a smile.  "I'm a lot harder to get rid of than most people think." "We don't want to get rid of you at all!"  Ambriel declared softly before pulling away enough to look up into my face.  And in doing so, she caught sight of the image still frozen on Dante's screen. "In fact, I, . .   What, . . is that?"  She asked, eyes flying wide as she stared at the screen. It was Tovin who answered. "Something we'd hoped we'd never see, commander."  The veteran psyren said before also turning her attention to the screen. "That would be the siphon the velkin are building to drain the Earth Mother's essence and destroy our world for good!"

 

Stepping Stone

Ambriel stepped away from me to look first to Tovin, then back to me, confusion on her face. "I'm afraid I don't understand."  She confessed in a quiet voice.  "What is this siphon?  And why will it destroy the Earth?" Again Tovin took up the narrative. "We learned several weeks ago of a velkin plan to construct a massive device that would burrow to the Earth's core."  The psyren began.  "Once there, it would then siphon up all the goa it would find there for a use we still haven't discovered." "But wouldn't that destroy the Earth Mother?"  Ambriel asked, concern naked on her face. "It sure would."  I grimly confirmed.  "Just like an old school vampire sucking all the blood out of a human would kill them, the siphon sucking all the goa out of the planet would kill the Earth Mother.  And since she's the force keeping our world alive, if she dies, . . ." "The planet dies!"  Ambriel's hands flew to her mouth as she gasped out loud.  "We, we have to stop them!" "That's the plan."  I growled before turning back to Dante.  "Brother, you need to pull all your teslas in and use Felix's data spike to find out everything there is on the velkin network about that siphon.  And the elites, while you're at it.  I don't care about any side projects they, or you are running.  This is now your only project, and has top priority." "Copy that, sir."  Dante's fingers started dancing across his interface and I watched several of the screens that I remembered Felix monitoring, appear in front of him.  With that done, he then reached over to his communications array to quickly send out a recall order.  And almost immediately teslas working in other parts of the command center began standing up and making their way to Dante's work station. "C'mon."  I said, taking Ambriel by the shoulder and gesturing to Tovin.  "Dante's going to have his hands full in a moment.  We need to give him some room." We stepped out of the command center just as the two wraith commanders, Twitch and Whisper walked up, talking in low tones with each other. "Ah, perfect."  I said with a smile.  "Just the two ladies I was looking for."  My smile vanished as they looked at me, questioning expressions on their faces.  "I need the two of you to sit down and put together a viability report on a covert penetration of a velkin facility for the purpose of sabotage and service disruption." Both nodded as Whisper fished out a notepad to jot down the parameters. "What kind of facility are we talking about here, big man?" Twitch wanted to know and I looked over at her.  She must've seen something in my expression because she immediately frowned. "Uh oh, that doesn't look good."  She noted, the note of alarm in her own voice bringing Whisper's head up as she looked first at Twitch, then over at me. "What's not good?"  Whisper asked. "The situation."  I replied before looking back at Twitch.  "We found it." "Ah damn."  Twitch's expression immediately fell, prompting yet another look of confusion from Whisper. "Found what?"  Whisper pressed, looking back and forth between the two of us. "The siphon."  Twitch grimly replied and I nodded in confirmation.  "A giant device the aliens are constructing to drain the Earth's supply of goa."  She grimaced.  "Everything that we've learned about goa and how it is essential for the Earth Mother's existence has led us to believe that having it all drained would definitely kill her and transform the world into a lifeless ball of rock."

"Well, damn."  Whisper hissed.  "Didn't this shit get serious as hell."  She looked at me.  "Did you want us to penetrate this siphon thing, sir?" "The construction facility for the siphon, to be exact."  I immediately replied.  "Since I'm fairly certain the siphon itself isn't penetrable.  The construction facility is hanging in lunar orbit on the dark side.  I need you two to lead a crack team inside to do a full recon under full stealth conditions." "That's do-able, sir."  Whisper immediately replied, Twitch nodding in confirmation. "Just get us inside, big man, and our people will do the rest."  My diminutive friend indicated with a grim look.  "You want that we fuck shit up?  We'll make sure those bastards can't even turn on the damn lights!" "First I want to find out what's going on there, and how exactly they plan on deploying the siphon."  I replied before smiling tightly.  "Then you can fuck shit up."  I looked up and saw Legion striding towards us and I began walking to meet him. "Get me that viability report and select your team.  It's my intention to sign off on it within the hour and have your team in space shortly afterward." "Got it, boss!"  Twitch called out before they were out of easy ear shot. "Max Niekro."  The K'ethik neo-shell greeted me as I approached. "Legion."  I replied.  "Tell me you have a working set of the neuron armor." It tossed me what looked like a dark gray hoodie, complete with a series of utility pouches attached to the front. "I went through several iterations, but all seemed too restrictive."  Legion explained as I held the piece of clothing up.  The fabric felt strange, almost like Kevlar from back in the day.  Yet it was incredibly light and as flexible as cotton. "This version, which I have produced with a fabric created with monofilament gold, graphite and zero-gap metal creates a profile that is both stable and up to ninety five percent absorbing of high energy radiation generated by an EMP event, such as gamma, beta and alpha band radiation."  Legion indicated in a no-nonsense tone of voice.  "The construction is primarily gold, as its highly conductive and thus provides the greatest amount of energy absorption.  The graphite and zero-gap metal was added to give the soft and malleable metal strength and endurance." My eyebrow climbed at that as I continued to give the hoodie a good look over.  This fabric was mostly gold? "Try it on."  Legion urged.  "I have sized it to your dimensions." I nodded and started pulling it on.  Only to pause half way as klaxons began sounding throughout the base. "All personnel to active duty stations."  A firm female voice announced over the speakers.  "All personnel to active duty stations.  Long range sensors have detected velkin warships moving into position above the base.  All personnel prepare for imminent attack!" "Damn."  I grunted, yanking the hoodie on the rest of the way.  Then I was following Legion as the big K'ethik charged for the leading to the surface, presumably to oversee the action of its newly installed defenses. I stepped out of the main entrance.  And almost immediately I staggered to a stunned halt at the incredible transformation that had swept over what once was two battered entrances and a stretch of worn out pavement. Dark bunkers of zero-gap metal now warded both the hanger entrance and the passageway leading down, forming angular barricades against direct access unless in flight in the case of the hanger.  Additional bunkers were spaced unevenly across the parking lot, each dug in deep with slit windows around the circumference and a recessed door for access.  Each was a ten metre diameter hexagon and a good metre from the ground.

It was from a number of these bunkers that I watched missile arrays began to carefully rise from their centers, the arrays shifting to aim their weapons skyward.  It was as I noticed the missile arrays climbing into position that I caught sight of Legion also looking towards the heavens. "Four Titan class warships are moving into position."  The K'ethik grimly reported.  "Full shielding in place, which may prevent the warheads from detonating against the hulls." "The Wolf Pack?"  The newly enhanced defenses forgotten in the wake of learning of the warships, I too peered into the sky in a vain attempt to see the enemy that was positioning themselves above us.  Legion shifted and looked to its left. "They are just reaching Gagarin."  It reported. "Damn."  I growled.  "I sent them back to the yard to prep for a surveillance run on the siphon site." That brought Legion's eyes back to me. "Siphon?"  It repeated with a frown.  I curtly nodded. "Access the command center's image database, time index from now to fifteen minutes ago.  The images were captured by Captain Daljeet and the Haida."  I instructed and watched Legion's head shift slightly to the side, a sign that I was beginning to recognize as one it made when it remote accessed another network.  It didn't take the neo-shell long before it found what I was referring to. "By the first shard!"  It hissed, visibly disturbed.  "That truly is a monstrous device."  It turned silver eyes to me.  "What is its purpose?" My answer was drowned out by a handful of the defense's missiles suddenly howling out of their arrays, streaking skyward almost too fast for me to follow.  But not Legion; the neo-shell quickly snapped its head up to stare hard into the distance.  And I watched a grimace of disappointment appear on its silvery features. "As I feared, the warships' shielding is preventing the missiles from striking the hull where the antimatter warheads would do the most damage."  It tautly reported as again its mercurial eyes dropped to me.  "Do I have your permission to initiate secondary protocols?" Even as the neo-shell asked, I could feel the air warm with approaching plasma fire.  I didn't need to look up to know the warships had fired their first barrage at us. "You do."  I barked, then, unable to resist the impulse any longer, I looked up to see the long deadly lines of energy as they cut through the upper atmosphere towards us. Then the sound of more moving machine caught my attention.  It was so faint, I almost didn't hear it over the late spring breeze that was ruffling my hair as we stood just outside the entrance and in the midst of its defensive bunkers.  Still, it was enough to pull my eyes off the incoming orbital fire to two heavy cannons lifting out of two bunkers set in the very center of the bunker array. Each was perched on the typical array of complicated K'ethik robotics and circuitry, thick cables running from the man thick and twice as long barrels to power and channeling mechanisms close by.  Then there was a ripple of energy dancing over the K'ethik machinery before the cannon slammed a scintillating bolt of purple light skyward.  The second cannon quickly joined its sibling, the two beams slicing through the sky. "A K'ethik anti-proton beam."  Legion explained, once again lifting its eyes to the sky.  "Developed in the latter days of the war against the velkin, this weapon had significant success against velkin energy defenses."  A hint of a smile touched a corner of its lips.  "Shield penetrated."  It reported and a heart beat later the sky split once again by howling impellers as a brace of missiles darted into the clouds.

Then I was ducking as the orbital fire rained all around us, skidding off closely woven energy fields protecting the bunkers and the two entrances to leave big gouges in the ground between the bunkers.  Thankfully the rain of deadly energy was short lived as the second round of missiles found their targets and stopped the plasma fire dead. The cannons spoke again, sending their incredibly effective purple beams into the sky where they held for nearly five seconds before a third round of missiles were launched.  Several seconds later klaxons were sounding again. "All personnel, stand down from duty stations.  The threat has been eliminated by our defenses.  All personnel, stand down from duty stations."  The female voice that initially had announced the alarm, now sounded the all clear from a small speaker close to the heavy double door leading to the base's main entrance. Nodding in satisfaction, I watched Legion's anti-proton cannons slowly retract into their bunkers along with the missile arrays before I looked over at the big neo-shell. "Nicely done, Legion."  I said with a smile.  "Your new defenses are most effective." "Thank you, Max Niekro."  Legion replied with no little satisfaction in its voice.  "I am pleased with its performance."  Then the smile that had teased the corners of its mouth disappeared completely.  "My only fear now is that this will certainly not be the last time the velkin fleet attacks, with this base as defended as it is.  They may even deploy elites against us." I grimaced at hearing that. "I have to admit, I fear that too, Legion."  I said before sighing.  "The velkin don't want us mounting any sort of defense when they are finally ready to bury the siphon in the Earth's crust to begin the process of drilling into the core where they will harvest the Earth Mother's essence.  So they're going to throw whatever they can at us to keep us off balance." Legion looked thoughtful. "It would certainly explain the sudden appearance of the elites."  It pointed out.  "And it provides an even greater justification for the new leader's secondary offensive." "It does, doesn't it."  I agreed before turning towards the base entrance.  "C'mon.  Let's see if Dante's teslas have dug us up anything useful out of the velkin network." Ambriel and a handful of her officers were waiting for us when we stepped out of the elevator to the surface. "Commander."  She called out to get my attention and I looked over to see the young human standing with her officers.  "If I can have a word, sir?" "Of course, Ambriel."  I looked over at Legion.  "I'll meet you in the command center." "Of course, Max Niekro."  And the neo-shell continued on while I took a handful of steps to the side where the humans waited. "What can I do for you, Ambriel?"  I asked after nodding in greeting to her officers. "We want in, sir."  She instantly replied and her officers quickly nodded in agreement. "If you are going to take a shot at this siphon thing, sir, we want to be a part of it."  That from one of the young men we had rescued along with her. "We don't want to sit back and let the Risen do all the work in saving our world."  Said one of Ambriel's female officers, a blonde with her hair cut in a short, functional bob.  "If there's something we can do to help you, we'll do it." "Just give us a chance, commander."  Ambriel finished.  "We'll even go into space, if we have to." That lifted my eyebrow.

"It might come to that."  I confessed, letting my eyes move off the human leader to her officers.  Where I found equal parts determination and grim resolution on each of their faces.  "It was never our intent to write you out of any final defense, my friends.  Yet, by your own confessions, you said you weren't ready to take more steps forward in embracing more advanced technology, running the risk of being left behind as we moved into orbit to continue the fight against the velkin." Ambriel hesitated to take a quick look around at her semi-circle of officers before facing me once again. "Seeing that thing getting ready to suck the life out of our world made us ready."  She tautly announced, her officers quietly murmuring in agreement.  "You tell us what we need to do, sir.  And you can tell us that now.  Because we're ready to fight now." I returned Ambriel's determined look for a long moment, my own thoughts churning.  This was exactly what I had hoped the humans would do.  Become invested enough in their own survival, and the survival of our world, that they would be willing to do whatever it took to see Earth safe.  Including giving up their own lives in battle. A stray thought moved into my head in that moment.  A thought that included a memory of the elite armor I had the chance to examine up close as I was trying to keep out of the way of a hunt.  'Maybe they won't have to give up their lives so easily.'  I mused, a half smile touching my lips. "I'll tell you what you can do, Ambriel."  I began.  "You can get ready to have your world turned upside down by a K'ethik."  And as they looked at me in confusion, I went to broadband.  - Can I get someone to send Legion back to me at the entrance from the command center?  I have a new project for him to work on! - The big neo-shell slowly walked around first Ambriel, then the blonde.  All the while its eyes measured and examined the humans from top to bottom.  It then moved to a pair of the males to do the same thing. "Oxygen breathers, with homeostatic internal temperature maintenance."  It muttered under its breath. "Simple layered external sheath with limited self repair capability.  Head mounted sensory and respiratory cluster, some internal bone scaffolding with structural and protective capacity.  Metabolic cycle providing on call energy via internalized fuel consumption, tissues dependant on high amounts of water to maintain rigidity and metabolic continuance." Abruptly it was looking over at me to nod. "I can absolutely design and implement powered zero-gap armor to both protect a human in adverse environmental conditions as well as improve their ability to engage in battle."  It announced and I smiled at both the K'ethik's report and the surprised and pleased expressions on the humans' faces. "Excellent."  I said.  "Let's get these humans in some armor then, Legion." As the K'ethik nodded in confirmation and turned to the pile of raw material it had gathered following Operation Pheonix, I waved a pleased Ambriel over. "Yes, sir?"  She asked with a smile as she looked up at me. "I'm going to need the total number of soldiers you're going to field in our effort to stop the siphon from attacking the planet, Ambriel."  I said.  "So I can factor them into my battle plan.  Can I count on both your original number, the handful of girls we rescued before that, and the new ones we just retrieved?" "Ah."  Ambriel grimaced.  "I'm afraid not, sir." "No?"  My eyebrow climbed.  "Why not?  The more soldiers we have in this fight, the better off we'll be, Ambriel." "I know, sir.  And you can absolutely count on the newest members of my force to participate in that fight.  But a handful of the women in the group I was rescued with, along with a pair of the girls you rescued from that incubus, have gotten themselves involved with some of the males.  One thing led to another and they've become pregnant." "What??" She quickly nodded in confirmation. "We don't have any rules against it, sir.  Nor would I stop them even if we did.  Humans are a fairly rare breed on this planet and we have to do what we can to expand our numbers at every opportunity."  Ambriel lifted her chin slightly in defiance of my disapproving expression.  "I won't apologize for that." For a moment I returned her defiant look with a grim one of my own.  Then abruptly I dropped my eyes with a sigh. "Fair enough, Ambriel."  I conceded.  "I don't blame your people a bit for looking to expand their numbers.  We do the same, whenever we can.  I just hope some of your better female fighters aren't included in that group that are now with child." "Just a couple, sir.  Most want to wait until we've clawed some breathing room from the aliens before giving in to their instincts." "Good.  Like I said, we need every soldier we can get, Ambriel.  Male and female."  I gestured to where Legion had already finished the upper sections of what would be powered, self-contained zero-gap armor for a human. "Now, let's get you suited up, shall we?  We have a lot of ground to cover before we can lift your people into orbit."

 

Data Spike

I stood beside Legion as a number of Ambriel's humans tried on the pieces of armor that the K'ethik had crafted for them. "So I'm curious, Legion.  Each of those blisters on your armor represents a single K'ethik autonomous unit, right?"  I asked, my arms folded across my chest as I watched Ambriel's people put the armor through its paces "That is correct, Max Niekro."  The neo-shell rumbled without taking its eyes off the humans that were walking around in the armor.  I looked over at it. "Then answer me this: during that battle with the elites, why didn't you just bust out all of those autonomous insect forms and swarm the living shit outta the velkin?  I'm sure you would've had the numerical superiority despite their advanced weapons and tactics." "A logical question, presupposing an ability to give them full sized bodies at will."  It finally took its eyes off the humans to look over at me.  "Each body would need to be synthesized to the dimensions matching the unit's previous shell.  And while I possess a number of abilities including the ability to synthesize K'ethik shells, I cannot do so without raw materials.  My people can manipulate matter at the atomic level, but we cannot synthesize it from nothing." I barely stopped myself from asking him what good he was, if he couldn't get something from nothing and satisfied myself with a smirk instead. - Max, could you join me in the command center, please? -  Tovin's quiet voice asked into the depths of my mind.  - Dante is starting to get some results from his data mining in the velkin network. - - On my way, Tovin. -  I looked over at Legion, which had returned its attention to the humans.  "The teslas have dug something out the of the velkin network and I'm going to check out what they've got."  I announced. "Very good, Max Niekro."  Legion replied.  "I will join you there as soon as I process the last of my ergonomics measurements and do the final adjustments to the armor." "Cool."  Then I was turning to jog lightly towards the command center. Not only was Tovin there, hovering close to Dante as screen after screen of data scrolled past the tesla's eyes.  But Twitch and Whisper were there as well, along with Justice and a handful of their command officers. "Thought it was a good idea to see what we're up against, sir."  Justice indicated and I quickly nodded in agreement. "I agree.  Let's hope Dante's found something significant."  I focused my attention on the tesla commander.  "You're on, Dante.  Impress me, brother." Nodding, Dante looked over his shoulder at the holo display set up in the room's center and watched as it lit up to indicate it was functioning.  A few keystrokes made a column of holographic light appear in front of him on a miniature holo disk just to the side of his keyboard.  He then curled his fingers around it and made like he was tossing it to the holo display.  Which then immediately came to life to display the column of  cream colored semi-translucent light, now half a metre wide and nearly a full metre tall. Pushing back his chair, Dante then stepped to the display with the rest of us grouped around it and behind him. "First round of data mining confirmed the fractured nature of the velkin network that Felix observed when his team first managed to place a data spike in a network outlier."  The tesla said as he inserted two fingers into the center of the column of light.  Drawing them apart had the effect of several spidery structures appearing, each moving slowly through space and only occasionally coming into contact with each other. "And since we had already determined the networks representing the various bases on the surface, as well as the ships in near orbit didn't hold any information of relevance, we had to wait until the data spike could jump to networks further away from the planet, to see what they held.  We hoped they would eventually reveal the presence of a primary network hub, where the bulk of the invaders' information was stored."

He inserted a hand this time into the holo image to sweep away the structures closest to the display's base, making them disappear.  Then a gesture made the handful of structures left near the top expand to fill the remaining space. "Of course, we only supposed there were other networks.  It was a logical assumption based on observations that the entire fleet couldn't possibly be in orbit and had to be parked somewhere else.  But we didn't have confirmation until just a few minutes ago, when the spike managed to jump to one of the deeper networks."  He paused to select one of the structures at the very top of the display. "As it turned out, it happened to be the network supporting the siphon array." That set off a round of low murmuring to which Dante nodded in agreement. "We couldn't believe our luck either."  He said with a laugh, tapping the network fragment he had isolated to make it expand.  "To find the siphon network on our first try?  The only explanation we could think of for our incredible good fortune was that until recently the siphon network was isolated from the rest of the velkin system and didn't offer any bridges the spike could hop to make its way to it.  Additionally Gagarin has only been online a few short days and was previously unavailable as a signal booster for the spike.  Either way, we found it and I retasked all available resources to pulling out what they had on there." Dante isolated one of the nodes and tapped it to expand it in relation to the rest of the network fragment, then made a pulling gesture that resulted in a heavily armed and armored figure appearing.  My eyes narrowed as I recognized the figure as an elite. "They are called the Nevhest, an elite group of warriors that serve as both the personal guard for the velkin leadership.  And as heavy shock troops deployed when the fleet runs into a species that is giving them more resistance than anticipated.  Their numbers are limited in the field both by the leaders wanting them close by for protection.  And by those same leaders being paranoid about having too many Nevhest close enough to where they could launch a coup against them."  Another gesture created a data stream that was stuffed with information as it flowed past the forearm high image of the Nevhest elite. "Thankfully that same paranoia has pushed the leadership into keeping close tabs on the location and disposition of those elite soldiers, including the type of modifications each has made to their armor, any specialized weapons and tactics each may have, and how many major conflicts they've been a part of."  As Dante made each point, a line would be drawn to a portion of the elite's armor or weapons with a small data tag, detailing what each item was and how it functioned. "Major conflicts?"  One of Justice's officers, a latina ballista, asked with a frown.  "You make it sound like they're more than just an elite force serving as personal guards." Dante's answering smile was wry. "That's because they are."  Highlighting another node, he again made a pulling down gesture and several smaller symbols appeared, each with equally small scrolling data readouts. "Each fleet segment has an allotment of Nevhest that, when brought together, form a cohesive unit that has been involved in the siege and destruction of nearly fifty different sentient species over the last thousand years." "Wait, wait, wait."  Said one of the new animus commanders, a brunette with the rounded vowels of Canada in her locution before she asked:  "By fleet segments, you mean the parts of the fleet that are floating in and around Earth, right?" Dante looked at her for a moment then slowly shook his head. "The ships that are currently occupying our solar system comprise only one fragment of a much larger, more far flung velkin fleet that's spread over a good chunk of two galactic arms of the Milky Way."  That revelation sent a ripple of unease over the group circling the holo display. 

"We're still gathering information on the other fragments."  Dante confessed with a grimace.  "As detailed as their data is on the Nevhest, the velkin database is incomplete when it comes to other fleet fragments.  All we could tell so far was that once they were based on their home world, close to the galactic core in the Orion arm.  But after suffering a massive environmental failure, they were forced to put their entire population onto ships and send them foraging out into the galaxy."  "At the time of their diaspora, there were several very powerful leaders that fought each other to draws in the competition to see who would be their alpha.  Each of these co-alphas decided to take a part of the fleet with them and headed in a different direction from the others to avoid future conflicts.  Yet they would always keep track of the other fragments' whereabouts in case they needed to call them in to help with a more powerful prey species." "So if we defeat them here, the leader might just call in another fleet, or fleets to finish the job.  Because we then would be considered powerful."  The same latina ballista grimly pointed out. "Except they've already defeated the prey species on this planet."  I noted.  "The humans were conquered and subsequently used to feed the fleet's hunger." "A fine line of distinction."  Dante said, looking over at me.  "But perhaps enough for the leaders of the other fragments to deny lending aide to this one.  The incomplete details about the other fragments make it very clear that the fleets very reluctantly and only as a last desperate measure, agree to fight together against a singular enemy.  The fleet commander requesting the assistance has to make an extremely strong and persuasive case to convince their fellow commanders to help." "We'll definitely have to keep the possibility in mind for the near future though."  I said, taking a quick look around at the circle of officers.  "And that means keeping your people as prepared for yet another all out assault on the planet as physically possible."  I looked back at Dante as the officers slowly nodded in agreement, thoughtful expressions on their faces. "Now, let's press on, Dante.  Does this database tell us exactly how many of these Nevhest are in this particular fragment?" The tesla nodded. "Approximately fifteen hundred, with no more than ten in any one spot."  He highlighted a couple of new nodes while sending the originals back to their positions.  A tap on one generated a schematic of the array, complete with a wire diagram of the siphon.  Both quickly lit up with a relatively dense scattering of flashing red dots.  "Unfortunately they are crawling all over the siphon array.  Tracking has nearly three hundred of them there, protecting primary access points and key locations." Justice whistled as the others murmured some more. "That's a lot of fire power."  The ballista commander noted.  "They must definitely want this siphon thing finished and deployed if they're protecting it that strenuously." "And that's just what they have inside the array."  Dante tapped the second node and several shapes appeared, similar to the titan class warships the Wolf Pack had been hunting in orbit, but somehow bulkier.  And definitely more menacing. "They have a handful of these deployed outside the array, in near space and in lunar orbit." "What, . . are those?"  The Canadian animus commander asked, eyes wide as she leaned in for a better look at the new vessels. "The velkin categorize them as vessels of the vanguard, or Gah'ak'tang'grook in their language.  I have given them the identifier of frost giant or FG class, in keeping with the classification methodology the Wolf Pack currently uses."  A swipe and the array shrunk while one of the frost giant class vessels tripled in size so we could see its multiple weapon arrays, bulky shielding, powerful thrusters and massive drive assembly. 

"Enhanced shielding and weapons, more powerful drive systems, a broader array of weapon systems and the capability to penetrate an atmosphere."  He paused to look up at our astonished faces.  "We managed to find a partial weapons manifest that lists a number of different types of warhead, including fusion style nukes.  Additionally they carry two or three different types of beam weapon, along with siege weaponry that includes mass drivers.  And something the rosetta stone loosely translated as a 'kinetic core' gun, a weapon that for all intents and purposes, is a star killer."  Again data symbols and lines connected to various parts of the image of the FG class warship appeared as Dante listed off some of its armaments. "Again, only limited numbers of these FG class warships are available, and are commanded by velkin named 'blood loyal' to the fleet commander.  I think the squadron that are deployed around the array are pretty much all they have." "Enough to be deal makers and heart breakers."  I bluntly assessed, my mind already chewing on the information the tesla had laid out for us.  It didn't take long for me to come to a conclusion.  Time to push the Risen war machine to full out obliteration mode!  "Well, I'll give you this, Dante.  When I ask for intel, you deliver.  None of it good news, mind you, but at least we know what we're facing here.  Your next task is pretty simple: find me weaknesses.  Both for the Nevhest, and these FG class warships.  Especially the FGs; I don't want them getting desperate and slipping some past us to take a shot at our sun with that kinetic core gun, if that's what it does.  If they make our sun supernova then this party is all for nothing." As Dante nodded and started focusing on the data scrolling around the image on the holo display, I looked at the officers. "Here's the plan, folks: Twitch and Whisper are putting together an infiltration team to do a recon of the array from the inside.  If we can find a way to blow it up and take all those FGs with it, that's our primary goal.  If we can't blow it up, we need a way to disable it.  And if that fails, we need to prep for a full on assault with all our resources to tear it from the sky." I leaned forward, my expression hard. "That siphon will not reach our world.  We will do everything physically possible to stop it and destroy it.  Am I clear?" "Crystal clear, sir."  The officers said in unison, determination etched onto each of their faces as well. "Outstanding."  I found Justice with my eyes.  "In case option one fails, we'll need an assault team for the insertion into the array.  Pick your team, Justice and prep them for zero G, zero atmosphere combat against Nevhest defenders." "Yes, sir."  Justice grimly replied.  I then swung my eyes over onto Tovin. "And I need you, Tovin, to find me a company of psyrens that are willing to undergo a Valkyrie conversion.  If we need to put somebody on that array where they're going to be in tough against the elites, I want psyrens with the ability to psionically take them down so we don't get pounded." Tovin serenely nodded. "I've heard from a number of the girls who are already willing to convert."  She indicated.  "I will gather them up and begin infusing them with the Valkyrie protocols immediately." "Good."  I returned to Dante, who was already pulling more data out of the velkin network.  "Dante, one last thing, brother.  I want you to spin Gagarin back into construction mode.  If the Wolf Pack has to go nose to nose with those FG class warships, we're going to need more numbers to make the playing field even." "At once, sir."  And the tesla began keying in the communication codes to access Gagarin's network from the holo display interface. Nodding in satisfaction, I leaned back to fold my arms over my chest.

"Okay, people, we've got a lot of work to do, and a very finite amount of time to do it in."  I bluntly pointed out.  "I suggest we hop to it."  And, after a chorus of 'yes, sir!', the command center began to rapidly empty of command staff. As the last cleared the room, I took another long, lingering look at the FG class warship sitting in the holo display, the image slowly being pulled apart under Dante's direction as the tesla began his search for weak points.  Then I too was turning to walk rapidly out of the room.  I needed to find Legion.  While having a hoodie that could absorb EMPs was pretty frickin' awesome, I also needed some firepower in case I couldn't use my juggernaut abilities in combat.  Those sonsofbitches have caught me twice now unprepared in battle against the Nevhest.  It wasn't going to happen again. The neo-shell had finished its latest testing and was assembling a final suit for the humans to try.  Dressed in dark, comfortable clothes, Ambriel and her officers were patiently waiting nearby for the K'ethik to finish, talking amongst themselves or having a quick bite to eat and drink.  Ambriel flashed me a brilliant smile and a wave when she caught sight of me walking towards them, both of which I returned.  Then I was focusing on Legion. "How goes the armor production?"  I asked once I was within audible range. "Final iteration to undergo testing, then I believe I will have all the parameters that you laid out, met."  The neo-shell answered before touching something on the back of the armor that made it fold up like an Asian fan before compressing into a box the size of a cigarette lighter.  The K'ethik then held it up to give it a scan, frowning as it searched for flaws. "How the hell did you get all that zero-gap metal to fold up into that tiny little box?"  I wanted to know, frankly stunned that it had managed to do so. "Spatial compression."  The powerful neo-shell replied, dropping the small box to look at me.  "It's the same technology I used to compress the form you saw being created in Moscow, into the one currently standing beside you." "So, you're still some nine metres tall?" Legion nodded before bringing the box back up to renew its examination, leaving to me to marvel once more at K'ethik tech that was so beyond our own, it wasn't funny.  I had to literally shake my head to refocus on the reason I was there. "Okay, so never mind that for a sec.  I need you to break down and miniaturize that high density particle cannon we were using during our wreck sweep a few days ago.  The cannon was fairly effective against Nevhest elite armor and shielding so I want that level of fire power.  But I need something about the size of a Reaper so it's much easier to handle." "In case your juggernaut abilities are unusable in a zero G environment?"  Legion asked and I quickly nodded in confirmation.  "Logical.  I am redesigning the weapon now.  Can I assume the term Nevhest is the one we will use to refer to the elites from this point on?"  I nodded in confirmation. "Dante hit the motherlode in his data search, managing to sneak Felix's data spike onto the array's network where it found a primary database node." That was enough to earn me an interested look from the big K'ethik. "A primary database node?"  It repeated and at my second confirming nod, I saw a thoughtful expression appear on its face.  "I will access tesla Dante's system then, and take a look at the information myself, if you don't mind.  It will be the first time any K'ethik has successfully accessed a velkin data source since our war with them began." "Of course, man.  Fill your boots.  The more you can learn about them, the easier it'll be to develop K'ethik countermeasures for their military tech." "Agreed."  Legion said.  "And thank you.  I appreciate your trust in me."  It then turned and waved Ambriel over, handing her the box.  The neo-shell then had her put it around her neck on a thin chain, some some sort of weird medallion then carefully showed her the sequence she needed to press on the sides of the box where I could now see recessed studs. Nodding, Ambriel did so and I watched once again in silent amazement as the armor, dark gray zero-gap metal, smoothly and blurringly fast, expanded over her entire body, sheathing her from head to toe.  Only a thin eye slit was left for her to look out of, and a slim pack on her back looked like it served as both power and atmosphere supply for the enclosed suit. Legion gestured in a circle and the human leader happily complied, jogging lightly in a circle around all of us.  And I could already see how easily the armor let her enjoy natural motion yet didn't provide any weak points.  Almost like a K'ethik shell. Then Legion was talking to me, forcing me to take my attention off the sleek set of armor and the young woman protected by it. "My ergometric tests are complete.  I will test the suit's atmospheric seal, power flow, speed and reflex enhancements, interface and protective abilities shortly.  Regardless, I am confident the suit will be done its testing within a half hour, and I will have several units ready shortly after that." I nodded in satisfaction before asking. "And my weapon request?" "Redesign is complete.  I will have a working prototype within ten minutes."  It reported, making me shake my head once again at the K'ethik's efficiency and technological proficiency.  It was a wonder that they didn't conquer the stars, with how easily they adopted, adapted and commanded technology. "Excellent, Legion.  I look forward to testing your newest addition to the arsenal in ten minutes then."  And shortly after that, I would get to start my own preparations.  Because if we had to breech that array in order to destroy the siphon, there was no way they were going to do it without me.  After all, I had a score to settle with the Nevhest elites. And juggernauts always settle their scores.

 

Chapter 22: Damocles' Sword

I frowned as I looked at the weapon in my hand.  For lack of a better description, it looked like a stockless shotgun, the kind that was used by soldiers in close combat situations.  Of course it was quite a bit bulkier, with no pump action.  But the handle and trigger assembly was almost identical to the heavy hitters I used in Afghanistan and Iraq as a soldier.  Just long enough to aim, and short enough to easily wield.  In other words, perfect for those close encounter situations. "Is there something wrong with the redesign?"  Legion asked from where it stood a couple metres away, crafting another full suit of armor.  Its tests complete, the K'ethik was now churning out as many suits as it possibly could with the materials it had on hand at Ambriel's request.  Apparently the human leader wanted to make sure every one of her soldiers was so equipped so they could also participate in the assault on the siphon array.  I couldn't blame her; I'd want the same thing if I were in her place.  I just hoped they wouldn't get in the way. "Not at all."  I replied before whipping the gun up and firing a blast at a nearby target.  A coherent beam of energy snarled out of the weapon's muzzle to slam into the target, ripping it apart with little effort.  Smiling in satisfaction, I released the trigger and looked over at the big neo-shell. "Just anxious to test it on some real targets.  Like Nevhest elites." "If the pace you set for our forces to prepare to assault the array is any indication, you will have that opportunity sooner versus later."  Legion noted, finishing the suit and collapsing it into the lighter-sized box that was its resting state.  It joined a handful of others already in a padded storage case. "The sooner we destroy the damocles' sword that's hanging over our heads, the better off we'll be, Legion."  I replied, slinging the particle shotgun, or PSG as I was calling it in my head, over my shoulder via a handy carrying strap.  The strap let me cradle the weapon across my chest, like the old readiness harnesses did back when I was in the forces. "If I could somehow destroy it in the next hour, I would." "While I don't completely understand your reference, I can understand the need to remove the siphon array's threat."  Legion said as it began to assemble a new suit from parts that it was coalescing out of a molecular fog generated by its omni field.  "I would only caution you against being hasty in your assessment and action.  An understanding of the situation before launching an assault could prevent your force from taking unnecessary risk and damage." "I'll take your suggestion under advisement."  I retorted dryly.  Easy for the K'ethik robot to preach patience.  It wasn't it's world that was being threatened. - Max, Twitch and Whisper have allocated their teams and are standing by for their jump to Gagarin. -  Ronin reported over the broadband.  - Tovin also wanted me to tell you her first team of Valkyries are ready, and suggests you take them with you up to Gagarin to get them acclimatized to space before they participate in any assault on the array. - - Tovin always has the good ideas. -  I commented and could feel Ronin's amusement in reply.  - Very good.  Advise Twitch and Whisper I am on my way. -  I looked over at Legion.  "Heading up to Gagarin to watch the wraiths make their insertion." Legion nodded and paused in its crafting long enough to toss me a package, a flattened plastic ovoid with a number of winking indicator lights on its face along with a set of recessed studs.  At my querulous look, it explained. "A spatial distortion storage pod, containing EMP armor and additional weapons for the juggernauts currently serving in the Wolf Pack." "Ah, perfect.  Thanks, Legion."  I said, noting the diagram that indicated which order the studs would have be pressed to open the pod and cause it to expand.

"It was my pleasure."  Legion replied, the very human saying sounding almost natural coming out of its mouth.  "Just doing my part in defeating the velkin so my people can finally go home." "I hear that."  I said, then I was turning to jog towards the jump out muster point, just outside of the command center. It took a few minutes to make the traverse from Legion's test area near the back of the main cavern to the command center.  Even with four complete Hammerhead crews pulled from the ranks, the number of Risen and humans that were now packed into New Retribution made the place absolutely crowded.  Several times my jog was slowed to a quick walk, then a slow walk by the press as Risen moved to duty stations, training centers, or were returning to barracks from duty stations. Thankfully I was somewhat recognizable and several times I found passages opening up through the crowds for me, accompanied by salutes.  Which I returned with a smile and a small word of thanks before pressing on.  Even with those breaks, it took almost fifteen minutes to make my way to the command center where Twitch and Whisper were anxiously waiting with their teams. But it wasn't the wraiths that caught my attention first as I stepped free of the last bit of traffic swirling around the command center to approach the jump out point.  It was the small knot of women in fatigues standing beside them that while they were silent, composed and serene, seemed to exude an air of menace.  At catching sight of them, I found myself smiling. Valkyries in the house. My smile broadened even further when a familiar redhead turned towards me, her smile warm and inviting. "Max."  Magda greeted me with no little amount of delight in her voice.  She stepped towards me to catch my hand and lean in to gently kiss me on the cheek. "Magda!"  I returned her hand squeeze and smiled.  "I haven't seen you in a couple days.  Where have you been hiding?" "Oh, you noticed, did you?"  She said teasingly and laughed at my chagrined expression before sobering.  "Actually I was trying to figure out the Valkyrie protocols on my own.  A number of us were growing less satisfied with our support roles and wanted to be more active in the fight against the velkin.  But, as a straight up psyren, that was impossible.  So we started looking into the protocols to see what we needed to do to initiate them." "And we just about had them when Tovin announced you had ordered the formation of a Valkyrie cadre."  Ronin added, stepping close as well.  At hearing her familiar voice, I turned to find myself looking at a very attractive blond, who smiled when my eyes fell upon her. "So that's what you look like, Ronin."  I grinned as she quietly laughed.  "So many of you hide beneath those hoods and cloaks of yours, you were more concept than person." "Unfortunately that's true enough that I can't take it personal."  Said Jazz, an olive-skinned woman of Arab descent as she joined us, along with a pretty, pale-skinned brunette who, when I looked at her with an upraised eyebrow, grinned. "It's Ell, sir."  She said, identifying herself as the psyren that had discovered signal riding and boosting the range of a psyren's LOS. "Ah yes, Ell.  Showing us the way at Fort Hill.  I'm not surprised you decided to become a Valkyrie."  I took a quick look around at the circle of women standing close by.  "All of you.  You all had that extra something that makes a perfect Valkyrie." Looking over Ell's head, I caught sight of an obviously impatient Twitch who, upon catching my eye, tapped her wrist in an exaggerated gesture. "And it looks like somebody wants to get this show on the road.  Let's move over to Twitch and Whisper and jump up to Gagarin.  Ronin, since you've made that jump, can you do the honors?"  I asked as we joined the wraiths.  The veteran psyren quickly nodded and reached out to lay a light hand on my shoulder for her goa draw.

"On my mark."  She began.  "Three, two, one, mark."  And New Retribution winked out of sight. Captain Mateo of the Mohican leaned back from the holo display which showed the wraiths' planned point of insertion into the array, a thoughtful look on his lean, swarthy face. "To tell you the truth, Commanders Twitch and Whisper, and you, sir, I'm not sure we could put the wraith team close enough to that point to make the insertion."  The latin captain bluntly indicated before pointing to several locations around the array.  "Our sweep found not only hardened access points and these FG class warships everywhere.  But a passive tachyon web against stealthed or cloaked ships."  He made a sweeping gesture that encompassed the entire array. "While their warships don't seem to have the capability to detecting stealthed vessels, this array certainly does." Twitch frowned before looking over at Ronin and Magda, who had joined the impromptu briefing at a holo display set up just behind the command dais on the bridge.  At their nods, she looked back over at Mateo. "We don't need to be physically close to the array to get inside, captain."  She pointed out before making subtle gestures with her head to the two Valkyries.  "Just close enough for the Valkyries to jump us inside.  Surely this passive tachyon net doesn't extend to two hundred klicks in every direction." "No, it doesn't."  The latin captain admitted, his face growing thoughtful.  "But why stop there?  Instead of jumping a wraith team in, why don't we just jump in a handful of nukes and call it a day?  No muss, no fuss.  And no risk to Risen personnel." "Sure, let's do that."  I said with a smile.  "Just pull them out of your arsenal, . . ." "Uh, sorry, sir."  Mateo smiled somewhat embarrassed.  "The Mohican isn't carrying nukes." "No ship in the fleet is."  I dryly pointed out, eyebrow raised.  "Nor can we manufacture them at any of our facilities.  Before we start suggesting tactical moves, let's know what we have versus what we need to do." "Right, sir."  Mateo said with a nod, pushing his embarrassment aside to adopt a determined look.  "So I'll move the Mohican in close enough for the Valkyries to short port the wraiths into the interior where they'll do a full recon with the hopes of finding a way to use the array's own systems to blow it apart." "Exactly."  Twitch said before pointing at the image of the array.  "Now, it looks like our original insertion point is too close to a hardened access, with two full squads of Nevhest there, so let's move it to, . . "  She let her finger travel some distance down one of the array's long support booms.  "To here.  We'll take a couple Valkyries in with us and they can hop us back into, . . ." "I'd hate to give you the impression that we don't want to see our first action as Valkyries.'  Ronin interrupted.  "But I think you forget, commander, that while you wraiths can cloak, we can't."  She gestured at the array.  "We jump in there and we'll stick out like sore thumbs." "Damn."  A chagrined look appeared on Twitch's face.  "I did forget.  Sorry, Ronin.  'Kay, let's not do that, but let's move our insertion point to, . . . here."  She pointed at a spot just outside of the hub and along the same support boom she had selected earlier several hundred metres from an access point.  "That should put us far enough away from the Nevhest checkpoint, that we'll arrive without getting noticed."  She looked over at her fellow wraith commander. "What do you think, Whisper?  Go in there?" The slender Whisper quickly nodded in agreement "It's do-able."  She said before lifting her eyes to Magda and Ronin.  "As long as you ladies can port us in already cloaked."

"No problem."  Magda said, her response generating satisfied looks all around the holo display. "Then we have ourselves a target."  I said before looking over at Mateo.  "It's your show now, captain.  Bring us in nice and close and let's get these wraiths into that array!" Mateo nodded. "Thank you, sir."  Then, with nods to the others, he stepped back onto the command dais.  "Nav, drop our moorings, and thrusters to maneuvering.  Move us clear of the dock." "Yes, sir."  A lich in the blue and white with green trim of the Risen navy said from their station.  "Moorings dropped, thrusters firing." "Tactical, cloak the ship and prep for maximum stealth.  We are heading back to the array, people.  You all know what faces us there.  So let's keep it nice and frosty." I silently watched Gagarin slide past the Mohican's windows.  There, in one of the construction bays, a Hammerhead was a third completed though it had only been started earlier in the day.  It was surrounded by a fog of construction bots, each working in careful synchronicity with each other to build the powerful vessel at a speed that nearly boggled the mind. Then we were beyond the shipyard and the low thrum of power I could feel through the soles of my boots went up a notch as the Mohican's impellers went to full, hurling her forward. "Impellers at ninety percent, captain.  Estimated travel time to the siphon array is five minutes."  Nav reported and Mateo nodded in satisfaction. "Well done, Nav, thank you."  Mateo's eyes traveled over the bridge's curving forward section.  "Tactical, keep our shields in tight and eyes on for those FGs.  As soon as we see one, alert me." "Yes, captain."  An animus manning the Tactical station said, his eyes glued to his displays. "Science, as soon as we're in range, I want constant updates on the status of the tachyon grid.  If it as much as hiccups in the wrong way, I need to know." "Yes, sir."  That from a broad shouldered javelin at the Science station, his eyes also glued to his displays as his fingers danced over his interface. "Nav, main viewer to forward path.  Let's watch our approach."  Mateo commanded and the big screen at the front of the bridge lit up to show the rapidly approaching moon and a superimposed curving line of light marking our projected path. "Hard to believe so much emptiness could hide an evil as vast as the velkin."  Magda quietly said as she moved to my side to join me in watching the main view screen. "It is somewhat counter intuitive, isn't it?"  I replied with a wry smile.  "What amazes me is how they managed to find us, way out here on the edge of the galaxy.  It's not like we're in a crowded neighborhood.  How did they know we were here?  And while Humanity fed them for a little while, we certainly weren't numerous enough to sustain them for long.  Why bother burning the resources to take the humans out?" "Maybe it was never about them."  Magda suggested, looking over at me.  "Maybe it was always about harvesting the Earth Mother's essence."  She glanced over her shoulder at the holo display where the image of the array still floated in light.  "After all, look at how much effort they've made for the last fifty years to build that thing." I tore my eyes off the image of the moon that now dominated the main view screen to glance back at the array.  A hundred kilometres long and protected by a concentration of elite forces never before seen by Warm or Risen, it represented the greatest threat to the Earth's existence outside of a super nova.

Was Magda right?  Was this whole invasion and fifty years' worth of occupation for the sole reason of harvesting the Earth Mother's goa?  I frowned.  Just what the hell did they want it for, anyway? Then the Mohican's Tactical officer's voice brought my attention back to the main view screen. "We are at a thousand kilometres and closing on the array."  He announced.  "Shields are at maximum density, cloak is functioning at one hundred five percent, tubes are loaded and weapons are charged." "Nav, drop the impellers to fifty percent.  Science, begin your scan for the tachyon grid."  Mateo ordered, arms folded as his eyes flicked from station monitors to the main view screen and back again. For my part, I kept my eyes on the main screen.  And thus was able to watch one of the FG class warships abruptly loom out of the darkness, giving me a good look at its powerful and unrelenting lines. "Passing the perimeter and the pickets, captain."  Tactical announced as the Mohican slid by the massive warship undisturbed.  "We appear to be undetected." "Confirmed."  The Risen manning the Science station indicated, looking back at Mateo for a moment.  "The FG's shields are at minimum power and her weapon systems are inactive.  Her sensor array, however, is at full power and is running sweeps of local space." "She'll go hot the second she spots anything."  Mateo said with a nod.  "Stay on top of it, everybody.  Let's not give 'em even a sniff until we have offloaded our package." A tense silence descended over the bridge as the Mohican slipped between two more FG class warships standing guard, these ones with their sensor array inactive but fully shielded and weapons hot. "I'm reading stray tachyons colliding with our shield."  Science reported as we came within a hundred kilometres of the massive array.  A long, cylindrical shape, it now dominated the main view screen, letting me see detail on the hub and the four arms that almost carefully cradled the completed siphon.  Beside me, Magda couldn't tear her eyes off the thing she had seen in her clairvoyant vision, a vision that had nearly killed her. "Tachyon density is climbing."  Science indicated, eyes once again on his readouts.  "Five particles per square metre and rising.  Anticipated threshold for detection will be a thousand particles per square metre, if my calculations are correct.  Twenty particles per square metre, thirty, fifty, eighty, . . ."  The Science officer continued to count out loud as we eased closer. "Nav, once Science hits eight hundred per square metre, come to a full stop."  Mateo indicated before looking over his shoulder to where Twitch and Whisper were still fine tuning a number of points on their plan.  "Ladies, prep your team for insertion."  His eyes then traveled to Magda and Ronin.  "And you ladies, prepare to insert the wraiths on my mark." The Valkyries nodded as we slipped between three more FG class warships, all three with shields up tight and weapons hot as they stood ready to leap into action instantly if need be. "Seven hundred fifty, eight hundred."  Science announced. "All stop." Nav announced and the thrum of power beneath my feet muted.  "Seventy kilometres from the array, give or take a metre or so." Taking that as their cue, Twitch and Whisper both flashed me determined smiles before they turned and made their way below, where the rest of their wraith team was waiting for them. - Give us five minutes then find us a spot to jump into, please, Ronin. -  Twitch's voice spoke over broadband. - Copy that. -  Ronin immediately replied, the blond Valkyrie focusing her eyes on the main screen from where she stood between Magda and the holo display.  - I have you a spot.  Advise me when your team is ready to jump. -

- Stand by. -  It was Whisper this time who replied.  Then: - We are cloaked and ready.  Jump us in. - - Copy that.  You will jump on my mark.  In three, two, one, mark. - There was a brief pause.  Then Ronin spoke out loud. "The wraith team has been successfully inserted."  She announced and there was a brief round of applause. "Celebrate after we get them back out."  I cautioned and Mateo was quick to agree. "Exactly, sir."  He said with a nod to me before returning his attention to the crew.  "Let's not let up now, folks.  Nav, pull us back to a hundred kilometres out to stay in telepathic com range.  Computer, activate ship wide, please." A soft, artificial woman's voice spoke from all around us. "You are on ship wide communications, captain."  It announced. "All hands, this is the captain.  We're going to a low power profile to reduce our footprint and remain in full stealth mode while we wait for our wraith team to make their recon.  Power down all non-essential systems and maintain stealth protocols until further notice.  Thank you.  Computer, off ship wide."  Mateo then looked over at me. "And now we wait."  he said and I nodded. "And now we wait."  I echoed in agreement. It was nearly two hours later when we got the notification.  The two psyrens and myself were slowly going over the data the Wolf Pack had collected in their sensor sweep a few hours back, comparing it to what we had pulled from the velkin data base at the holo display with the image of the array in front of us when Ronin abruptly stiffened. "I just got an extraction request from the wraiths."  She said, straightening up from where she had been bent over the holo display to get a closer look at the array's image.  "Stand by, getting confirmation."  Then she was looking over at Mateo, who was sitting in the captain's chair, going over the latest scans of the tachyon grid his Science officer had generated. "Captain, I have a confirmed request for extraction.  Our wraith team is ready to come back out." Mateo instantly shot out of his chair, pushing aside the monitors he had been scanning to take a step forward. "Roger that."  He said.  "Full power to systems.  Nav, move us in to seventy kilometres, ten percent on the impellers."  The latin Risen then looked back over at Ronin.  "As soon as you have a fix on them, Ronin, jump them out." As Ronin nodded, Magda and I stepped away from the holo display to take positions once more on the command dias, our eyes glued to the main view screen.  And so I was in perfect position to see a FG class warship suddenly drift into view. "That FG has her sensor array active."  Science abruptly reported.  "And they're using an active tachyon sweep!" "Damn it."  Mateo hissed.  "Nav, twenty degrees out of the ecliptic.  Take us over.  Hopefully that sweep is being generated from a side facing array and not an omni-directional."  He then looked back. "Do you have your lock, Ronin?"  And he grimaced when she tautly shook her head. "Eighty klicks and closing."  Nav announced.  "And twenty degrees out of the ecliptic." "They're scanning where we were, captain."  Science reported.  "If they spot an emissions trail, they could track us." "Then let's hope they're not looking for one."  Mateo grimly replied.  He was about to turn and ask Ronin if she had a lock when the blond Valkyrie suddenly spoke up. "I have them."  She declared.  "Initiating jump out."  Then she was smiling broadly.  "Team successfully extracted, captain." "Ha!"  Mateo said with a smile and turned back to his bridge crew.  "You heard the lady.  We have our prodigal scouts.  Nav, plot us a reverse course, maximum power.  Get us out of here!" As the deck beneath our feet rumbled with the Mohican's main power coming back up to full, Twitch and Whisper stepped onto the bridge.  Both wraiths looked tired and uncharacteristically grim.  Catching sight of them, I stepped towards the pair. "Welcome back, ladies."  I said. "Thanks, boss."  "Thank you, sir."  Came their replied as they began fishing out data stores. "What did you find?" Twitch grimaced as she handed me her store. "Nothing but bad news, boss.  Nothing but bad news!"  Whisper was equally somber as she handed me her data store. "Confirmed, sir."  The slender wraith commander said with a nod to Twitch.  "Option one is definitely off the table.  Their power grid is too well protected and safe guarded to generate an explosion within that would destroy the entire array." "Not only that, we found out what they intend on doing with the Earth's goa."  Twitch added.  "Which is the same thing that they've done with the goa stolen from a hundred worlds!" "Eating it?"  Magda asked and both wraiths violently shook their heads in the negative before Twitch answered. "No.  The asexual monsters use it to make more of themselves!"

 

The Final Straw

I turned away from the image of the giant chamber filled with clusters of six metre tall tubes lining the walls that hovered over the holo display. "So, these bastards want to suck the Earth dry so they can make more of themselves?"  I growled, looking hard at Twitch and Whisper.  "Is that what you two are trying to tell me?" Twitch grimaced and glanced over at a troubled Whisper. "Yeah, boss."  She said with a confirming nod.  "That's exactly what we're telling you." I jerked my head through a quick shake of denial. "Not on my watch they won't."  I looked over at Mateo.  "Have your comm officer raise New Retribution." "Yes, sir."  The Mohican's captain immediately replied, turning away to speak to his communications officer.  Then he was looking back over his shoulder to address me where I had returned to stare hard at the display with its horrifying images. "I've got New Retribution on the line, sir." "Retribution, this is Niekro."  I said without taking my eyes off the holo display. "We're reading you five by five, sir."  A woman's voice replied.  "Go ahead." "I need a connecting line to the K'ethik neo-shell, Legion.  Can you make that happen?" Before I heard her reply, however, the bridge lights flickered and the deck beneath our feet shifted. "Whoa."  Twitch said with a frown as she looked down at the deck beneath her booted feet.  "What the hell was that?"  Then alarms were going off. "Captain!"  Mateo's tactical officer shouted.  "Our cloak has been penetrated by an active tachyon sweep.  We are being targeted by the nearest FG class warship, and two more are moving towards us!" "Maximum power to the shields.  Bring all missile batteries online, full power to the beam weapon systems."  Mateo tautly ordered.  Then the Mohican was lurching hard, staggered by something large smashing into her. "Shields down to seventy percent!"  Tactical reported as Science was frantically summoning information on their board.  "And I've got another shot incoming." Again the lights flickered as the Mohican heeled over, nearly going to forty five degrees before she leveled out.  This time the impact sent a loud ringing sound rippling through the ship. "Just what the hell are they firing at us??  Science!  What, . . ."  Mateo began to say, his face a mask of grim confusion. This time the lights on the bridge went out as the main power systems went offline in the wake of a third strike that sent another loud ringing sound sweeping through the ship. "Back up systems.  Now!"  Mateo roared and the lights flickered before coming back on.  "Nav, get us the hell away from here!" "Main power is down, sir."  Nav reported, throwing a look over at the grim captain.  "I've got thrusters only." "Cloak is also down, sir."  Tactical barked.  "We are out in the open.  Shields down to thirty four percent." "Holy shit."  Mateo looked up at the main viewer, which had gone dark.  "Can we see?  Damn it, we need to return fire, give ourselves some breathing room, . . ." The Mohican rocked again from another shot, then quickly again. "Second FG is targeting us."  Tactical reported, hands racing over their keyboard.  "Auto lock on the targeting scanners is off.  Going to manual, full spread of Shrikes, and beam fire."

The lights flickered as the weapons drew from the ship's power reserve to fire instead of the mains. "Second, . . "  Tactical, along with the rest of us, reflexively ducked as again the Mohican got hammered.  "Second salvo away."  Fingers danced for a moment.  "Minimal damage.  Third FG is now in range with a targeting lock established, . . ." Suddenly the lights doubled in brightness and the Mohican shivered as I felt the main drives rumble to life beneath our feet. "Main power back up!"  Nav crowed in triumph.  "Going to one hundred ten percent on the impellers, twenty five degrees up angle from the ecliptic." The main viewer snowed for a second, then came on to show the three FGs in hot pursuit as the Mohican rapidly climbed out of the plane of the ecliptic.  There was a flare of light from the lead FG and something darted towards us almost too fast to follow before the Mohican shuddered again from yet another impact. "Shields are down."  Tactical tersely reported.  "We now only have zero-gap armor between us and open space." "We are shooting darts, now that we have three on our tail and no back up."  Mateo swiftly concluded.  "Tactical, hold your fire.  Nav, Evasive maneuvers."  The Mohican's captain then snapped, pulling his attention from Tactical to stare hard at Nav.  "Hard to port, ten degrees down angle, roll to fifteen percent and away from the moon." "Affirmative."  Nav said and I watched the image on the main view twist to the left, allowing the Mohican to narrow avoid getting struck again by another shot from the lead FG.  "Putting distance now between them and us.  Two hundred kilometres, two twenty, two fifty; lead is widening." "Hard to starboard, five degrees down angle, roll to fifteen percent."  Mateo commanded and again the image on the screen shifted, the FGs slowly getting smaller in the view.  "Tactical, get me my damn cloak back.  Nav, as soon as the cloak comes back up, I want the moon between us and them.  Then high tail it for Gagarin." "Yes, sir."  Nav replied even as Tactical heaved a sigh of relief as they reported: "Cloak has been restored, captain." I saw the FGs, now the size of toys, abruptly break off, no longer able to track us and not willing to spend the time away from their posts to look for us with their active tachyon sweeps.  Then the dusty grey crescent belonging to Earth's only satellite was blocking the image as the Mohican's navigator put us on a curving course around Luna to put it between us and the siphon array. Mateo heaved his own sigh of relief before looking over at me. "That was a close one, sir." "Too damn close, captain."  I bluntly pointed out.  "Although I suppose it was just a matter of time before we got caught by that active tachyon sweep.  Did your Tactical manage to capture any imagery from the attack?  Anything that could tell us what kind of weapon was being fired at us?" "Let's find out, sir."  Mateo stepped off the dais and we all made our way to Tactical's duty station. There we all crowded around the Tactical station's main monitor to see what looked like a piece of rock being hurled at us in the severely slowed video capture of the initial moments of the attack. "Mass driver."  Ronin quietly named the type of weapon being fired, Mateo and his Tactical officer both nodding in agreement.  "Using magnetic induction to accelerate pieces of ordinary matter to near light speed, the weapon imparts tremendous force on the projectile." I grunted, unhappy with the information.  Enough force to bring down our K'ethik-designed shields and probably put some serious dents in our hull to boot.  If the FGs had cornered us, they would've beaten us to death with those things, zero-gap armor or not.  And I could only imagine what they could've done if they had warmed up the kinetic core gun.

"Well, as useful as that little scouting exercise was, I'd say the velkin now know we managed to sneak in close."  I paused to turn and look at my comrades.  "I don't think they're going to let us sneak in that close again." Twitch grimaced even as she and Whisper both nodded in agreement. "So much for plan A."  She heaved a quick sigh.  "Can we even do a Plan B?  Are we getting forced right to Plan C?  The all out assault on the array?" I shook my head. "At least, not yet."  I said.  "But we'll have to figure out a different way to get onto the array, now that sneaking in close under cloak and teleporting in is out of the question.  Maybe if we soften them up a bit and draw the FGs away, we might get close enough to land some soldiers." "Soften them up?"  It was Magda's turn to frown in confusion.  "What do you mean by that, Max?" "I mean, hit them with a barrage of missiles or beam weapons to break down their defenses a bit."  I said, looking over at the redheaded Valkyrie.  "Like if we can somehow punch a nuke or two through that tachyon field to hit the hull, it could open things up for landing parties.  Or even a harder shot, using AM warheads, taking out field emitters and weapon emplacements."  A thoughtful frown appeared on my face.   "Unfortunately I'm going to need to consult with Legion on that one, as it's the only thing on our planet that has the ability to build either kind of device." I was still considering how we were going to successfully attack the very well defended array when I stepped out of the airlock linking Gagarin to the battered Mohican.  A glance through the observation windows that lined the arrival terminal and I immediately grimaced at seeing the massive dents in the once flawless hull.  The FG mass drivers had smashed heavily into the hull, damaging power conduits, shield emitters and weapon systems.  The Mohican now looked like a prize fighter that had come out on the losing end of a one-sided fight.  The only area that managed to somehow avoid getting any damage whatsoever was the upper observation lounge which served as home for the Mohican's goa crystal. I was still staring at the damaged ship, thoughts churning when the yard's repair bots began swarming over her several minutes later.  Guided by Gagarin's central computer, the quick and efficient bots started pulling off damaged hull panels to access and repair the damage beneath. "Max?"  Magda appeared at my side to look up into my face with concern.  "You okay?" I sighed and nodded, tearing my eyes off the sight of the battered Hammerhead. "Just a bit frustrated is all."  I shook my head, frowning. "Just when I think we've got ourselves a bit of an edge on these bastards, they come up with something they've been holding back and we take it in the teeth."  I quietly said, looking at Magda.  "And now we've tipped our hand by getting uncovered within striking range of the array, letting the velkin know we have the ability to cloak." "I think they already knew."  Magda just as quietly pointed out before she gently drew me back from the observation window as the arrival terminal began to fill up with the Mohican's crew.  "That's why they had that tachyon field in place, and the FGs equipped with active tachyon sweeps.  They knew we couldn't resist taking a look once we found the array actually existed, and that we'd do it cloaked." "Well, now we need to make it unexist, Magda."  My face tightened with resolution.  "And since they can see through our cloaks, Plan A is out.  And Plan C is now a last ditch option in light of what I've seen in terms of the kind of firepower they have keeping that damn thing safe.  We are seriously outgunned.  If the velkin force us into a slugging match with those FGs, we'll lose."

"Legion's ground based AM missiles were effective."  She noted, moving closer to me as the Mohican's crew surged all around us.  "They hit the velkin hard without committing a single ship to battle.  Maybe we can use a variation of those on the FGs." "The ground based missiles were effective but only when they could directly impact their targets."  I quickly countered.  "We caught those titan class ships by surprise with their shields down.  In the two attacks that followed, if the titans had their shields up, Legion's missiles were wasted."  I sighed.  "From what I've seen, the FGs won't give us that kind of free shot at any point.  And I bet the array is just as heavily protected."  I slowly shook my head. "No, if we're going to use a missile attack, we need a way to bring down that tachyon field, and any other protective fields they have in place first." Magda gently laid her hand on my cheek as she smiled up at me. "If anyone can figure out a way to do it, it'll be you, Max."  She said. "Oh, hello."  Simon said as he and Tumult stepped out of the airlock and caught sight of us.  Magda sighed reluctantly and let her hand drop away from me as the two juggernauts joined us, both wearing broad smiles in greeting. "They said you were onboard, boss.  Sorry we didn't get the chance to come up to the bridge and say hi."  The Native American juggernaut said, clapping me on the shoulder even as Tumult slipped close for a hug.  I smiled back as I returned Tumult's hug. "No worries, Simon."  I said.  "I didn't have that much time to come down and see the two of you, either.  The life of a Marine treating you two okay?" "Not bad."  Honey-blond Tumult said.  "When we actually got to do something.  The captains are overly cautious when it comes to boarding a velkin warship." "Which isn't a bad thing."  Simon pointed out.  "With all the elites floating around." "Ah, that reminds me."  I pulled Legion's storage pod from where it had been sitting against my back and opened it up with a deft punching of the access buttons.  I quickly fished out a hoodie and a weapon for each. "I've got a little elite proofing for you.  The hoodie is Legion's new EMP armor."  I explained as they each held up the garments to take a look at them.  "Woven with a blend of gold, graphite and zero-gap metal fibers that will allow you to shed or absorb up to ninety five percent of the incoming energy from an EMP pulse." "Which will keep our nervous systems insulated, and our abilities online!"  Simon said with a grin.  "I like!" "You and me both, Sy.  Add the PSG to your arsenal and you'll have a bit more to take into battle against those elites." "PSG?"  Tumult accepted one of the redesigned particle beam weapons from me and held it up to give it a good look as well, her hoodie thrown over her shoulder. "Yeah, my private name for it.  It's the high density particle cannon that we used against the elites in the wreck sweep a few days back.  I wanted it smaller and more portable, while still keeping its hitting power.  So Legion did a redesign and now we have the Particle Shotgun, or, . . " "PSG.  Nice."  Tumult deftly connected the weapon's shoulder harness and, after pulling on her hoodie, slung it over her shoulder.  "And very convenient, with this harness." "That, it is."  I agreed before tossing the storage pod to Simon.  "If you two can make sure the rest of the juggernauts get a set, that'd be great."  I looked over at Magda.  "I need to return to Earth to get the tools and weapons we need for the array offensive as soon as possible!  Mind giving me a lift down?"

Legion was looking at a diagram of the siphon array on the holo display when I stepped into the command center a few minutes later. "Ah, just the K'ethik I needed to see."  I said, eliciting a look from the neo-shell. "Max Niekro."  Legion straightened up and turned away from the display.  "I received word that you were looking for me earlier, but the signal from the Mohican went dead midstream." "An active tachyon sweep dropped the Mohican's cloak, allowing the FGs standing on station to see us.  They subsequently opened fire on us with mass drivers."  I explained as I walked towards it, coming to a stop in front of the display.  "The ship took quite a bit of damage, including a shot to the communications array, during the pursuit." Legion slowly nodded in understanding before looking back at the diagram. "Using Gagarin's sensor array, I was able to scan the siphon construction site from a distance after the Mohican escaped."  It indicated with a frown.  "Your discovery has put the velkin on high alert.  The tachyon field has been extended to five hundred kilometres, and a scattering field has been erected around the array, blocking any EM signal from reaching the surface."  It again looked at me. "From what I have determined in my study of the psyren abilities, they are based on modified EM energy.  A scattering field would prevent both telepathic energy from scanning the inside, and teleports from carrying individuals or objects into the interior." I grimaced at hearing that.  So much for moving in close and teleporting a bomb inside the siphon to blow it to pieces.  It didn't, however, protect any of the FGs that we managed to get close to. "Do you think that scattering field would also deactivate guided munitions aimed at the siphon?"  I asked.  "Like one of your AM missiles, for instance?" "There is an excellent chance of that."  Legion said.  "Although, if it were only guided until it hit the field, its momentum should carry it to the target.  AM weapons, however, are ineffective against targets that are energy shielded." "How about a nuke, then?" "As in, a nuclear weapon?"  At my confirming nod, Legion shook its head.  "Despite their differences in genesis, nuclear explosions and antimatter annihilations are essentially the same.  They both generate massive amounts of radiation and energy.  If the velkin shielding is sufficient to withstand an AM annihilation event, it'll be strong enough to withstand a nuclear strike." A thoughtful frown appeared on my face.  The shielding had indeed showed itself more than capable of absorbing or deflecting massive amounts of energy.  But could it stop a projectile, one too dense for the energy field to slow or trigger into exploding?  Like a landing craft of some sort? "I see a look of thoughtfulness on your face, Max Niekro."  Legion observed.  "Have you formulated a plan of attack sufficient to destroy the siphon array?" I shook my head to the negative. "Not quite, anyway."  I admitted.  "My initial plan of sabotaging the array from the inside depended on stealth, which we've now lost.  And my plan of last resort is an assault on the array with the Wolf Pack.  Even with additional ships and crew, we're outgunned against those FGs.  Which pretty much leaves me plan B, which is somehow getting inside the station and setting explosives to destroy it that way."  I frowned. "But I'm starting to think no single avenue of assault is going to win us the day.  I'm going to need a combination of several different modes of attack to destroy this thing.  Maybe an attack with the fleet to pull the FGs off station, allowing smaller demolition teams to penetrate the tachyon and scatter fields to punch through the hull.  Landing inside, they would then fight to locations where maximum damage could happen and set their charges before falling back to their landing craft.  And we could use AM charges to make sure our devices are small and portable, but hit with maximum punch." A tight smile appeared on my face. "Not to mention, I think we could probably cause considerable havoc on the FGs after we've pulled them clear of the scattering field.  Because then we could teleport bombs directly inside them and they won't be able to do much about it."  My smile narrowed.  "They might have guns that can kill our sun, but they won't have enough protection inside those ships to stop an AM charge from detonating." "Likely not."  Legion agreed.  "Despite your initial assertion, it appears you've managed to develop a strategy regardless.  One that could take advantage of their weakness and utilize your people's skills and abilities to their maximum advantage." "I certainly hope so."  I replied.  "Now, do you think you can build me some AM charges that I can take into that station?" I left Legion quickly building devices that looked like old school limpet mines in its assembly area near the back of the main cave to begin my return to the command center.  And in doing so, I came across Ambriel's humans as they drilled in their new power-assisted battle suits.  Some worked on hand to hand combat, which seemed a waste of time considering who their opponents were, while others drilled with their weapons.  Yet others were working on getting used to how their suits moved and enhanced their strength and speed.  All under the watchful eyes of Ambriel and her officers, who were also dressed in armor. It was as I noticed several of the humans had painted bright red images on their dark gray armor, forcing me to slow in an attempt to get a better look at what they were, that Ambriel caught sight of me and hailed me with a shout. "Commander!"  She greeted me brightly after jogging to intercept.  "Come to see how my soldiers are working out?" "Actually, I was just talking to Legion about putting together munitions for our upcoming assault on the siphon array."  I admitted with a wry smile.  "Seeing your soldiers going through their paces was an unforeseen and coincidental benefit." Ambriel's eyes widened when I mentioned assaulting the siphon. "You've, . . you've developed a plan of attack?"  At my confirming nod, she stepped in front of me to make sure she had my full attention.  "We want in on that attack, sir.  We want to do our part to save our world!" Having pulled to a stop to avoid running Ambriel over, I glanced back at her drilling soldiers at that, to watch them for a moment. "I don't think so."  I returned my attention to her after a moment's worth of thought.  I was just in time to see a crestfallen expression appear on her face.  I quickly switched to explanation mode.  "Your soldiers are getting there, Ambriel, but they're nowhere near ready to take on Nehvest elites.  Your people will get hammered, zero-gap armor notwithstanding."  I pasted on a wry smile.  "No point in throwing precious human lives away, if we can avoid it." Ambriel's expression abruptly hardened. "But you're willing to throw away Risen lives instead?"  She countered.  "From the reports I read, not even juggernauts were all that effective against the Nevhest.  You're the only one that's done any damage, and as powerful as you are, you're only one person.  You can't take the entire array by yourself." "Well, no, . . "  I began before she cut me off with a quick gesture. "My people will be just as effective as yours, commander.  And better protected, with Legion's armor.  We will participate in this assault.  And there isn't much you can do to stop us, outside of shooting us." "That's an option?"  I countered and watched her grimace.  "Okay, okay, no shooting."  I hesitated slightly as I considered my options.  Then, mind made up, I said:  "Your people are in, Ambriel.  Just make sure they are ready to jump at a moment's notice.  This assault is happening within the next twenty four hours and no later." "They'll be ready."  Ambriel promised me with a tight smile.  "I'll see to it personally." "I expect nothing less."  I said.

 

No, The OTHER Plan B

I was almost to the command center when I felt a broadband signal enter my mind. - Max, could I get you to come to the command center immediately, please? -  Tovin asked quietly.  Yet there was no mistaking the urgency in her voice. - I'm already here, Tovin. -  And I stepped inside to find her hovering close to a visibly agitated Dante.  "What gives, kids?" "The array is on the move."  Dante announced, pointing at the screen.  "We just picked up the burn signatures of four FGs doing a simultaneous full thrust burst and redirected the Gagarin sensor array towards the siphon assembly.  This is what the sensors saw." Frowning, I stepped closer.  And felt my undead heart skip a beat in my chest as I watched the massive siphon array slowly being moved away from its geosynchronous lunar orbit position. Well, shit. "They're reacting to catching us near the siphon."  I bit out, my mind spinning.  "They've pushed up their schedule.  So we are now forced to do the same.  Or have a front row seat to watch that thing punch a hole in our home."  My eyes pinned the tesla commander into his seat. "Dante, have Gagarin begin assembly of boarding shuttles, built like wedges for penetrating hull plating, with heavy shielding and oversized thrusters."  I began, my words coming out in a tumble in an effort to get them all out at once.  "They must be large enough to accommodate twenty soldiers and equipment in strap-down brace seats.  And have the Wolf Pack immediately return to Gagarin to have their missile frigate bays refitted with shuttle launchers, something that can impart lots of velocity without squashing the occupants to paste.  And have the yard position the launchers so each Hammerhead can carry at least four boarding shuttles.  The Wolf Pack also need to have their arsenals replenished since they'll be flying into a hellfire of a fight, so make sure Gagarin's armory is producing at full capacity." Dante nodded, the Gagarin main computer's interface already up on his screen as he started inputting my requests. "And once you have the build requests into the system, advise the Hammerheads that they need to offload the juggernauts and the echoes, who will need to prep as part of the assault teams we'll be landing on the siphon assembly.  The Valkyries as well."  I looked over at Tovin.  "And I need you to tell the humans to assemble their troops and get them jumped up to Gagarin." I found my eyes back on Dante's monitor where they watched the massive siphon continue to move, each second getting closer to Earth. "Do we have a time frame for our preparations, Max?"  Tovin asked and I jerked my eyes off the screen to give her a hard look. "A time frame, Tovin?  Yeah, we need to have our shit wired in time to hit them before they hit us."  I returned my attention to Dante.  "Got a rate of approach on that frickin' thing yet, Dante?" Dante stayed silent for a moment as his fingers raced over his interface.  Then: "They are currently moving at two hundred kilometres an hour with an exponentially increasing delta V.  If my calculations are correct, they should reach escape velocity from the moon's gravitational pull in five minutes."  Holy frick, that's some serious thrust. "There we go.  Something a bit more solid for you, Tovin.  Less than an hour.  I want wheels up and us in space in thirty minutes."  I turned and started going out the door.  "Oh, and get me Justice.  He needs to have his people prepped and ready to jump out as well ASAP."  Then I stepped towards the door. "I will tell him that."  Tovin said.  "And I imagine you will want to meet them at the jump out point.  Which brings up the question: where are you going now?"

"To go and kick Legion into high gear with its munitions building."  I said.  "Because if we don't have something that goes 'boom' before we go in there, then this whole party will be for nothing!"  Then I stepped out the door and out of sight. I stared down at the diagram burned into the thin sheet of plastic extruded from one of the command center's data printers.  It was an extrapolation of one of Twitch's scans, completed on the recon that ended up triggering the velkin's final solution being put into play. "It's a damn cloning facility, Legion."  I finally said, pulling my eyes off the diagram to look over at the big neo-shell, which was in the midst of packing up all the AM explosives it had created for our mission. "They suck the goa out of a planet then use it to fuel a massive cloning run, the goa providing the life force to animate thousands of new velkin bodies."  I barely stifled the urge to crumple the diagram in my hand .  "No wonder they don't give a shit about their own guys, firing on them from orbit just to get one or two of us, or one of your K'ethik buddies.  They can just clone more if they need." The neo-shell was silent as it carefully arranged another set of explosives in a spatial distortion storage pod, similar to the one it had sent with me containing the EMP armor and the PSGs.  Only when its task was complete, did it look up at me. "Such a practice also explains a number of things my people observed during the velkin assault on K'eth.  As you say, a callous disregard for each others' safety while a core of officers, leaders and Nevhest works considerably harder to keep themselves out of harm's way." My eyebrow climbed at that. "You think the Nevhest and the leaders are all originals?  And by that, I mean, . . " "Not clones?"  Legion finished for me before reaching for another storage pod.  "I do think that, indeed."  It began to carefully insert AM charges into the pod, placing each one in an insulated pocket before reaching for the next.  "If the leadership is using itself as a source of genetic material for the cloning process, it stands to reason they'd go through additional protocols to safeguard that material." I frowned before letting a long sigh ease out of my nostrils. "While it would've been nice to know that from the beginning, I don't think we could've done anything about it."  I admitted, returning my attention to the diagram which was a tracing of the siphon assembly's power conduits.  Using a marker from one of the command center's media kits, I returned to circling the junctions where explosives should, when set off in sequence, disrupt the grid and cause a massive explosion.  Should, being the operative word.  We knew so little about actual velkin tech, it was a stab in the dark with even the data spike not finding that much in the way of technical readouts in the velkin database. "It's not like the Nevhest were on Earth right from the beginning.  And their officers and leaders pretty much stay on their ships.  All we could take shots at, were the damn clones." Legion finished packing the storage pod and put it beside the others, completing its task before climbing back to its feet. "The Risen and the humans have that opportunity now."  It pointed out and, after circling the last junction I could identify as being important, I nodded. "That we do."  I slipped the marker and the diagram into the packet of materials I had prepped from Twitch and Whisper's recon report and tucked it under an arm. "Let's go get that opportunity started, shall we?" The humans were already assembled at the jump out point when Legion and I arrived, with me pushing a trolley with all the storage pods on it.  Justice too had his people there, fully geared and ready to roll.  I smiled at that.  Trust Tovin to be efficient like no other creature on the planet.  Now, all we had to do was hook up with the juggernauts, Valkyries and the echoes on the other side and we were ready to roll.

I took a quick head count on the way in and between Ambriel's humans and Justice's assault teams made up of javelins, ballistas and a range of other Risen armed with Reapers, we had just over three hundred soldiers in front of me.  Add in those waiting for us, and we'd have enough to fill almost five Hammerheads' worth of landing shuttles.  I smiled grimly.  Perfect; we were going to need every last one of them. I looked over at an impassive Legion as we approached the assembled troops. "You in on this, Legion?  Or did you want to stay behind to start working on the K'ethik still here in North America, as you mentioned you might do?" That earned me a quick look from the big neo-shell. "My comrades that need assimilation here in North America can wait."  It bluntly stated, returning its attention to the gathered soldiers.  "The attack on the siphon assembly cannot.  I will accompany you on this mission, if that is agreeable." "It most certainly is."  I said with a smile.  Then, leaving the trolley and Legion for a moment, I walked towards the assembled soldiers. "If I can have all your attention, please."  I said in a loud voice and the low murmur of conversation that had been bubbling through the two groups that stood side by side without mixing, disappeared. "Thank you.  This is a pre-mission brief, for those that haven't gone through one before."  I said, pointing to Justice and Ambriel to get their attention before waving them forward.  When they were close enough, I handed them each a satchel containing the mission objectives, the targets and the anticipated time frame. As they opened them up and began sorting through the contents, I continued to speak. "I've had you assembled here for one reason: we're going to attack the siphon.  What's the siphon, you ask.  Well, it's a velkin device that's been built with a singular purpose: to drain the Earth of it's goa.   Is this important?  To the Risen, yes.  It is the energy that fuels our existence.  To the humans, yes.  It is the very essence of the Earth Mother, the powerful entity that keeps Earth alive.  Without goa, the Earth Mother will die, as will the world she maintains.  Nothing will grow here, no animal will live.  The very air itself will be filled with dust and death." I paused to look over the soldiers.  I now had their full and undivided attention. "So, for all interested parties, it's important that we stop this thing."  My expression grew even more grim.  "And we will."  I paused to gesture at Ambriel and Justice.  "Your commanders now have the mission brief, a collection of data about the mission, objectives and the plan of attack.  They will shortly be sharing that brief with you.  Along with that brief, there are rosters for the assault teams.  Before you actually get to see those rosters, I'll tell you right now that each team will be a mix of Risen, humans and echoes so each will have a balance of skills and capabilities I feel are essential to complete this mission." I paused again.  "One last thing before I let Commanders Ambriel and Justice do their thing.  And it's something I need to make perfectly clear."  I let my eyes sweep over as many faces I could see.  "From this point on, you are no longer Risen.  You are no longer human.  You are all children of the Earth Mother.  You will fight together.  You will fight for each other.  You will fight against our common enemy.  And, so help me God, and by the strength of the Earth Mother, you will win!  Do you get me?" "WE GET YOU, SIR!"  The assembled soldiers roared in a single voice.  I grinned tightly. "Out-frickin'-standing."  I said.  "Ambriel, Justice, you have ten minutes to brief your troops, fill your team rosters and distribute these charges to your designated demo specialists."

As the two commanders started handing out assignments and setting up the assault teams, I turned back to Legion. "A rousing speech, Max Niekro."  It said with a nod and a smile.  "And a point well made about all the children of Earth needing to fight together to win this battle.  We will need every individual we can muster, if truly the enemy's fortress is as unassailable as the reports suggest." "Nothing's unassailable, Legion."  I quickly pointed out.  "Human history is full of examples of supposedly impregnable fortresses that fell to small, well prepared and determined forces.  We don't need to actually take the array.  We merely need to penetrate it's defenses to set our charges and let the explosives do all the work." "Another point well made, Max Niekro."  Legion didn't hesitate to concede.  "The task is straight forward.  All your soldiers have to worry about is the level of resistance they encounter within." I sighed and nodded. "Unfortunately, that'll be the determining factor, here."  I admitted before finding Tovin with my eyes.  "But I'm not going to worry about that.  Instead, I'm going to work to make sure the number of variables impacting our battle plan are minimized.  A battle plan I now need to share with the Wolf Pack captains." Legion looked over at me. "You intend on jumping to Gagarin now, Max Niekro?"  At my nod, it went on.  "Very good.  I will accompany you." "Fine by me, bud."  Then, into the silence of my mind: - Tovin, mind giving Legion and I a jump up to Gagarin?  I want to go ahead and brief the captains before the assault teams get there. - - Of course, Max. -  Was the veteran psyren's immediate reply.  - Can I assume the assault teams will follow you in a few minutes? - - That you can, Tovin. -  I confirmed even as she moved past the assembled soldiers to lightly lay a hand on my shoulder to use my goa to give her the extra power she needed to make the teleport happen.  Catching my eye, she nodded in both greeting and acknowledgement as she prepared to teleport us.  Yet I could sense her concern as though I was seeing it on her hidden face. "No worries, Tovin."  I said with a reassuring smile.  "We're coming back." "I know."  She said and I could feel her smile in return as if my reassurance was enough to settle her mind.  "The two of you will jump on my mark."  Upon hearing that, Legion moved closer to make the jump easier.  "Three, two, one, mark."   And New Retribution winked out of sight. "I will see to the installation of the shuttle launchers."  Legion rumbled almost as soon as Gagarin appeared all around us.  "I want to ensure they will work properly when the time comes." "Good idea."  I said and the neo-shell quickly strode towards a nearby elevator entrance, one of a handful here, in the arboretum.  Tovin had selected this location as it would have less traffic than the arrivals and departures terminals, making it easier for us to jump in without interference. I watched him go for a moment before turning to the shrine in the arboretum's heart.  A few quick strides and I was standing in the midst of the massive oaks that surrounded the ring of giant crystals.  I gazed at the crystals for a moment, thoughts churning before reaching out to lightly touch one of the warm, smooth surfaces. "Wish us luck, Mother."  I said quietly.  Then I was turning to jog back towards the same elevator Legion just used. I found the Wolf Pack captains where I expected them to be: departure terminal, staring at their ships being refitted with shuttle launchers.

"Captains."  I greeted them and they turned towards me as one. "Sir."  Daljeet greeted me, the rest of the original five quickly echoing her.  Joining them were two new captains, an African American male, a javelin going by his aura, and an intent Asian woman, her aura naming her a summoner.  They looked nervous as they stepped up to be a part of the small group gathering around me.  They should be: this was their first major engagement and it had the possibility of being their last. "Glad the seven of you could return to Gagarin so quickly."  I said then started passing out information packets.  "Here is your mission brief.  In short, I need you to draw the fire of the FGs protecting the array.  Once they're out of position, you'll launch several landing shuttles, which will then punch through their jamming and protection to penetrate the hull and drop off our assault teams.  With your greater speed and maneuverability, you will then keep the FGs occupied while the assault teams plant their charges." Handing the last brief to the Asian captain, I then faced all of them, hands clasped behind my back. "If everything goes to plan, the assault teams will then retreat to the shuttles, trigger the timers on their devices and get the hell out of dodge before it blows.  You'll then pick them up after the array has been destroyed, avoiding any surviving FGs while you do so." I paused to turn and look out the same observation windows they had been looking out of and for a brief moment, watched the heavy cruisers below being refitted.  Then: "Of course, if everything doesn't go according to plan, then our fleet will be destroyed, our assault teams slaughtered, Gagarin destroyed and that siphon will suck the Earth dry of all life."  I looked over my shoulder at the captains and saw looks of dismay on their faces.  "I agree.  Not the most pleasant of alternatives.  So let's make sure it doesn't happen, hmm?" "Yes, sir."  The captains grimly said as one.  Nodding in satisfaction, I turned back towards them. "I'll give you a few minutes to sort out how you want to make your attack.  Listen to Mateo; he's gone up against the FGs once already."  I turned and began to make my way towards a nearby elevator.  As I did, Isabella called out. "Where are you going, sir?"  She asked, the others turning curious faces towards me.  I paused and looked back at them. "Heading down to the loading area, where the assault teams are mustering.  Since I'll be going in with them, I figured I go and get ready along with the rest of the juggernauts and the echoes.  We need as many heavy hitters on the assault teams as possible to successfully place the charges.  Once you have your initial assault sorted out, let me know and we'll get rolling."  Suddenly I smiled.  "Good luck.  Earth Mother watch over each of you."  Then I was turning to finish walking towards that elevator leading down. I took maybe a step or two out of the elevator into the crowded loading area when a lithe form exploded out of the swirling mass of people to slam into me. "Max!"  Jen cried joyfully, her voice on the verge of crying as she clung to me tightly. "Jen."  I smiled and returned her enthusiastic embrace with a good squeeze of my own before she was leaning back enough to plant a long and very passionate kiss on me.  And she was still kissing me when Justice and Ambriel stepped out of the crowd, the broad shouldered ballista holding up his hands. "Can I have your attention, please?"  He shouted over the rumble of conversation and the loading area went silent.  "Thank you.  I've just received word from Gagarin's main computer that the shuttle launchers are completed and the landing shuttles are in place." Ambriel then took up the thread. "And we've just heard from our seven captains."  She indicated with a nod.  "They have given us the word to begin our loading.  So we want you to break down into your teams, find your assigned shuttle and get going.  Separation from the station is in five minutes, and counting." "No."  Jen quietly murmured, looking stricken as she turned to face me after listening to the two assault commanders.  "I'm not ready to go yet.  I need more time with you, Max.  Did you know they've put me in a different team from you?" "We don't have enough juggernauts to team us up, sweetheart."  I quickly replied.  "We don't even have enough for one per assault team.  We're spread pretty thin." "Let's go, people, c'mon!"  Justice interrupted our conversation to shout as the crowd continued to mill, leveling a hard look at us all.  "Three minutes to get to your shuttle berths or we're leaving you behind!" "Damn it."  Jen hissed.  Then she was groaning low in her throat with pleasure as I gave her one last kiss before I turned and moved away from her through the crowd, not trusting myself to look back.  I couldn't afford to.  I no longer had the room in my heart or mind as I focused on one thing, and one thing alone. Stopping that siphon from landing.  Oh yeah, and killing as many of those frickin' velkin as possible while I did!

 

Let Loose the Wolves of War!

According to the roster I had, I was assigned to an assault team being launched out of the Iroquois.  It seemed fitting, really, as the Iroquois was our first real warship in this fight.  By the time I had slipped through the crowds of Risen and humans still sorting out where they were supposed to go, I arrived at the Iroquois' loading port with only a couple minutes to spare.  And found Captain Isabella waiting for me there. "Commander."  She greeted me with a determined smile, the latina captain fighting hard to retain her composure as she was obviously sorting through the ramifications of the upcoming battle. "I was pleased to learn I would be carrying your assault team into battle."  She said, joining me as I stepped through the loading port and into the Iroquois' belly.  "As it was your efforts that got Gagarin rediscovered and my ship built, spearheading our efforts in space against the invaders." "It does feel quite poetic, doesn't it?"  I replied with a smile of my own as we continued inside, making our way through corridors crowded with viper pilots and soldiers.  The pilots would be launching their Tigers almost as soon as the Hammerheads left Gagarin to provide combat cover.  They would be joined in providing that cover by the missile frigates, which would be launching directly from Gagarin berths to follow the Hammerheads out. "It does."  Isabella agreed.  Then we were pausing at what would normally be the airlocks leading into the missile frigate berths, now taken over by the landing shuttles and their launchers. Her light hand on my forearm stopped me from stepping into the airlock.  My eyebrow lifting in curiosity, I looked back at her. "Captain?" "I want you to watch the battle from the bridge, sir."  Isabella said.  "I feel it's only right, as you've done so much to put us in a position to try to win this thing.  So I would like to establish a telepathic link with you so you can see what I see and hear what I hear." I didn't hesitate for a second.  Watch the battle to get close to the siphon from the bridge?  Hell yes!  She didn't have to ask me twice. "Absolutely, captain.  It would be my honor to accompany you into battle." Isabella smiled. "No, commander."  She replied.  "The honor will be mine."  I felt her presence touch my mind.  "I've established the connection.  All you have to do is close your eyes and you will be on the bridge."  She paused to glance at a chronograph she had strapped to a wrist. "Now you best find a seat on your shuttle, sir.  The Iroquois is about to leave her berth!" Nodding, I stepped into the airlock and quickly moved through the divided corridor beyond that brought me to a heavy door leading into the shuttle itself.  Inside most of the seats were already filled.  Simple affairs that were connected to the floor via pneumatic pedestals that would absorb some of the graviometric forces that the shuttle would face with its abrupt changes in direction, the seats were a combination harness and sling. Taking a spot between a grim lich in a zero-gap breastplate, their Reaper in their hands, and a human in full armor, a splash of red on her shoulder in the shape of a scorpion, I strapped in.  Just in time; with a rumble I could feel through my boots, the Iroquois' impellers spun up as she prepared to leave.  Doors and airlocks closed with muffled clangs and, with a jerk, the ship separated from her berth. I gave Isabella a moment or two to reach the bridge.  Then I was settling back into my harness and closing my eyes. Instantly I was seeing the corridor that lead to the bridge as Isabella briskly walked along it.

- Welcome, sir. -  Her quiet mental voice greeted me.  - We have separation and should be maneuvering to clear our moorings. - - Sounds good, captain.  I'll go silent from this point on and merely observe.  Best of luck and good hunting. -  I returned. - Thank you, sir. -  She said as she stepped through the double door leading onto the bridge itself. It was exactly how I remembered it when I took the Iroquois out for her shakedown cruise: clean lines, simple layout, and perfect lighting.  Zara truly had designed a vessel that was both functional and efficient while remaining elegant and ergonomic. "Nav, are we clear of our moorings?"  Isabella asked as she ascended the command dais to stand just in front of the captain's chair, hands clasped behind her. "Just clearing now, captain."  Her Nav answered.  "Impellers at five percent." "Plot us a course out of the yard, Nav.  Impellers to fifteen percent."  She turned to look to her right.  "And Comms, advise Commander Davinder we have cast off and he should follow suit to keep the frigates close." The Comms officer quickly looked back at Isabella. "Commander Davinder is already casting off, captain."  They reported.  "They're moving in to take a flanking position to watch our stern." A quick glance at one of the big view screens that showed the Iroquois' flanks was enough to confirm the compact forms of the missile frigates had indeed taking the indicated position.  The pair of frigates now paced the Hammerhead cruiser as she eased out of the yard. "Sir, the other captains are indicating that they too have cast off and are heading for the rendezvous point."  Comms reported and Isabella nodded. "Very good.  Tactical, as soon as we're clear of the yard, engage the cloak, full power to the shields, power up all beam weapon emplacements and activate our missile batteries." "Aye, captain."  The Tactical officer replied as the main viewer showed the ship just passing by the last part of the yard. "Sir, we're clear of the yard."  Nav reported. "Very good.  Go to thirty percent on the impellers and plot a course to rendezvous with the rest of the fleet."  Isabella commanded.  She again glanced at her chronograph before returning her hands to behind her back. "Captain, the cloak has been engaged."  Tactical reported.  "All weapons stations are reporting ready and maximum power has been sent to the shields." Isabella nodded in acknowledgement. "We've reached the rendezvous point, captain."  Nav reported a few seconds' later, Comms speaking a heart beat later.  "The rest of the flotilla acknowledges condition green, captain, and ask that you take command." Again Isabella nodded.  It was her turn in the rotation. It was only coincidental that her turn fell on the very day they decided to engage in the greatest space battle the Earth-born had ever known.  Would, or could she lead them to victory??  Grimly she pushed that thought aside and focused on the task at hand. "Signal acknowledgement, Comms.  Command is mine."  She looked over at her Science officer.  "Any reading on the current location of the siphon array, Science?" The officer at the Science station worked for a moment, checking numbers and glancing at monitors before replying. "Sensors put the siphon at approximately three hundred thousand kilometres from Earth and closing."  They reported over their shoulder.  "Their current rate of approach will put them in Earth orbit in less than an hour."

"Then that's the amount of time we have to stop them."  Isabella grimly replied.  "Advise the fleet to form up on, . . ." "Sir!"  Tactical called out.  "I'm reading several additional vessels vectoring in on our location.  Or rather, our rendezvous point.  They are not scanning us." "Velkin vessels?" "Negative."  That was from Science.  "Configuration is similar to a Hammerhead, with the same emission spectrum and thrust profile.  If there weren't such obvious changes to the superstructure, I'd almost say Gagarin made them." "Sir, we're being hailed."  Comms reported. I could feel one of Isabella's eyebrows climb in surprise at hearing that.  Testament to her coolness under fire, and quick thinking as a psyren, she didn't hesitate long. "Open a channel, Comms.  Let's see who wants to talk to us." There was a slight pause as the Comms officer opened a channel.  Then: "Hallo, North American vessels."  A lightly accented voice came over the speakers.  "I know you're out there, because you're getting ready to hit the siphon array.  Just tell me we're not too late to join the party." "This is Captain Isabella of the Risen warship Iroquois."  Isabella said with a frown.  "Who is this?" "Hideku Asa, of the Star Dragon."  Came the quick reply.  "Out of Japan.  Although my crews are mostly from Eastern and Northern Europe.  Not many Asians left.  We were so nicely packed together, the aliens couldn't resist treating our people like an all-you-can-eat buffet.  Ironic, really." Isabella frowned as she heard that. I could sense her confusion.  It shouldn't have mattered who was killed in the invasion.  If this Hideku Asa was Risen, then he should've known the Earth Mother could summon anyone back, regardless of when they died.  The recently slaughtered in the Asian nations wouldn't have made much impact on that capability.  Unless, of course, the overcrowding of the Asiatic nations had continued after my death and had reached a level where they were forced to excavate the graves and bury the dead elsewhere to make room for the living.  Like at sea; kinda hard to get summoned back if your bones are in some box at the bottom of the ocean. Then Isabella was pushing her momentary confusion aside. "I'm assuming you're Risen then, Hideku."  She said. "You'd be correct, Captain Isabella.  A tesla, to be exact.  What are the odds, hey?  A Japanese tesla?  Anyway, we got the plans for the Hammerheads from our Earth Mother liaison, found us an industrial ship yard that hadn't been destroyed in the attack and raced to make ships that we could use to join you.  We just made it."  There was a slight pause.  Then: "We haven't missed anything, have we?" "No, your timing is perfect.  I am in command of the North American flotilla.  Are you in command over there, Hideku?" "I suppose so."  Came the answer.  "But in all truth, I haven't fought in a single engagement.  Neither have any of my crew."  That was enough to elicit several groans from the bridge crew.  Isabella silenced them with a quick glare. "We all had to start somewhere, Hideku.  Does your crew at least know how to operate all aspects of your vessel?  Weapons? Propulsion? Navigation?" "Actually they do."  There was a hint of pride in the Japanese tesla's voice.  "We trained on the ship's operation as we built them.  So each crew member is very capable."

Isabella allowed a very small smile to touch her lips for the briefest of moments. "Outstanding.  You have that going for you then, Hideku.  Very well, if you've no objections, I'll take control of your flotilla as well and give you commands in battle." "None whatsoever."  The Japanese captain quickly replied. "Excellent."  She glanced up at the main viewer, which was now displaying the newcomers' ragged formation.  "I want you to break up your formation and take wing positions to each one of our ships.  Then, outside of the direct commands I will give you, I want you to mirror what they're doing.  Shoot at what they're shooting at, follow where they're going.  And if you can, cover for each other if you get out of position."  She took a step back to the captain's chair to let her fingers dance over one of the control surfaces for a moment. "I'm passing on these same directions to the ships under my command.  You'll see them decloaking now." "We see them, Isabella."  Hideku indicated.  "Very nice, those cloaks.  I don't suppose you have some spares kicking around you could lend us.  They, uh, weren't in the original design specs." Isabella's expression abruptly tightened. "No.  They were added on after."  She said and there was a long pause. "Well.  Doesn't that suck."  Hideku bluntly stated.  "But, hey, it's not like you knew we were coming, right?  We'll just have to make due." The Iroquois' Science officer hit something on their board before twisting to look at Isabella. "Captain, the siphon has drawn within fifty minutes of Earth orbit." "Mierda."  Isabella hissed.  "Hideku, this conversation is over.  Bring your ships into formation.  We're leaving.  The siphon is within fifty minutes of Earth orbit and we need to move." "Rodger that."  Hideku crisply replied, all business upon hearing the siphon's location.  "Moving into position now, Iroquois and following your lead." A glance at the big screen, which still displayed the tactical position of the new Risen ships, confirmed they were indeed moving smoothly into position.  Then Isabella was barking orders. "Nav, impellers to one hundred and ten percent, thirty percent up angle out of the ecliptic.  Tactical, full shields and do not engage the cloak until we're within the array's scanning perimeter." "Yes, sir."  Tactical replied as the rumble beneath their feet multiplied as power was fed to the oversized impellers pushing the Iroquois through space.  "Shields are at maximum, full sensor sweep ahead to give us eyes on." "And we are at one hundred ten percent on the impellers, captain."  Nav reported.  "Thirty percent up angle." "Make your course parabolic, Nav.  I want the bottom of the arch hitting the array right in the middle." "Yes, sir."  Fingers danced across the keys.  "Parabolic course plotted and executing.  Time to intercept at current speed: ten minutes." Isabella nodded in acknowledgement. "The rest of the fleet, Science?"  She asked. "Right on our tail, sir.  Hideku's Star Dragon is flying on our wing, and Commander Davinder has our frigates in close on the flank." Again the latina psyren nodded.  Then she noticed something as she was looking at the secondary view screens which showed the Star Dragon moving into position.

"Hail the Star Dragon back, Comms."  She directed, a thoughtful expression appearing on her face.  A second's pause, before: "Go ahead, Iroquois."  Hideku's voice said. "I see some mods on your ship, Hideku.  It would appear you didn't adhere to the original design with complete accuracy.  Anything different in the way of weapons?"  Isabella asked.  "I'd like to know what we can deploy when we're hitting the array. "Standard beam weapons and Shrikes, mostly.  We did manage to squeeze in a railgun, based on some schematics we pulled out of an ADF military computer, but it takes a while to reload.  Kinda useless in a dog fight." Isabella smiled tightly as I could feel an idea appear in her mind via our connection. "But not in a first strike situation.  Advise the rest of your ships to prep those rail guns, Hideku.  The FGs used mass drivers with great effect against the Mohican.  Let's give them a taste of their own medicine." "Rodger to the giving the aliens a big fuckin' punch in the mouth!"  Hideku crowed and Isabella's smile lightened for a second before becoming grim once more.  - I think our chances just went up, sir. -  She silently sent to me and I had to agree.  A railgun??  Time to fight fire with fire, baby! "Captain, I have the array on approach."  Science abruptly announced, making me almost jerk out of the telepathic contact with Isabella in surprise?  Damn, that was the shortest ten minutes I had ever experienced. "Engage the cloak."  Isabella tautly commanded  "Hideku, advise your ships to position behind and just above the ships they're wing on so the velkin will have to scan through the cloaks to get to you.  Might muffle your signature a bit." "Rodger that.  Star Dragon moving into position.  Railgun is prepped and ready to fire.  Just give us some targets to shoot at." "Comms, have Commander Davinder stay as close to us as possible to also get some protection from the cloak.  If those big bastards start throwing everything at us, the frigates will be the most vulnerable." "Advising him now, sir."  Comms confirmed. Isabella nodded in satisfaction before looking up at the big screen. "Tactical, show us what we're shooting at."  She said and the image of stars disappeared, replaced by a schematic of the array.  A heart beat later its escort appeared, and a quick count yielded that it was almost quadruple the size of the fleet that had originally protected the array while it was being constructed. Thankfully, not all of them were FGs.  As we had noticed back in New Retribution when we were first comparing the information gathered by the data spike with the Wolf Pack's recon data, the bulk of the FGs were clustered around the array itself.  Only a handful had joined them since, bringing the total to some fifteen FGs. That meant the rest of the escort, some twenty ships, were titan class warships, with much lighter armor and weaponry, and lacking the active tachyon sweeps the FGs used so effectively against the Mohican during Twitch and Whisper's insertion into the array.  I knew which ones I would hit with the railguns and which ones would get a barrage of our standard weapons. It quickly turned out that Isabella and I were on the same page. "Star Dragon, split your six railguns into two teams.  Team one will fire on three FGs on the left of the array.  Team two will fire on ships to the right.  As soon as your targets are struck, open fire on the envelope of titans in the defensive shell above them with everything that you got.  Wolf Pack and frigates, that goes for you as well." "Do you want us to break off while we fire, Isabella?"  That was Jacinda, captain of the Seneca. Isabella shook her head tightly.  Then spoke out loud since they couldn't see her. "Negative.  Blow through the array at full speed."  She commanded.  "Let's not let them train those mass drivers on us.  Once you're through, cut back up towards the ecliptic for a second pass, crossing over the array so we can deploy the landers and the Tigers while we're taking another shot at those FGs.  After that, there's a good chance they'll be right on top of us so it'll be keeping it tight and holding the bigger velkin ships as close to each other as possible so if they open fire, they'll hit each other when they miss." "Thirty seconds to range."  Tactical tightly advised and I felt Isabella's face tighten in a feral snarl. "Time to kill some velkin!"  She hissed. The tactical image on the screen disappeared, replaced by the real time of the array leaping towards us out of the darkness.  I barely had time to focus on it through Isabella's eyes before winks of light were streaking down towards the array almost too fast to follow even with the distance.  Then the Iroquois was shuddering as she fired every beam weapon she could aim at the nearest titan-class warship, slashing across the massive vessel's dorsal shielding before a brace of Shrikes darted in to hammer it in the engineering section. We had just enough time to see it break apart before we were past with a second titan in our sights.  Again long, straight lines of deadly energy reached out to slash across the ship's upper edge before Shrikes pounded into its engineering section.  It was an attack the Wolf Pack had used time and time again in brilliant fashion. A quick glance to the secondary viewers where other ships of the fleet showed them in the same unrelenting dive, weapons firing in rapid fashion to hit as hard as possible before we flashed by.  An FG abruptly appeared, laboring with a massive hole in its forward section and the Iroquois unleashed a barrage of killing light and particles at it, its shields obviously down.  The beam fire was quickly followed by a full spread of missiles, launched right at the wound one of the railguns had left in it. The Shrikes slammed into the gaping rent in the FG's hull and we watched as a concussive ripple washed over it. Then we were past it as well and staring at empty space. "Bring us around and prep for another pass!" Isabella shouted even as the Iroquois shivered from velkin weapon fire splashing against her shields. "And advise all landers to prepare for launch!"

 

Chapter 23: Assault

Space spun in the main viewer, the stars leaving silvery afterimages behind as they streaked across the view.  Then the array was in front of us once again. This time, instead of hanging in silent serenity as it appeared to when we first saw it, the massive structure was wreathed in dancing light and the silent ripples of concussion as ordnance detonated against, on or inside its target.  Damaged velkin ships were everywhere.  And there were a couple damaged Risen ships too, seeing them making my stomach twist.  I felt even more despair to see that they were a pair of Hideku's ships, which meant their railguns weren't available for another shot at the FGs. Some of that despair was pushed aside when the two vessels suddenly began to move, shields shimmering back into place just barely in time before they were slammed with energy fire and mass driver shots.  Then one of the FGs locking in on them staggered as a railgun round slammed into it from beneath, its shields flickering wildly in an attempt to stay cohesive before they vanished like a popping soap bubble. Seeing opportunity, one of the stricken Dragons then opened fire with several searing particle beam blasts right into the now unprotected front corner of the huge vessel before Shrikes were darting across the intervening space to slam into the FG's cheek.  An eyeblink later the front corner erupted in brilliant light and the FG lost altitude control, dropping its nose as its maneuvering thrusters refused their commands to work. Then we had climbed past the skirmish, the array dead ahead. "The tachyon field has stripped us of our cloak."  Tactical grimly announced.  "We're three hundred kilometres from the array and out in the open.  Sensors report weapon emplacements on the surface have targeted us." "Full power to the impellers, Nav."  Isabella barked.  "We'll outrun their weapons' ability to lock on.  Tactical, target what emplacements you can reach and open fire!" Beams of light instantly reached out to brush against the array, several flares of light announcing successful impacts on various emplacements.  Then the Iroquois was shivering as her shields took multiple hits. "I've got two FGs moving in on us."  Tactical reported. "They're powering their mass drivers."  That from Science, who was watching their monitors like a creature possessed. "Nav, do not let them have a clear shot!"  Isabella snarled.  "We need to get to a hundred kilometres to launch the landers or they'll be sitting ducks.  Evasive!  Increase rate of climb by ten percent and roll to starboard ten percent.  Go!" The Iroquois smoothly rolled and we watched on the secondary view screens as a mass driver shot narrowly missed us.  Then one of our frigates was swinging around in between the FGS and us to let loose a barrage of Wasps, small, cluster missiles that acted as both chaff to pull a targeting lock off.  And as a wide area effect weapon, the swarm of small, but agile missiles not hitting as hard as a Shrike but extremely effective against weapons emplacements. Or sensor arrays; Isabella grinned as the frigate's barrage destroyed one of the FG's primary targeting arrays, the very things they had been using to aim their mass driver.  Then we were up and past them, the FGs forced to climb in pursuit in an attempt to shoot at us. Isabella blinked as a mass driver round narrowly missed and slammed instead into the array in front of us, smashing a massive gouge in the colossal structure. "One hundred fifty kilometres and closing."  Nav reported. "All landers, prepare to launch."  Isabella ordered.  "All pilots, stand by to deploy Tigers."

"One hundred kilometres!"  Nav sang out. "Deploy Tigers!"  Isabella ordered.  "And launch the landers!" With a hard jerk, our connection was broken and I was in the flickering light of the lander getting hammered back into my sling by the force generated by the launchers to throw us clear as we traveled at high speed.  The landers had been equipped with powerful inertial dampeners so we wouldn't get turned into paste by being launched at such high velocities.  But even they couldn't compensate for the enormity of the stresses that abruptly slammed into the bulky, heavily armored vehicle. Beside me the human grunted as we pulled enough G's to force all the air out of their lungs.  The lich on my other side had to fight to keep its Reaper from tearing its head off as the gun was driven hard into its body. A metallic voice spoke from overhead speakers. "Impact in ten seconds."  It warned in a sexless, inhuman tone.  'Knock, knock.'  I grimly thought, unconsciously bracing myself.  Then we were all nearly thrown out of our harnesses as the lander drilled into the array's hull like a giant spear. "Penetration achieved."  The voice returned to report in rapid fire fashion.  "Ram deploying.  Ram deployed.  Passageway established.  Stand by for airlock opening.  Opening."  And the air in the lander 'whooshed' out in a rush through the now open lock. - That's our cue, people. -  I sent over broadband, punching my quick release on my harness and throwing myself forward. - Let's go, go, go! - The lich that had been in the seat beside me, was right behind me as we ran through the airlock and down the passageway through crumpled and torn metal before jumping out the hole the ram had made.  A second spent in the air then I was on the decking, instinctively rolling to absorb the impact of the jump. - Looks like we've got an artificial gravity field. -  I reported, coming to my feet just as the lich dropped onto the ground beside me.  - Something close to Earth normal.  - A heart beat later we were joined by first the human that was on the other side, then the rest of the shuttle's occupants.  Which included no less than three Valkyries. - Sir. - Ronin greeted me as she straightened up, her fellow Valkyries behind her.  I didn't recognize them, being that they were some of Chi's girls, but I was glad to see one of the most veteran of Tovin's psyrens with us. - Good to have you with us, Ronin. -  I said before taking a quick look around. And I immediately felt awed by the sheer immensity of the place.  Over seventy kilometres long, and a good twenty wide, the siphon by itself would've been too massive to try to destroy.  The array, at one hundred klicks long but with each individual arm only being five kilometres wide, was a much better place to find the best places to plant our explosives.  With the array feeding the siphon power, we hoped a sufficient enough backlash generated by well-planted explosives at power junctions throughout the array would send a surge through the siphon and destroy it. Yet, five kilometres was still a helluva lot of territory to cover.  A glance up showed the ceiling of the space we had penetrated into nearly a kilometre up and to either side the array ran into the distance without end.  Everywhere I looked there was construction machinery, power plants and supply depots, great accumulations of resources for the building and maintenance of the siphon. But it wasn't so much what I was seeing that was concerning me.  It was what wasn't seeing that was troubling.  And I wasn't the only one. - Where are the damn Nehvest? -  One of the Valkyries asked tautly, obviously wanting to try her new skills on the enemy first hand. - Maybe they don't know we're here. -  That was from one of Ambriel's humans, the armor plated male slowly looking in a circle around us, his face completely hidden except for eye slits by his armor's face guard.

- Oh, they know we're here, lad. -  That from Corraidhan, her voice carrying a slight Celtic accent even as the echo pushed herself through the crowd to stand close to me.  I could see a new attachment on the side of her head which bore a resemblance to the psy receivers we used to pick up telepathic communication at the command center.  She must be using it to communicate on broadband with us. - They'd have to be deaf and dumb to have missed the racket we made even before we punched several holes in the hull of their great beast of an array! - - While Corraidhan makes a good point. -  I said, looking at the twenty or so members of my squad even as I summoned my juggernaut abilities and felt my body begin to go hyper dense.  - We don't have the time to stand here and talk about it.  We're on the clock, people. -  I looked at the chronograph I had put on just for this raid.  - Twenty minutes to all explosives planted and on our way out on my mark.  Two, one, mark! -  I looked back up at my squad.   - Let's move. -  I turned and began trotting along the pierced hull towards what looked like a power junction, if my many trips inside velkin structures had taught me anything.  Nearly a kilometre down I could see another team disembarking from their lander.  Hopefully the Wolf Pack managed to plant us all fairly close together versus scattering us over a hundred kilometres of pylon. I was debating whether to contact that team to see where they were headed when abruptly flares of deadly light were splashing all around them, quick followed by a couple pinhead nukes.  Well, at least we don't have to worry about where the elites are any more. - Tighten it up, troops. -  Ronin grated and I felt telekinetics flare to life all around her.  - We've got incoming! - I half turned to my left before a focused blast of energy slammed into my upper body with enough force to make me take a step back.  I grimaced then exploded forward, arrowing at the tight knot of Nehvest that had taken cover behind a massive stack of metal beams nearly twice as tall as they were, and four times as wide as its height.  Not that it mattered. I felt rather than heard the sound barrier break around me.  Then I was ploughing through the metal stack with unrelenting force, sending massive beams in every direction.  As expected, there were no elites directly in my path.  Nor did any get caught by the flailing metal beams, the more skilled velkin soldiers spotting my approach and moving smoothly to get out of the way.  Catching sight of a pair out of the corner of my eye, I turned towards them.  And took a pinhead nuke in the chest.  And I grinned when I felt the EMP armor shed the EMP pulse like water off a duck.  'Tight.'  Then my grin became a feral snarl.  'My turn.' Going up the side of the stack at full speed, I went vertical as the elites twisted in place to unleash a storm of destruction at me from their modified weaponry.  Sprinting along the stack's front face, I launched when I hit the top, aiming at the nearest Nehvest.  A tight turn in space to gather momentum then I was driving my fist down against the elite's helmeted head with enough force to knock the giant alien to one knee. Landing lightly and turning in the same motion, I shed several blasts from the elite's companions before I smashed into the kneeling elite's body, knocking it flying.  Again, in testament to the elite's modified armor, I left it with only a dent in the helmet and one in the hip, where I hit it a second time.  They were perfect spots, however, to use the weakened metal to my advantage. My PSG swung up and I fired in one smooth motion, pounding the damaged helmet with a massive pulse of energy.  And I tightly smiled when the blast ripped through the weakened metal to shred the helmet's contents, the Nehvest jerking spasmodically in death before going still.

"How's that for a close encounter, bitch?"  I growled. Two more pinhead nukes slammed against me a heart beat later, their impacts alone staggering me.  Shrugging them off, I turned to fire at the remaining giants and for a brief moment we viciously exchanged deadly darts of light and death. - Max? -  Ronin's voice spoke into my mind, sounding tired and concerned. - Don't worry about me. -  I said, grunting as a different kind of missile slammed into me, the impact pushing me back in a concussive wave of force.  - Just plant those damn charges.  I'll try to keep these Nehvest off your backs. - - The team's tesla has identified the nearest power node and we've already planted our first charge. -  Ronin quickly replied.  - But another squad of elites has appeared and they have us pinned down.  The Valkyries dropped three of them.  But they have some sort of scatter field protecting them and it takes twice as much power to burn through it to kill them with a psychic shock so we're exhausted.  The pyrokinetic and telekinetic attacks have little effect on that same armor. - I grimaced as I slowly sidestepped, shedding energy blasts and grimly returning fire with my PSG as I tried to get a bead on the elites taking cover. - Scattering fields don't stop projectiles. -  I replied.  - Use your telekinetics to pick something up and hit them, . . - A battering ram smashed into my side, interrupting my communication and sending me flying.  Arms akimbo, I flew for maybe four or five metres before I dropped hard onto the metal deck.  Before I could move, a massive boot was pinning me to the ground. "Die, juggernaut."  The boot's owner grated in a stomach-churning voice.  Then I was taking shot after shot to the head and shoulders as the Nehvest unloaded everything it had at me while it had me pinned down. I took the barrage for a few seconds while I gathered myself.  Then I twisted under the nearly half tonne of pressure and took hold of the velkin's boot. "Get the fuck off me!"  I snarled, pushing up with all my strength. Unbalanced by my sudden push, the Nehvest staggered back.  But, even as it did, it drew and aimed a sidearm at me in one continuous motion.  It then fired a miniature missile.  Well, miniature if you're a giant.  It was as big as my forearm, like a bazooka round or an RPG and it hit me flush in the chest with enough force that I was sent sliding back across the decking. Hitting a jumble of metal beams, I came to an abrupt halt.  And immediately grunted as several more high powered rounds were pumped into where I was braced against the beams, each one slamming into me like a runaway truck. Dazed by both my hard impact with the beams, and the subsequent torrent of weapon fire dumped onto me, I blinked against the scintillating waves of energy smashing into me, trying to clear my head.  Then, just as suddenly as it had started, the weapon fire ceased.  My vision cleared just in time to see two Nehvest carefully moving forward, weapons still trained on me.  It was as they drew close that I noticed something. While the one on my left had the usual assortment of Nehvest weapons scattered over its armored body, the one on my right had something extra.  From my position against the beams, melting metal oozing onto me, the giant appeared to be holding something in its gauntleted fist that looked like a shimmering giant-sized dagger of glowing red glass.  'What the hell is that??' The Nehvest with the dagger moved closer, drawing the dagger back in preparation to strike and I braced myself.  Whatever it was, it couldn't penetrate my shield and hyperdensity, right?  Right?? I never got the chance to find out.  The elite abruptly jerked as if struck from behind.  Then it was spasming wildly as a length of metal beam covered in its green blood burst out of its chest.  One last twitch, then it was dropping onto its armored knees and keeling over, the rest of the beam jutting out of its back.  The body falling out of the way freed up sight lines on the second Nehvest and I watched as it jerked free a sidearm to fire both it and its primary weapon at something it was seeing nearby. I let my eyes follow the slashing ordnance.  And found myself watching in amazement to see it wildly deflecting off a bubble of energy protecting something within.  Then the Nehvest abruptly stopped firing, dropping its weapons to grab its helmet with both hands.  A helmet that started twisting to the side no matter how much effort the elite put into holding it in place. For a long moment the giant's incredible strength kept the helmet from twisting too far around.  But even a Nehvest's strength had its limits.  With a surge of motion, the helmet went the rest of the way around, corkscrewing the giant's head and neck beyond their physical limits.  I heard the neck snap with an audible 'crack' before the elite dropped bonelessly to the ground. "That bloody mudak was strong."  A quiet, familiar voice dryly commented and I found myself smiling as a slender hand was extended towards me.  "Time to get off the ground, tvarisch.  As you say, we've got velkin to kill!" Valkyries in the house.

 

Behind Enemy Lines

Daria smiled as I took her hand and let her pull me to my feet.  Then we were both ducking behind a TK shield as several high powered rounds streaked in to be deflected at the last moment. "I have to admit, moi droog, you sure know how to throw a party."  The veteran Valkyrie said as we braced against the barrage. "I like to take care of my friends."  I dryly replied with a grin, wincing as a shot caromed off the shield close to my head.  "What brings you here?  I thought Ulyana didn't want any of you to leave Arkhangelskoye in case Vorinov got frisky." "Vorinov is dead."  Daria bluntly reported, peering in the direction of where the weapons fire was coming from.  Then three or four of the massive metal beams were lifting up and launching in that direction, forcing the Nehvest that had us pinned down, to scatter.  The deluge of deadly light immediately ceased and she dropped her shield so we could scamper to a nearby stack of building material and take cover. It was there as we pressed ourselves against stacked plates of metal that the Russian Valkyrie looked back over at me to finish her explanation. "It was in the second round of the new offensive.  The filth was hiding in that burnt out apartment building of his like the coward he was when they were spotted.  Without even Kalashnikov's protection, they were obliterated in the first wave of bombardment from space."  A slight smile touched her lips. "Of course, the enemy had to be sure and they hit the entire district again, flattening it into dust, melted metal and glass.  The only thing that got out was the psyren Taisia, who foolishly thought she could somehow rehabilitate Vorinov and his overbearing misogyny." "I think she was in love with him."  I peered around the corner of the heap of materials we had selected as our cover and felt my expression tighten upon seeing the Nehvest already regrouping, a number of them prepping large rocket launchers. "She couldn't bear to leave that bastard."  I stated as I pulled back to press once more against the stack of plates and look over at the frowning Valkyrie. Daria snorted in derision. "Then she was an idiot on top of being a fool.  The man was a pig and deserved to die in ignominy."  Then she too was leaning around the corner to take a look at the regrouping elites.  Her eyes narrowed slightly and I watched gouts of pyrokinetic fire appear over the stack of materials we crouched behind. "They are distracted.  Now is the time to hit them."  She tautly indicated without taking her eyes off the velkin.  Nodding, I stepped around her and the corner of our cover then exploded into motion. The first Nehvest I hit was cocooned in psy fire from head to toe.  However, unlike the regular hunters who jerked and twitched as they burned, this one didn't seem to be in distress from the rippling blue-white flames dancing over its armored body.  Instead it calmly continued working to prep its rocket launcher as I took a bead on it.  And I quickly noticed something else. While the elite  wasn't bothered by the psy fire rippling over its body, it also wasn't seeing properly because of them.  It made no move to get out of my way when I started towards it.  Which was fine by me. I smashing into its left leg like a runaway locomotive, its reinforced armor not crumpling and letting the leg get torn in two.  Yet it couldn't prevent the knee from getting bent the other way, the joint's sudden destruction causing the Nehvest to topple over. Yet, as it fell in silence, more evidence that these bastards were as tough as they come, it had the presence of mind to hastily discard the rocket launcher and yank out its side arm.  It actually managed to get off a shot at me before it was on the ground.  Which was where I put a PSG blast through its face.

Not bothering to see if my shot had done its job, I slung the PSG and grabbed the rocket launcher.  The size of a caber pole, only my juggernaut strength made it possible for me to handle it with any capability.  Thankfully it was relatively easy to operate and was already loaded, mostly due to the elite's efforts.  I spun it around and fired at the head of the next elite in line, also wreathed in psy flames. The rocket, as long as I was tall, slammed full bore into the side of the elite's head, the explosion and concussive wave knocking it over to drop hard onto the ground.  Seeing that there was still one round in the launcher's chamber, I turned and put the second rocket into the chest of the next Nehvest, who had looked up at seeing its buddy hit the deck.  And I watched as it too got put on its ass. I threw the launcher aside, shrugged off some poorly aimed shots from the surviving pair of elites, and moved in close to dispatch the two I had knocked down with well-placed blasts to the head from my PSG.  Then I heard a grunt behind me, followed quickly by one of the surviving Nehvest hitting the deck, a metal plate neatly inserted at the neck and down at an angle into the body to nearly cut it in half.  A heart beat later the last elite simply stopped in the middle of reaching for its side arm and dropped to the deck in that familiar way that told me its brain had just been obliterated by a psychic shock. I looked at it for a couple seconds to make sure it wasn't moving.  The one with the plate through it, I didn't bother.  It was stone cold chopped in frickin' half.  Then I turned and scooped another one of the discarded rocket launchers and stepped to where I could see my team getting pounded by a second squad of Nehvest.   The launcher was a little awkward to aim, but I had to, considering it was almost two kilometres distant and I didn't want to hit any of our people by accident.  Then I fired off the first round, shifted over slightly to aim at the next Nehvest over, and loosed the second one.  I quickly repeated with the two remaining rocket launchers and was throwing the last launcher away when I saw the first elite go down from a rocket impact. "Nicely done."  Daria stepped between the downed velkin to join me.  "Now we need to make sure those charges are set.  While killing these filthy giants is satisfying in itself, we need to remain focused on the primary mission." "Copy that."  I grimly replied.  Then I was exploding forward. It only took a few seconds to cross the intervening space between the squad Daria and I had destroyed.  And the one menacing my team.  Although menacing was past tense; the rocket attack had caught them unprepared, which in my experience was unusual for the Nehvest.  Maybe Ronin and her baby Valkyries had kept their attention long enough that the rocket strike was successful. Either way, two were down and moving weakly, another pair were on one knee, trying to pump some sort of stimulant or med into their bodies with what looked like hyposprays of some sort.  And the final three were taking cover as Reaper, javelin and ballista fire danced all around them. Having kept up with me with her teleport 'skipping', Daria took out one of the kneelers with a psychic blast, the Nehvest going from desperately trying to pump meds into its leg to simply keeling over onto the deck.  I took out the other, sweeping its leg out to throw it onto the deck where it got a PSG round in the face for its troubles.  The other two already down via my earlier rocket attack also got PSG shots to the head to finish them off. That left only the three still standing.  Having seen and heard their comrades going down, they immediately turned towards us even as I saw the space around them blur.  Was that the scattering field Ronin had mentioned?  A glance over at Daria revealed a grimace of frustration on the veteran Valkyrie's face.  Yeah, that'd be a scattering field.  Then I was ducking as a piece of wall lifted from a nearby pile to fly by overhead at the three, forcing them to quickly get out of the way. 

Scattering field, maybe, but Daria wasn't letting it get in her way.  Then she was hastily erecting a TK field as all three targeted her and opened up with everything that they had even as they still were moving out of the way of the piece of building she threw at them.  Oh yeah, Nehvest did not like Valkyries. Nor did they forget about me; even as I prepared to use Daria as a distraction for my own attack, one twisted in my direction and fired a pinhead nuke right at me.  My eyes narrowed slightly upon seeing that.  Then I was bolting forward, going supersonic in a step and easily avoiding the pinhead's blast radius. Somehow my target managed to get out of my way before I hit it.  Not that it mattered; I used its buddy as a launching pad, running up the second elite's side before turning and jumping off its shoulder.  Midair I twisted towards my impromptu launching pad to put a PSG round into the side of its head before turning back to my original target in time to catch it by the helmet.  Using my momentum, I torqued the helmet and the elite's head around far enough to snap the giant's neck. Letting go, I landed lightly and briefly on the now dead giant's shoulders as it slowly started toppling forward.  There I managed to get off three PSG shots at the remaining Nehvest before I had to jump to avoid getting trapped by the giant's falling body.  As expected, the elite managed to avoid two of the shots and its armor absorbed the third.  Doing so let it stay focused on Daria and it unloaded both its rifle and its sidearm at the shielded Valkyrie. I made to charge as soon as my feet hit the ground.  Only to see Daria's hand fly up with a hold signal.  Knowing that she had me in her peripheral vision, I nodded in acknowledgement and turned back to the Nehvest that was currently trying to batte her TK shield down with ordnance.  The Valkyrie didn't make me wait long to see what she intended. It started with a shimmering bubble appearing a good metre away from the elite, the bubble completely surrounding it.  After firing a couple rounds from its weapons, the Nehvest within quickly discovered the bubble was impermeable to energy and swiftly holstered it's weapons.  It then drew a long, serated edged knife which it attempted to jam into the hardened surface that was now all around it. The impact of the arm-long blade didn't penetrate the bubble, but did send a ripple washing its surface.  As if that was some sort of signal, the bubble began to move, slowly lifting the elite off the ground like a soap bubble wafting on a breeze. Inside the giant's efforts to punch through the bubble became more determined, the velkin throwing its entire strength into trying to cut through.  That was when the bubble began horizontally contracting, like a shrinking cocoon. The trapped Nehvest continued working with determination for a moment while the bubble contracted.  Then, seeing that its efforts were pointless, it stopped and, sheathing its blade, it folded its arms over its chest and leveled a cold stare at the two of us.  And that's how it remained even when the bubble touched it and began crushing its armor like an empty soda can, continuing to stare at us without making a sound even as it was turned into pulp. There was no denying it.  Bastard was hard core. I exchanged a quick look with Daria.  Then she was letting her TK field go and what was left of the Nehvest dropped with a clatter to the deck.  As we turned to my battered team, I found myself hoping we didn't have to face too many of those kinds of Nehvest.  Because if we did, it'd be a fight to the very bitter last. Ronin looked up with an expression of relief on her face as Daria and I approached.  She was kneeling beside a javelin that was missing most of her chest, trying to stabilize her while they waited for the team's only summoner to arrive and repair the damage.  A quick look found the summoner, an exhausted looking fellow doing his best to put chopped up Risen back together a few metres' away.

"Thank goodness."  The tired North American Valkyrie said after giving Daria a nod in greeting.  "Your arrival was most timely.  They had us pinned down and were methodically chopping us into bait with us three Valkyries too tapped out to stop them." "That would be your inexperience showing."  Daria bluntly pointed out.  "And your lack of stamina.  You and your sisters are strong, and you use your attacks well.  But you don't have the experience or the stamina to last long in a hard battle like this one." Her expression somewhat uncertain, Ronin looked from Daria to me then back to the Russian. "You are quite right, . . um, . ."  She began before I rescued her. "Captain Daria, of the Arkhangelskoye Valkyries."  I introduced the veteran Valkyrie with a gesture and a smile.  "Daria, this is Ronin, one of our own North American Valkyries, possible thanks to your gift of the protocols." Instead of continuing to be stern and unrelenting in her assessment, Daria's face blossomed into a brilliant smile as she stepped forward to give Ronin a warm embrace and a kiss on either cheek. "So pleased to meet you, Ronin."  She enthusiastically said in greeting.  "And in the name of the Valkyries, I welcome you and your comrades into our sisterhood.  We may be powerful, but we are few.  With each sister that joins us, we are strengthened that much more as a whole." Then she was leaning forward to lightly press her forehead against Ronin's.  Startled, Ronin froze in place, eyes wide.  But she didn't remain that way for long, her eyes suddenly narrowing. "And now you know what I know."  Daria said almost reverently as she leaned back once more and took a step back.  "I will pass on my experience and my knowledge to your sisters as well, as is my duty and responsibility as a senior member of our sisterhood."  And the Russian turned to do just that, making her way to where the other two North American Valkyries were helping some of the wounded. "That, . . that was amazing."  Ronin breathed, hand on her forehead as she looked at me with a stunned expression.  "It was like Tovin's memory bolus, but more powerful and personal.  Without giving away any of her memories, Daria was able to pass on everything experience and trick she had learned in her years as a Valkyrie." "That'll be handy as hell."  I remarked and Ronin bobbed a quick nod in agreement. "That it will."  Then she was straightening up, her fatigue disappearing as I put a hand on her shoulder and refilled her goa supply. "There."  I said with a grin.  "Now you can take full advantage of all that new knowledge.  But as Daria said, . . " "I need to pace myself.  I know."  Ronin said with a wry smile of her own.  "I just wish we actually had the time to pace ourselves." Damn it, that reminded me of how tight the time was.  I glanced down at my chrono and immediately grimaced. "You're right about that, Ronin."  I growled.  "We are out of time for the extra-curriculars.  We just blew ten minutes fighting off these two squads."  A glance in either direction along the pylon showed a number of teams in the distance still fighting.  That tightened my expression even further. "We need to get these charges placed.  Like now." "Half the team is down and out, sir."  Ronin pointed out.  "We need Carson to work double time to put them back together in time." "You let me worry about that, Ronin."  I grimly indicated.  "Just grab the tesla and get the next couple spots mapped out.  We need to get this show back on the road now!" Using me as a goa battery, Carson, the team's summoner, quickly finished repairing the Risen injuries. Thankfully the handful of humans we had, while their armor was scratched and battered, were still uninjured.  I topped up everybody's goa levels then we headed for the next spot our tesla had marked out on our schematic. Clearing those two squads actually gave us a bit of breathing room, something I noticed after we placed the third charge at a primary power junction a few minutes' later.  I looked around as the charge was being placed and saw that while the battles being fought by the other squads in flashes of weapon fire and exploding ordnance still raged on, we were in a small bubble of relative calm. "Don't get too relaxed, moi droog."  Daria pointed out as she joined me on the perimeter, her own eyes taking in the fighting on either side of us.  "It's just a matter of time before those bigger aliens notice that one group is unattended to." I nodded in agreement without looking away from what appeared to be the fiercest battle a couple kilometres down the pylon towards the massive base where Twitch had found the cloning center. "I meant to ask but forgot in the midst of killing those Nehvest."  I said, finally glancing over at the intent Russian Valkyrie.  "How many of your team did Ulyana let come up here?  And I'm assuming you caught a ride with that crazy Japanese Tesla, Hideku since he mentioned something about eastern Europeans being a part of his crew." Daria nodded in confirmation. "When he contacted Ulyana via Taisa, she was doubtful at first."  A wry smile touched her lips.  "Imagine that.  But her doubt vanished when he told her what he was doing and why.  Nearly half of her Valkyries are here, jumping into the array as the Dragons flew past."  She grimaced and looked over at me. "Unfortunately that scattered them even more widely than your landers.  While I was able to find you, knowing your goa signature, I doubt my Russian sisters were so lucky."  She returned her attention to the distant fighting. "I just hope they're making a difference wherever they are."  She looked back at me for a moment.  "Oh, I forgot to mention: I have your baby juggernauts here as well."  This time her smile was more amused.  "Ulyana couldn't stop them from wanting to come along when Hideku asked for volunteers.  We jumped them in with us." I felt a muscle ripple with sudden tension in my jaw at hearing that.  While the handful of juggernauts I left with Ulyana and her Russians were competent, they lacked the protection Legion provided for me and my people.  If the Nehvest figure out who they are, they'd get pinhead nuked and cut to pieces before they could do anything about it.  They may have signed their death warrants agreeing to come on this mission. My attention was recaptured by the fighting towards the base end of the pylon and I saw that it was dying down.  Mostly Nehvest weapons fire now as the elites moved in to clean up what was left of the Risen team.  I grimaced at seeing that, barely restraining the impulse to dash forward and help.  We all may have signed our death warrants coming in here.  But it was that, or let the siphon destroy the Earth. And that wasn't going to happen.  Not on my watch.

 

An Unusual Rescue

"Charge planted."  Our tesla noted and, with a nod, I indicated we needed to move to the next mapped out spot to set another charge.  With eight charges per team, and with five of our charges already planted, we only had three left before we could jump in and help the other teams.  Including the one nearest to us base-side that looked like it was pretty much wiped out.  If anything, we'd scoop up their charges and keep going along the line they intended on traveling. "Do you think the feedback from destroying a single pylon will be enough to overload the entire power grid?"  Daria quietly asked as she jogged beside me.  I quickly nodded. "Both our tesla commander, Dante and the K'ethik Legion, which was created in Moscow, think so.  Each charge has several hundred grams of anti-hydrogen, the antimatter possessing the ability to generate a massive surge of energy during the annihilation event when it comes into contact with matter.  Even a dozen grams of anti-hydrogen would generate a megaton worth of explosion.  So having an order of magnitude more in each charge should do the job." Daria shook her head. "I can't imagine the magnitude of such a violent event."  She confessed, looking over at me.  "When I was put into the cold earth the first time, antimatter was science fiction.  And now here we are, about to use it to destroy this siphon before it destroys us." I quietly chuckled at that. "I understand where you're coming from there, Daria."  I said.  "It was barely science fact when they put me into the ground, with only the most powerful particle colliders able to produce one or two picograms of antimatter at a time.  Yet, thanks to Legion's ability to manipulate matter, and antimatter apparently, at the atomic level, we now possess the power to destroy our enemies.  It's almost enough to blow my mind." "I just hope the metal bug man remains true to our alliance."  Daria bluntly noted.  "If the robot decides to turn on us before the aliens are destroyed, it could hurt us badly." "I'm fairly confident it won't."  I stated then grimaced as something occurred to me.  "As long as we support its objective to get its people back to its home world, that is.  We resist it in any way, and I have the feeling that we'll quickly find Legion our enemy."  I frowned.  "Speaking of that big metal monster, I wonder where it is?  It had gone down to check the launch mechanisms for the landers before the fleet left Gagarin.  I suspected it had the intention of joining the assault but haven't heard." "I'm sure it's here somewhere."  Daria said, taking a quick look around as if looking for the big neo-shell.  "If I got anything out of my brief encounter with it in Moscow, it was the notion that the robot fully intended to do everything in its power to wipe the invaders out."  She returned her gaze to me.  "And if it helps us in the meantime, it'll be a useful coincidence." I mulled that over for a moment as we approached our final location before we starting overlapping with the destroyed team ahead of us.  Seeing a pair of Nehvest methodically working through the fallen to remove the heads of any Risen they came across was almost enough to send me streaking towards them.  I would've, except I had a keen-eyed Daria standing beside me, making sure I stayed close enough to protect my team.  Like she said, while it was satisfying to take any velkin out that we came across, the mission came first.  We had to destroy this array.  There was no other option.  And that meant making sure we got our full complement of charges planted.  And so I anxiously waited for the tesla and a couple of our javelins to set the charge instead, preparing to charge the elites as soon as we were in range. It was as I stared at the two Nehvest that were just asking me to kill them that Daria gave a start beside me, her eyes flying wide. "Did, . . did you hear that?"  She asked, looking over at me.  Frowning, I shook my head.

"Hear what?"  I began, only to stumble into silence as a faint sound reached my ears.  In the modified atmosphere the velkin used inside the pylon so their workers could do their thing without having to wear environment suits, regular speech was only slightly distorted and sounds like weapon fire going off in the distance carried well. Yet this sound was laboring to reach us, like it was trying to pass through many dense layers of air.  My frown deepening, I let my PSG drop to my side via its tether to the readiness harness and put my hands over my ears to see if that modified the sound at all.  And quickly discovered the sound was unaffected. "Daria."  I looked over at the mystified Russian.  "I don't think we're hearing that sound with our ears.  Focus your telepathy on it to see if you can boost the signal a bit." Nodding, Daria's eyes narrowed slightly as she concentrated on bringing the sound out of the background using her telepathy.  And the sound swiftly grew loud enough that I could make it out as speech.  Speech from one of our own, whose message sent a chill racing down my undead spine. - , . . hear me, you must move away from the hull immediately!  This is Captain Isabella of the Iroquois, broadcasting telepathically to any Risen or human forces in the eastern pylon.  One of the FGs has taken damage to its attitude control and is heading towards the array.  If it crashes into a spot near any of your teams, the results will be catastrophic!  So if you can hear me, you must move away from the hull immediately! - "What??"  I said out loud, seeing a confused frown appear on Daria's face.  "One of the velkin warships is going to run into the, . . .?" I didn't get the chance to finish my sentence as the great curving wall directly in front of us suddenly buckled as something massive struck it from the other side.  Then it was tearing like tissue paper to reveal the massive nose of an frost giant class velkin warship, battered and bruised from multiple shots levied by railgun and missile. "No way."  I managed to breathe as it continued pushing its way inside on a front that was kilometres wide.  Then the decking beneath our feet was buckling and I was being pitched into the air. "Finish the mission!"  I shouted at Daria before I saw her wink out of sight, a short range teleport snapping her out of harm's way.  Then I was falling, falling into the great space that lay beneath the construction deck and in the heart of the pylon. - Max! -  Ronin cried into my mind.  Then a piece of destroyed decking that was falling with me stuck me in the head hard enough that my senses got scrambled and for a moment I knew nothing. I'm not sure how long I fell.  I just knew my senses remained foggy until a hard jerk on my entire body send a thrill of adrenaline through my reanimated body.  And while it didn't work exactly the way it did while I was alive, it was enough to clear the fog from my senses.  My vision refocusing, I took a quick look around and felt my stomach twist in discomfort to see that I was floating without support.  Well, without visible support, anyway.  Yet, I was still being rushed at several hundred metres per second towards the base end of the array. A hand down against whatever was holding me up revealed some sort of coherent energy field formed the medium beneath me.  Not quite solid, but more than enough to keep me from dropping towards the bottom five or so kilometres further down.  It also wasn't letting me slide forward or back, holding me in place by some unseen mechanism as it rushed me conveyor-like forward. A quick look back towards the pylon's other end revealed the mass of the FG still lodged in the pylon's side.  Fires had broken out, both on the ship and all around it, the collision having disrupted local power conduits and systems, sending sparks flying onto more flammable materials.  I could only hope my people had gotten out of the way before any of them were lost. 

At least they had the Valkyries with them, with their short range teleportation capability.  That would allow them to jump around the FG's bulk and continue the mission. That is, if the Nehvest didn't take the FG's presence as a sign of urgency and redoubled their defense. A jerk on my body pulled my attention back to the energy conveyor as I streaked past what appeared to be a junction of some sort.  If I was to hazard a guess, I would've said something of a certain size or weight would've been kicked off the line I was on, to a second one moving towards the far side, which opened directly onto the siphon.  The jerk was the system testing to see if I qualified to be moved. Three more times I felt the invisible field tug at me, testing to see if I was large enough or heavy enough to warrant a redirect.  And then I was hurtling at the grayish-green wall that marked the array's gigantic base. I had just enough time to blink a couple of times then I was through a relatively small opening in the wall that was tens of square kilometres in size and into yet another large space.  This one, however, was partitioned into several large chambers.  One of which I recognized as the cloning chamber Twitch and Whisper had found, spotted as I hurtled through space towards some sort of sorting system. The cloning chamber truly was massive, maybe five square kilometres in size, with massive circular banks of tubes large enough to fit even the largest velkin inside.  Conduits of clear material and metal ran from central diffusers to each bank where they were again subdivided into lines that ran to each tube.  'That must be how they get the raw materials for the bodies and the goa for their life essence to each cloning tube.'  I mused.  Then I was inside the sorting chamber and ironically found myself shunted to the chamber right next to the cloning facility.  I rode the line in, gathering as many details as I could while I had visual access before I felt the restraining field disappear and threw myself clear before the line terminated in some sort of large storage area. I tumbled through the air for a moment before I landed hard, rolling to absorb the impact before bringing my juggernaut abilities back online.  As soon as I did, I felt a strange tugging on the very essense of the Life Mother rumbling through my veins.  'Wha?'  I wondered as I cast a quick look around.  'What the hell is that??' Having gained some sensitivity in sensing energy fields including goa in my time as a juggernaut, I quickly determined the tugging sensation was coming from several man-sized tanks about five hundred metres from the storage bin I had landed by.  A quick glance yielded the storage room empty so I hazarded a quick jog towards the tanks. As I did so, I took a look at my chrono and immediately felt my guts tighten.  We had less than fifteen minutes before the siphon reached Earth orbit, and less than ten before the AM charges started going off.  I needed to find a way back to the pylon to see the mission completed, or I was going to get caught inside while this bloody thing died.  As a juggernaut, I could withstand great forces and stress but I doubted even I could survive an antimatter annihilation event.  Especially the size of the one we were attempting to create.  And while that would send me on to the next world where Abby waited, I found myself wanting to see this thing through, to witness with my own eyes the array's destruction and our triumph despite the odds. With a tug the strange force emanating from the storage tanks recaptured my attention and I stepped close, a thoughtful frown on my face.  What was in these tanks that seemed to be interacting with the goa animating my body? Whatever it was, they were being kept within well insulated metal; a light tap with a knuckle produced a muffled thud instead of a metallic ringing.  It was as I ran my hand towards the top of the tank that I spotted what looked to be a panel slipped in out of the way beside the tank.  A tug yielded it was on some sort of glider, the panel easily pulled out and folding to the side to reveal it was some sort of access control with three buttons.

To a velkin, the panel and buttons would have been relatively small.  To me, however, the panel was twice my width and as tall as my torso, with the buttons being bigger than my head.  Thinking they would be marked with velkin script, I was pleasantly surprised to find simple pictographs on each. The top one seemed to be a filling control, with an image of fluid being poured into a container.  The second had the same fluid being poured from the first container into a second container.  And the final showed the fluid being sprayed out, a disposal mechanism maybe? I pondered the buttons for a moment.  Then I was reaching out to press the center one, the pressure sensitive material instantly reacting to my hand.  If I was going to find out why whatever was in the tank was reacting with my goa, I would need to see it.  And pouring it into another container seemed to be the only way. There was a soft 'snik' of a mechanism engaging behind the tanks.  Then the control panel was being pulled out of the way to let an open-ended tube the length and width of my forearm and made from some sort of crystal appear, clutched in a vise-like mechanical holder.  I watched as it was then positioned near the bottom of the tank before a spigot extruded itself from the tank to begin decanting a luminescent purple fluid into the tube. I twitched as soon as the fluid appeared, feeling it pull at the goa in my tissues.  It pulled at me while at the same time it filled me with a strange sense of familiarity.   Eyes narrowed and mind whirling I peered closer at the sluggishly moving stuff which seemed to be lit within by some sort of energy as it filled the tube.  It was then that it hit me like a locomotive. This purple goop was goa!  Not the blue-green, lightning-filled energy that was from the Earth Mother, but there was no denying it.  I was looking at the concentrated life energy of a living planet!  Was it a sample, I wondered?  Or what was left from an earlier attack, after the siphon did its thing??  Either way, this tube filled with the concentrated life force of an entire world was speaking to the goa in my body. I stared at the purple fluid for a long moment, even after the spigot spilled the last few precious drops into the tube and disappeared, allowing a second mechanism to appear that capped the tube with some sort of metal stopper.  And in that moment I made a decision that would affect me for the rest of my undead life.  I decided to save it. I took a quick look at the other tanks, some fifteen in number and made another decision.  I wouldn't just save this one.  I would save them all.  It was the least I could do.  A glance down at my chrono made me wince.  And I had to work fast, if I was to have a chance at doing it. First things first: I raced around the array of tanks, activating the decant function of each one.  Then I took a second to figure out where I was going to put all those big tubes of glowing goa.  Ah!  Legion's missile array.  It was in one of those spatial distortion containers.  I should be able to slip them all inside it.  I had carried it like a weapon cartridge on my belt every since the big neo-shell had given it to me seemingly forever ago at the beginning of Operation Phoenix.  Somehow it had managed to survive my near death at the hands of the Nehvest during Ambriel's recruitment mission. Pulling the container off my belt, I flipped open the top and looked in at the miniaturized array inside.  If I laid each tube beside it, they should all easily fit.  The opening at the top of the container was just big enough for me to ease the tube inside. Nodding in satisfaction, I quickly turned back to the first tube.  And noticed that most of the tubes were already finished and their tops in place.  Some had nearly a full tube, like the purple one.  Others, barely a couple hand widths worth at the bottom.  The colors ranged from a pulsating red, to a purple lightning-shot obsidian.  And each one made the goa inside my body seethe and shift in a way that I didn't have the proper words to describe.  All I could say about it was that they made me feel, . . . different. Pushing aside the sensation, I took hold of the first tube and, spotting what appeared to be a quick release button on the vise holding the tube in place, I gave it a push.  And smiled in satisfaction when it indeed released.  That tube went carefully into the distortion container. I then moved to the next and had to grit my teeth at the wave of sensation that roiled through me as soon as my hand touched the crystal side of the tube.  Inside the alien goa, a strange and vibrant yellow, climbed the walls of the tube in an attempt to reach my hand, tiny tendrils of energy dancing out of the fluid to caress the inside of the tube like a bizarre static charge sphere.  I released the tube and carefully repeated the process of putting it into the spatial distortion container. One after the other, the tubes followed each other into the container.  And with each tube I touched, the sensations filling me grew more and more bizarre.  By the time the last one slipped inside and I closed the top, I could barely speak through the roaring sound in my ears.  My undead heart raced like a panicked antelope in my chest and my reanimated muscles twitched and danced beneath my skin. Thankfully the container seemed to have a dampening effect on the cascade of sensation and I felt them fade as I attached it back to my belt.  And just in time; as I turned away from the tanks, I heard a noise from what appeared to be a doorway of some sort leading out of the storage chamber.  I quickly stepped to it and glanced around the corner. It was a door, opening into a broad corridor that appeared to be connecting the various chambers in the base together.  Although to call it a corridor was a gross understatement.  More like a multi-laned freeway, with tracks for large scale supply and resource movement, vehicles and whatever else needed to be moved from place to place within the base. Then I was forced to duck back into the door as a cluster of velkin appeared striding with some urgency down the corridor.  I caught a glimpse of them as they went by the door: a cluster of Nehvest, weapons drawn and ready.  And in their midst a velkin that was head and shoulders taller than even the tallest of the elites.  I gave them an additional few seconds to be truly beyond the doorway I was hiding within before I peered out once again in an attempt to see more. The group of aliens were almost out of sight by the time I did so, their long legs chewing up distance with little effort.  Still, I was able to notice how the Nehvest differed to this newest type of alien, responding to its directions and words with what appeared to be respectful nods.  Then they were stepping out of sight several kilometres down the corridor. Face tightening, I stepped out into the corridor and launched myself after them.  If this newest velkin was important enough to have a Nehvest escort, then it was important enough to see if I could make it dead in the very near future.  Focusing on where the alien and its escort had vanished, I kept my speed just beneath the sound barrier so I wouldn't give myself away.  Still, it only took me a few running steps to traverse the distance and I slowed to ease up to the door and peer inside. And I immediately felt my guts twist at what I saw.  It was the cloning chamber!

 

Swarm

It was as I stared into the cloning chamber, watching velkin bustling around the various tube clusters in preparation to bringing them online that I heard a soft 'hiss'.  Immediately I looked in the direction of the sound.  And found myself looking at the grim, battered form of Legion. Despite its armor being gouged, seared and chipped, the neo-shell looked ready to go with both its hands converted to weapons which were still smouldering from recent discharge.  It had obviously fought its way here.  Catching it's eye, I pointed at my chrono then held up five fingers.  Legion immediately nodded and gathered itself, as did I.  We needed to smash as much as we could, including that new velkin, in five minutes.  Or things would unravel fast. I was about to go around the corner, Legion ready to do the same, when a scream wrenched from a human throat from somewhere inside the cloning chamber pulled me up short.  A scan of the chamber found the velkin still working hard to prep the cloning chambers, ignoring the screaming.  Most likely because they had heard plenty of that in their lifetimes, being the hunters that they claimed to be. Just as I began my second sweep of the chamber, I spotted three Nehvest moving in a tight group together.  One was holding what looked to be an unconscious Transcended Risen and the other an armored human, with their helmet removed.  I felt a muscle jump in my jaw when I saw the human was none other than Ambriel.  She was struggling wildly against the giant hands holding her prisoner. For the briefest of moments I considered shooting her in the head so she'd avoid the fate of being eaten alive by these bastards.   However, realizing that would invalidate all the effort we went through to reformat her mind and help her be the leader of her people, I went with plan B instead: attack. I stepped around the corner and took aim at the cluster of Nehvest as they continued to advance through the chamber, eyes forward.  Then I was going full out, intending on hitting the nearest one with everything I had. Of course as soon as I broke the sound barrier I had three sets of Nehvest eyes turned in my direction.  Then the Risen individual and Ambriel were getting dropped as the three elites went for their weapons.  Before they could do more than put their hands on the handles of their holstered weapons, however, they were being staggered by a volley of high velocity, high explosive or HVHE missiles launched from a rack that had appeared on Legion's back. Unfortunately that served to get the attention of every other Nehvest in the chamber.  Which included nearly a full two dozen scattered throughout the space.  At least they started to run towards us until, with a wordless roar, the big velkin that got escorted by the squad of Nehvest strode forward, waving the others back.  It must've had some kind of power over them because the elites didn't hesitate to obey, stopping in their tracks and dropping to one knee, heads bowed. Whatever.  I was going to smash out this Nehvest in front of me regardless. I felt more than saw the motion out of the corner of my eye, something the big velkin did that I didn't quite catch.  But I did feel the impact of something hitting me, the piercing pain of a razor point driving through my body as it knocked me off my path.  How, . . how was that possible?  My shield was intact and I was full on juggernaut.  How could I be feeling, . . pain? I managed to take a couple more staggered steps, passing through the Nehvest's legs before I fell to my knees.  As I did, I looked down and saw a length of red glass jutting from my side, the tip tapered to a fine point and covered with what passed for blood in my undead veins.  Did, . . did that big lanky bastard actually manage to throw this thing and hit me with it while I was going faster than sound??  As I wondered that, the image of that Nehvest in the pylon flashed through my mind.  The one where it was holding a velkin-sized dagger of glowing red glass and advancing on me after I had been pounded up against a stack of building materials.  Now I knew what it had been attempting to do.  Pin me like a bug with a weapon that somehow ignores my shielding and my hyperdensity.

"Juggernaut."  A hard, alien voice croaked in passable English.  "Not so invulnerable after all." I twisted my head towards the voice in the midst of reaching for the dagger's oversized hilt to pull it free and watched the oversized velkin walk slowly towards me.  Could I get the dagger transfixing my body out before it reached me??  Out it had to come before I began repairing the damage.  Whatever it was made of, or whatever it was doing to allow it to penetrate my defenses, was giving the dagger the ability to prevent goa-fueled regeneration.  My flesh refused to begin melding together with this thing jutting out of my body. Seeing me look at it, the oversized velkin reached up and pulled off it's helmet and fixed me with its hard, reptilian eyes.  It also continued towards me, pausing only slightly to raise its arm in time to block several of Legion's HVHE missiles with its arm before sending the Nehvest against the K'ethik neo-shell with a gesture of its head.  The air instantly filled with the sounds of weapon fire as the elites descended on the beleaguered and solitary K'ethik. "I recognize you from the reports."  It grated, squatting so it could look more closely at me, reaching out to flick my desperately reaching hand from the weapon's grip to take hold of it itself.  "Male juggernaut, spotted in multiple locations, extremely difficult to stop, generating high casualties in any force brought against him." I grimaced against a particularly harsh flare of pain from the weapon piercing my body, generated by the alien putting its hand on it. "And you are?"  I managed to ask. "About to suck your planet dry of life energy."  It replied in an almost conversational tone, giving the glass dagger a twist.  I grit my teeth against a new storm of agony that surged through my body, feeling the bizarre weapon shred tissue and grind against broken bone. "I must say I'm impressed with your world, juggernaut."  It continued, toying with the dagger's long hilt, each touch sending another ripple of pain through me.  "It has more life energy stored inside it than any other world we have conquered.  That was what drew us here across many vre'tak of space.  Enough energy to rebuild my pool of ate'boahg three times over, even with the numbers you have killed on the surface."  It gave the dagger another twist, forcing me to clench shut my jaw or cry out with the pain. "Enough ate'boahg to challenge even the most powerful of the fleet masters for overall supremacy.  Enough to make me grand master of all the velkin."  The tendrils around its mouth moved for a moment.  "Only to have you reanimated corpses waste it in a vain attempt to resist our might.  If I didn't need the plant and animal life on the surface to continue creating life energy to the very last possible moment, I would've seared the surface to ash to keep you from stealing it." I got the feeling that suddenly it was amused. "Not that it ultimately mattered.  You couldn't stop me on the surface.  And you haven't stopped me here, on our var'trucht.  In mere moments it will enter the atmosphere and begin its descent to the surface.  Untouched by your pathetic attack."  The giant velkin didn't even twitch when a stray missile slammed into its shoulder in punctuation to its final statement, the explosion and impact making no impression against its armor. For whatever reason, seeing that on top of being forced to listen to this alien asshole monologue sent a surge of anger through me. "Holy fuck.  Do all you shit eaters talk this much?"  I grated.  I turned to stare into its cold, flat eyes. "Or just you?" The tendrils around the giant's needle-filled mouth twitched.  Then it was pulling the dagger out of my body horizontally, nearly cutting me in half and spilling my entrails onto the ground in front of me.  Continuing in the same motion, it brought the dagger around and through my neck, the glowing blade's razor edge easily severing my spinal cord as it sliced through my cervical spine.

I blinked as I felt the blade pass through my neck, thinking my end had come.  'This is it.'  I thought as I waited for the sensations from my body to end and for the fall into blackness my redeath would bring.  'Abby, my love, I'm finally coming home.' I blinked again and found myself staring at the deck painted with my own undead blood.  What??  I wasn't dead, . . again?  What the frickin' hell?!  I lifted a shaking hand to my neck and found it was slowly resealing, draining what goa I had left to do so.  The giant's cut had left just enough of my neck still attached that I survived the devastating slice, the goa automatically working to put me back together again.  Unfortunately my goa levels were dangerously low, drained in the effort to keep me alive with such devastating injuries.  So the healing process was slow and tedious.  And I wasn't so sure I'd have enough to go juggernaut again and finish this thing fighting. Then a motion out of the corner of my eye made me turn my head out of reflex to see what it was.  Thankfully my partially severed neck had resealed enough to allow me to do so and I watched the velkin leader stand and look to where the Nehvest were dealing with Legion.  That left me momentarily forgotten. With a whisper of zero-gap metal against the decking, Ambriel scrambled into view on all fours.  Other than a darkening bruise on her cheek, she appeared unhurt. "Max?"  She hoarsely whispered.  "Thank goodness you're, . . "  She continued before gasping out loud at seeing my entrails spilled into my lap.  "By the Earth Mother!" "Shhh."  I managed to whisper in reply.  "Keep it down, Ambriel.  Too loudly and we'll get its attention back." "What, . . what do you want me to do?"  She stammered hoarsely after throwing a fearful look at the oversized velkin, who continued to watch its elites engage Legion with arms folded over its chest. "Help, . . help me put these back inside."  I quietly replied, taking handfuls of my entrails and stuffing them back into my ruined body cavity.  "I will heal much faster if my body isn't spread out in pieces everywhere." Nodding, Ambriel moved close and carefully began helping me gather up my shredded innards and put them back inside.  It took a moment or two to finish then I was holding my flesh together and willing the pieces to reseal.  Then we both heaved a sigh of relief when the wound began to close. Before either of us could say anything else, a low buzzing sound suddenly filled the chamber and I watched the oversized velkin abruptly go tense.  At the same time I saw Ambriel's eyes go wide as she spotted something back in the direction I had come in.  Upon seeing my querulous look, she helped move around so I could see what was going on.  And I found astonishment washing through me like a tsunami. It was Legion.  The K'ethik neo-shell, with pieces of its armor ripped off its metallic body, had in desperation extended its omni field, breaking down nearby walls and cloning chambers with equal speed and fervor.  And in doing so, it had created a vast pool of raw materials to work with.  But not to repair its armor. To create insect form bodies. With flashes of light, the blisters on the remaining pieces of Legion's armor exploded outward, sending their contents arching through the omni field's fog.  As they did so, they rapidly grew in size.  Until, by the time they hit the ground, they were full sized insect form K'ethik.  Regrown, it didn't take them long to figure out where they were, and what they needed to do. The Nehvest barely had time even with their skill and experience to reset and target the wave of silver and black newcomers before the insect forms were swarming over top of them.  At least they were able to stand their ground, unlike the hunters that I had seen face similar odds and get chopped to pieces.  Specialized weapons appeared out of their harnesses, EMP flares quickly blossomed everywhere and grimly the elites held the K'ethik at bay.

Which, of course, gave Legion room enough to repair its damage and reset itself.  Then HVHE missiles were flying everywhere, along with cannon ordnance and rapid fire small arms and the Nehvest found themselves under siege.  I watched energy rounds and rockets zip back and forth, hammering into zero-gap armor, or reinforced exotic metal armor to stagger an elite or stop an insect form in its tracks.  It was a maelstrom of destructive energy, swirling in and around the two opposing forces. Then the velkin leader was striding forward, pulling a long metal rod from its belt.  It gave the rod a strong shake and red glowing glass extended from the top and bottom until it was holding on to a weapon as tall as it was, with a stabbing spear end instead of a butt, and a long, curved blade on top.  It looked like Death's scythe, for lack of a better description.  And the leader didn't hesitate to put it quickly to work. First it pinned an insect form with the stabbing end, driving it down and through the K'ethik's body.  Then, while it twitched and sparked, unable to move, the velkin somehow detached the top scythe portion of the weapon and smoothly swung it down to separate the K'ethik's head from its body in another spray of sparks.  'Damn.'  I thought with a sinking feeling in my stomach.  'How are we supposed to fight against that?' Two more insect forms quickly died in the same fashion, the leader brushing aside several rushing attacks with contemptuous ease, the K'ethik unable to get traction on its armor or use their strength in any way against it.  Then I caught something darting into the fray from behind us.  It was the Risen I had spotted earlier, the speed at which it was attacking marking it as a juggernaut.  But which one?? Whoever it was, the juggernaut had launched its attack at the best possible moment: when the leader had its back to it and its attention consumed with killing K'ethik insect forms.  I heard the 'boom' as it went supersonic in the last few hundred metres, blurring across the intervening space. Yet, as it did with catching me with its dagger, the leader somehow sensed the juggernaut's approach despite not being able to hear it as it traveled faster than sound and, twisting with impossible speed, slashed at it with its massive scythe.  Imbued with its strange and powerful energy which instantly defeated juggernaut shields and hyperdensities, the scythe neatly cut the charging juggernaut in half. Only Ambriel's desperate hand on my arm kept me from leaping forward despite being unable to trigger my own juggernaut abilities.  In horror I watched the oversized velkin pause and, while using the scythe to hold off several K'ethik insect forms, it picked up the juggernaut's top half with its free hand.  And again Ambriel had to hold me down when I finally recognized who it was. "Jen."  I whispered painfully, my undead heart pounding loudly in my chest as I was forced to continue being a spectator. The leader looked at the weakly struggling Jen for a moment as if measuring her somehow.  Then it was biting off her head. "NOOO!"  I screamed, jerking against Ambriel's hands.  The sound caught the leader's attention and it looked back at me before it spat Jen's head out onto the deck. "Not worth eating."  It grated, tossing her limp body to the side before it returned to the attack on the insect forms. "Fucking bastard."  I breathed, sorrow a cold icy storm tearing through my body leaving only emptiness behind.  An emptiness that quickly filled with searing rage. "Sonofabitch is gonna pay!" I tried to struggle to my feet then, my low levels of goa robbing me of my strength.  And as my body demanded it yet couldn't find any, I found my need for goa focusing my attention on two places.  First was the spatial distortion container I had on my waist, thankfully undamaged by the velkin leader's attack.  Yet that was alien goa, and I didn't know what it would do to me if I tried to absorb it.  The corruption of the vampires as they absorbed velkin life force was still fairly fresh in my memory and made me hesitate.

The second spot, however, while it had natural Earth goa, was also worthy of hesitation since it was Jen's dead body.  Unfortunately my body wouldn't let me hesitate any further and, outside of my will, my hand lifted in the direction of the piece's of Jen's body and I instinctively summoned the goa remaining there to me. And it came, like a blue and green snake of living lightning.  Tendrils of the stuff pulled themselves free from Jen's pieces to combine into a cable of energy.  That cable then slithered quickly across the intervening space almost too fast for me to follow.  And then it was leaping off the floor and slamming into my body.  Immediately I felt my tissues absorb it and a heartbeat later my strength returned.  Not to full levels, but enough to go juggernaut. And so I gathered myself, drawing up to my feet and bringing an unwilling Ambriel with me. "I so don't think this is a good idea, Max."  She whispered, darting glances between me and the massive velkin busily cutting K'ethik insect forms into pieces as it waded deeper into the seething battle near the cloning chamber's entrance. "Jen probably had more goa than you onboard, and that thing chopped her in half like she was nothing." I threw her an abruptly desperate look. "I can't just stand here and do nothing, Ambriel."  I hoarsely replied.  "If not to seek vengeance on that monster for what it just did, we need to, . . ." I was interrupted by a loud single-tone klaxon sounding throughout the cloning chamber, followed by a terse sentence in the velkin language.  What the hell?  Then suddenly I realized what it was announcing.  A quick look at my chrono confirmed it. The siphon had reached Earth orbit. "Damn it."  I hissed.  "We need to, . . " Then the whole chamber was shuddering as a concussive wave passed through it.  Fighting to keep my feet, I twisted towards where I thought it had come from.  And felt my heart climb into my throat as I watched Legion's omni field shimmer with barely contained energies then drop.  But that wasn't the end of it.  Even as my eyes tried to take in the sight of several Nehvest climbing to their feet after the concussive wave had knocked them over, I watched Legion slowly grow to its true size, something close to the height of the velkin leader. "Holy shit."  I whispered, eyes wide.  "The gloves have finally come off!" The massive neo-shell, now well over eight metres tall, took a second or two to compose itself.  Then it was blurring forward, its hands restored, to grab the nearest elite and break its neck with a quick twist.  The next one the K'ethik caught still down on one knee, trying to gather its senses and the neo-shell put one of its own knees into the side of the Nehvest's head, snapping it around and dropping it limply onto the ground. Two more quickly dropped before the velkin leader was moving forward with a hiss, its glowing glass scythe humming as it cut through the air.  Stripped of its omni field protection, Legion had to step inside the hard downward slice aimed at its body to block it with an upraised arm to the weapon's shaft.  It then hammered a clenched fist into the oversized velkin's body.  Piston-like, it managed to pump in two more hard body shots before the leader blocked its next one and took a step back to put some distance between them. A hard backhand with the scythe caught the neo-shell moving in to re-engage and Legion was sent staggering back, the blade's heel catching the K'ethik flush on the chin.  Ever the one to take full advantage of opportunities, the neo-shell smashed another kneeling elite in the face to drop it onto a deck covered with the broken corpses of the insect forms before it stopped itself by grabbing the head of a fourth elite.  It reset then broke that one's neck with a hard twist before returning its attention to the leader. Just in time; the leader had followed the neo-shell on its backward path and was almost on top of Legion by the time the K'ethik had stopped itself.  This time it was the leader that powered a clenched fist into the side of Legion's face, staggering it once more, leaving a set of dents in Legion's metal face.  An upward swing with the scythe caught Legion again on the chin with the blade's heel and it was flung back. But the K'ethik was no push over either.  It took a step to steady itself, then it was steaming forward once more to tackle the velkin leader around the waist, pushing it onto its heels and nearly onto its back.  Far more used to hand to hand combat, thanks to the endless battling with other velkin alphas for supremacy, the fleet master, as I heard it refer to others like itself, threw a leg back to brace against the K'ethik's attack.  It then hooked its arms around Legion's body, twisted to break the K'ethik's hold around its waist, flipped the neo-shell around in an impressive show of strength and drove Legion head and neck first into the decking. If the K'ethik had been an organic, the blow would've snapped its neck.  As it was, it seemed dazed as it flopped over onto its belly and weakly tried to get back to its hands and knees.  Staring at the big neo-shell, the velkin fleet master slowly walked around it while the surviving elites looked on, not taking its cold, flat eyes off the struggling mecha.  Then with the tendrils around its mouth dancing, it smoothly raised its weapon to drive the spear end into Legion's back, pinning the K'ethik to the deck. I growled low in my throat, Ambriel fighting to restrain me. "You can't help Legion, Max."  She quietly pointed, eyes silently pleading with me to stay with her.  I threw the human leader a look, thoughts churning as I again wondered how I was going to defeat such a monster. Legion slowly pushing itself off the deck despite having the fleet master's spear through its back recaptured my attention.  And I watched as it reached beneath itself and, with an impossible surge of strength, shattered the glowing glass spear head with a fist.  The tension suddenly released from its weapon, the velkin staggered back, giving Legion just enough space to sit up as sparks sprayed from the wound in its chest. It was as it straightened its torso, that the giant neo-shell caught my eyes with its own.  It then slowly nodded before touching something on its chest.  A door the height of a man opened and a cylinder the same height and filled with shimmering blue light was ejected out of it to fall into Legion's hands.  Carefully the K'ethik touched first one end of the cylinder with its fingers, then the other as the velkin fleet master slowly stalked forward, twirling its damaged weapon. With a flare of light the cylinder shrunk to something manageable to a human and smoothly Legion threw it towards us.  It hit the deck maybe twenty metres from where Ambriel and I watched with bated breath, rolling a couple times before coming to a halt. Again Legion nodded, as if satisfied with what it had done, its arm slowly dropping to its side.  Then it was spasming in pain as the fleet master drove the curved blade of its weapon down through the top of Legion's head and into its body with a wickedly fast overhead lumberjack swing.  Buried to the hilt, the fleet master gave its weapon a twist to send sparks flying before ripping the weapon out sideways, nearly tearing Legion in half doing so.  And, in a final spray of sparks, Legion, K'ethik neo-shell and the hope of its people in returning home, slowly toppled over to hit the decking, dead. The fleet master looked at the dead K'ethik neo-shell for a moment as the rest of the surviving elites slowly came to their feet.  Then it looked up to catch sight of me.  With its gaze firmly on Ambriel and me, it then pushed its way through the unresisting Nehvest to a nearby control panel.  With it's weapon still in one hand, it keyed in a sequence on the control panel's interface, never take its eyes off me as it did.  Then, with a flourish, it hit a final keystroke and another klaxon went off before alert lights began flashing on all the closing arrays as they began to light up with power as they came online in anticipation of being feed goa in the very near future.  And I felt my undead heart lurch in my chest as I realized what was happening. The final assault on Earth with the siphon had begun.

 

Chapter 24: Last Gasp

Hearing the klaxon and seeing the lights flashing seemed to clear my mind.  All my confusion about what we were going to do, or how we were going to escape disappeared as all the answers made themselves known to me in that instant.  With rage still simmering, I pushed my grief at Jen's demise even further into the back of my mind and focused on the here and now.  Huh, . . like I had a frickin' choice. "Do you have comm capability, Ambriel?"  I tautly asked, measuring the distance between me and the cylinder of blue light Legion had tossed over before its demise with a quick look. "I think so, Max."  The blond human replied.  As I watched, she then touched something at her throat and an earpiece and jaw mike appeared in her right ear. "This is Commander Ambriel.  Does anybody copy?"  She said quietly, holding a hand up to her ear to catch even the faintest replies as she stepped closer to.  It didn't take long for a smile to appear.  "Tamsin!  Good to hear your voice."  Ambriel looked over at me, eyebrow raised in question. I nodded in acknowledgement as I made a number of decisions.  The first of which was the need to get the hell outta Dodge.  It was useless trying to fight the fleet master and its buddies on half a tank.  We'd just end up dying pointlessly.  So we needed to leave.  And we'd be doing it the juggernaut way: through the frickin' wall and anything else that gets in our way. "Time to punch out."  I said.  "Have all surviving teams immediately fall back and begin evac, setting timers on their charges for five minutes."  Ambiel nodded in understanding as she relayed my terse instructions.  "And how am I getting out?"  She repeated a question she obviously just heard, once again looking over at me. "I'm getting you out."  I grimly indicated and as she relayed that I quickly darted out and scooped up the cylinder.  I quickly noted how heavy it was, despite the spatial distortion Legion had activated around it.  Heavy and warm.  It went into my container holding the missiles and the alien goa. Ambriel had dismissed her comm unit by the time I had returned, and now hefted my retrieved PSG.  Unfortunately the readiness harness had been sliced apart by the fleet master's attack so she was forced to carry it unassisted.  Small price to pay to be armed. "How are we getting out of here, Max?"  She asked, throwing a quick look back at the fleet master and its squad of Nehvest, now grouped around it as it gave them some sort of instructions. "How do you feel about piggy back rides?"  I asked and Ambriel frowned in confusion, her look almost enough to make me laugh.  "Ah, humans don't use that term any more.  Okay, I need you to get on my back with your arms around my neck and your legs around my torso.  Then you need to hold on, no matter what." Nodding in understanding, she climbed onto my back and used her elbows and knees to get a good seat while keeping the PSG in both hands as she settled in.  I then took one last look at the fleet master and the elites.  'I'll settle up with you bastards later.'  I grimly and silently promised.  I then turned and went full juggernaut as I took off.  In two steps I broke the sound barrier with a loud 'boom'.  It didn't matter now if they noticed.  It just mattered that we got clear of the hub before the charges started to blow. "I, . . I had no idea you went this fast."  Ambriel managed to gasp, keeping her face out of the fierce wind that battered her at supersonic speeds. "This is nothing."  I replied, speaking as if taking a stroll through the park.  Of course, I didn't have to breath like she did either.   "Wait until we start going through walls." "Wait, going through walls??"  She managed to stammer.  Then we were smashing through a cluster of cloning arrays near the chamber's far end, having traversed the kilometre worth of space in only a few seconds.

Desperately Ambriel clung to me, twitching every time we hit something new as if expecting to get knocked off my back.  In truth she had nothing to fear.  I had discovered early in my existence as a juggernaut that anything in close contact with me when I went  full on was protected both by my shield and my density.  Clothing, equipment, passengers; they were all made virtually invulnerable by the process that converted me from a simple undead to an unstoppable juggernaut. Though she couldn't feel it, Ambriel now had the molecular density of a juggernaut and my shield, while it didn't help her breath against the wind of passage, would keep just about anything away from her.  Handy in case the Nehvest somehow managed to follow and decided to shoot at us.  Not so useful against their glowing glass weapons, though. Grimly I pushed that thought to the back of my mind as we approached the cloning chamber's back wall.  I couldn't afford to be distracted until we were back on Earth and this array was burning up as it dropped in pieces through our atmosphere. Also spotting the massive wall, stretching upward and out of sight as we rapidly approached it, Ambriel braced herself.  Then we were slamming into it at full speed.  Or, at least as full a speed as I could manage with only a half load of goa aboard.  Thankfully it was enough to rip through the standard velkin metals and I didn't even slow down as I ploughed through nearly two metres of solid metal before bursting out the other side.  Out and into the space filled with the various material transport lines like the one I had accidentally rode into the hub. Feeling the artificial gravity shift, I flipped tightly to bring my feet back into contact with what was once the wall and now the floor.  The quick move elicited a gasp out of Ambriel as her hold somehow managed to tighten in response.  Thank the Earth Mother my tissues were as dense as my goa levels would allow, or she would've choked me out.  And speaking of choking, it seemed the array was equipped with some sort of way of dealing with holes as the air wasn't any thinner than before, despite several massive holes now visible in the great, curving wall.  That was good news for my helmet-less passenger. Then my head was being filled with telepathic chatter as the final evac of what was left of our teams was seriously underway. - , . . no, it doesn't matter which lander you came in. - Ronin's voice cut through the chatter to clearly say.  - Just get on the nearest one you can find.  As soon as that lander is full, take off.  You've got less than two minutes before the anti-matter charges go off and you don't want to be here when it does. - - Ronin. -  I said and immediately felt a surge of relief and joy over the telepathic broadband link.  The normally reserved psyren must be tired to be letting that amount of emotion loose over broadband. - Max!  Thank the Earth Mother you're okay.  Where are you?? -  The veteran psyren quickly fired back. - Going across the surface of the hub, heading towards the outer wall with Ambriel.  Can you get a lock on us and teleport us to one of the landers? - This time it was bitter regret that preceded her response. - That's a negative, boss.  All the Valkyries are spent from battling the Nehvest and the surviving psyrens are tapped out from maintaining shields around their teams.  Nobody has the goa to pull the both of you close. - - Damn it.  Okay, that means sticking to plan, . .  -  I began before the plating in front of me abruptly buckled.  Meaning to swerve and avoid the obstacle, I found myself experiencing something I'd never felt before as long as I had been a juggernaut: I lost my balance.  I wasn't sure what caused it, maybe Ambriel on my back.  Maybe a fluctuation in my lower than normal levels of goa.  Either way as I went to slow and swerve around the buckling in the deck, I found myself stumbling instead.  My feet refused to obey my commands as the normal juggernaut surety deserted me.  One hooked in the other and we were sprawling onto the warm metal beneath our feet.

Thankfully Ambriel was fairly nimble and managed to roll free just as we hit, somehow maintaining her grip on the PSG while she did.  As for me, I hit hard and basically skidded to a halt on my face.  Shaking my head, both in chagrin and in an attempt to settle rattled senses, I looked up in time to see the buckling in front of me erupted upward in a spray of metal and fire. - What the hell? -  I managed to blurt over the broadband then my eyes were widening as the fleet master emerged from the massive hole resulting from the eruption.  "You've got to be kidding me."  I whispered out loud as the oversized velkin finished its exit from the hole, a rocket pack on its back growling with maxed out thrusters to power itself free.  In its hands was a massive weapon that looked more like a cannon than anything else, its muzzle glowing white hot from constant and recent discharge.  As soon as it was free, it began casting around for us, its flat black eyes cold and hard. "Where are you, bug?"  Its harsh voice growled.  "I'm not finished with you yet!" How the hell had that monster managed to follow my supersonic flight out of the cloning chamber??  With that thought pounding through my skull,  I hesitated.  Because it'd be any second now that the big alien would whip out its glowing glass weapon and start cutting anything that moved to shreds. Ambriel, however, didn't want to wait.  From her knees, she opened up with my PSG and she pumped several hard shots into the fleet master's shoulders and chest.  Most just glanced off the giant's improved armor as it turned towards us, the glowing glass scythe appearing in its hand.  It was then that I noticed the fleet master had forgotten to replace the helmet it removed down in the cloning chamber.  Oops.  Bad move, pal. Ambriel was just as quick to spot that and, shifting her aim up slightly, she put a shot into the giant's face.  The fleet master jerked back with a roar of pain and surprise, only its rocket pack keeping it upright with the sudden motion.  Unfortunately for it, that also meant Ambriel could keep her aim on it.  And the human didn't hesitate to put a couple more up into the fleet master's face. The last one, catching the fleet master on the side of its head, spun it around and it fell heavily onto the deck close to where I was just getting up onto my hands and knees from my hard spill.  Had Ambriel actually managed to kill this big bastard??  I stared at it, looking for any signs of life as fluid oozed from the blast holes in its face. It was into the uneasy silence that followed the fleet master's fall that I became aware of Ronin almost shouting over the broadband. - Max!  Answer me, please!  What happened?  Are you alright?? - - Yeah, we're okay. -  I replied, throwing a look over at Ambriel who, like me, had climbed to her feet to slowly advance on the fallen fleet master.  She kept the PSG on it while she used a boot to poke it in an open eye to see if it'd stir. - We just got ambushed by the fleet master, the velkin leader.  But I think we got 'em. - I could almost feel Ronin sag with the sudden release of tension. - Thank goodness for that! -  She said with no little relief in her voice.  - I've got the psyrens to link and that's giving them just enough juice to pull you out one at a time. - - Take Ambriel first. -  Was my immediate reply as the human leader joined me, looking exhausted but satisfied with what she had just accomplished.  - The humans are the key to the future and they'll be needing their leader. -  I winked at her as Ambriel smiled upon hearing that.  - As soon as she's clear, . . . - The hand was a vise that closed around me before I could react.  Then we were falling back through the hole in the deck.  I heard a screamed "No!" from Ambriel then she was gone, left behind as I tumbled backward and out of sight in the hand of the fleet master.

Well, shit. It was like a scene out of a bad slasher flick.  Just when you think you have the bad guy dead, he summons some sort of evil from deep inside and attacks yet again.  And considering these bad guys in particular suck entire planets dry of their life force after eating their inhabitants, these assholes truly were evil.  And you know what that made their boss, . . We tumbled through space for a few seconds, lights flickering and alternating with darkness as we did.  I focused on staying full on juggernaut,  because I didn't want the fleet master to just rip me in half at his convenience.  I didn't want to make anything easy for this bastard.  And that worked until its flailing arm brought me dangerously close to the edge of the ragged hole we were falling down and I slammed my head against a protruding piece of metal. Normally that wouldn't have mattered.  My shield and hyperdensity would've protected me.  But with my abilities uncertain due to the low levels of goa I had, the blow was enough to rattle my senses and I lost focus.  Which meant my abilities went off line.  A heartbeat later we were slamming into a wall before the artificial gravity field adjusted our positions and we slid down onto the floor. Rolling free of the fleet master's spasming hand, I managed to get to my hands and knees as I tried to get my senses to clear.  It was through my contact with the metal deck on all four points that I felt the first shiver of a distant explosion.  A quick glance at my chrono confirmed the second deadline I had missed in the last fifteen minutes. The charges were starting to go off. I scrambled to my feet, gathering what strength I had to make a run for the nearest wall.  I had to get out of here before the annihilation horizon reached this section of the massive array.  If it did, . . Then I was grimacing as I felt a sharp pain in my lower abdomen.  I looked down and felt my undead heart sink to see another glowing glass dagger protruding from my belly.  You have to be fucking kidding me.  It got me again?? This time, however, I wasn't going to wait around for that monster to do more damage.  Reaching out, I carefully pulled the long dagger free, minding the edge when I reached it with my hands to avoid cutting off my fingers.  Then I was dropping it on the deck where, contrary to its fragile appearance, it didn't shatter like glass.  Instead it thudded quite solidly. A grimace on my face, I looked up at the fleet master as it too got onto all fours.  Just in time for my juggernaut reflexes to twitch me aside to avoid getting skewered by a second dagger.  Damn it, I needed to get the hell out of here!  But when I tried to go juggernaut I found my goa supply had been exhausted by my system automatically repairing the damage the first thrown dagger had caused.  'Well, isn't that just frickin' awesome.'  I thought as I watched the fleet master climb to its feet and pull out its massive scythe weapon. No PSG, no juggernaut abilities and facing a giant looking to cut me into dog food. I was fucked. I took a half step back as the fleet master stared down at me with its ruined half a face and began lifting its weapon for a final strike.  At the same time the shudder under my boots announcing the charges going off steadily grew stronger. Looking around, I tried to find a weapon of some sort.  Man, there had to be something around here, something I could throw at this bastard outside of salty language.  It was then that I thought of the spatial distortion container at my side.  If I could get the missile rack out, I could light this asshole up with an AM warhead in the face. It was desperation.  But seriously, what else did I have left?  My list of options had run out.  I hurriedly flipped the container open and reached in, intending on grabbing the miniaturized missile battery. 

Instead I found my hand touching the cylinders filled with alien goa.  This time, with my own natural goa levels so low, there wasn't a stirring in my body in response to the nearness of the foreign life force.  There was a seething fire that surged into me like somebody had opened me up and poured raw lava into my veins. Somehow I managed to get my hand back out of the container, my senses unresponsive to my frantic demands to clear and stop spinning into chaos.  Blind, I stumbled to the side like a drunk man and, in doing so, narrowly avoided getting split in half by the fleet master's weapon.  I could hear it growl in frustration over the howling in my ears as I continued to stumble and stagger erratically, my muscles now failing to obey my commands. It was perhaps a few seconds after the initial surge that I finally brushed against something solid.  A wall, maybe; with my vision filled with dancing lights and shadow, I couldn't tell.  But what I could tell, was that I could feel the power running through the wall.  Conduits, transfers, cycling; I could feel it all.  Seething energy, raw and unchanneled and becoming more so with each AM charge sending further feedback through the array's gargantuan power grid. Gasping, I tried drawing my hand away.  And felt the energy follow me, as if I now had the power to draw it out of the very walls.  Teeth grit against the storm in my head, I jerked my hand back.  And felt the energy stretch then detach, momentarily filling my hand before the motion of my arm slung it away.  I could feel it dart away from me to slam into a nearby console where, with a thunderous roar, it ripped it apart. Somehow I felt the weapon descend, not made out of glowing glass, but out of unorganized energy barely held in check by exotic technology, disrupting the very fabric of reality as it passed through it.  That's how it managed to penetrate my shield and hyperdensity!  It disrupted reality itself! I staggered out of the way and heard the fleet master snarl again in frustration as its weapon narrowly missed me, so close that I could feel my skin burn in response to the disruption field that surrounded it.  And, in doing so, again I fell against the wall. This time, as a good part of my upper body came into contact with the metal, the surge of raw energy that flowed into me was almost too much to handle.  I twisted away and once more sensed the energy stream twist as it tried to follow my moving body.  Feeling it move within me like a living thing, I desperately stabbed out my hand in the direction of the fleet master, which was gathering itself for another attack.  And I felt it flow through me and out my hand to arc with flashing blue and white discharge to hammer into the fleet master's armored body. The massive velkin staggered with the impact.  But, somehow through the virtue of its exotic armor, it managed to stay on its feet.  Still, I could see enough through the haze filling my eye sight that I had actually struck the fleet master a telling blow with my desperate gesture.  I needed to use this new power to hit it again, and hit it harder. The deck beneath my feet shuddered and I could feel in it the growing strength of the array's death throes.  The charges were working, and quickly.  I couldn't have more than a minute or so before they were right on top of us, ripping metal assunder in cascades of annihilation. So I thought: if I could feel it, and it moved into me with this new ability garnered from alien goa, could I draw it deliberately in?  Only one way to find out.  With my hand on the wall, I willed the energy, now wild and chaotic, into my body like I would goa.  And grunted as it poured into me in a flood. For a brief moment I gathered it.  Then I was twisting around to ball my hands together, willing the flow there even as the fleet master stepped in, the scythe already swinging towards me.  Howling, the energy gathered in the space between my cupped hands until even I couldn't hold my hands together.  It was then that I threw the seething ball of light and power one handed directly at the velkin leader before I desperately ducked. The scythe's blade hissed as it sliced overhead.  Then the fleet master was knocked backwards as the blast hammered it directly in the chest with so much force even its armor couldn't hold it all back.  Instantly I held out a hand and summoned more power, quickly building another blast and slung that as soon as I had enough.  The second ball of power darted forward and caught the fleet master in the side as the velkin tried twisting away from me, it's armor smoking. This time the armor wasn't strong enough to resist the blast and I watched a hole get punched right through the velkin's armor, fluid and charred tissue spurting from the gaping opening.  I grinned tightly in satisfaction in finally seeing that armor breached.  But I so wasn't done. A third and a fourth ball of seething energy I slung at the injured fleet master.  Each punched through the failing armor to tear massive holes in its body.  Then I gathered a fifth and final blast. "This is for Legion and Jen."  I grated then slung it forward. It darted across the space and, with a flare of light and destruction, blew the giant's head off, the explosion sending bits of bone and meat spraying in every direction.  Then I staggered as a nearby explosion sent a concussive ripple through the space, tearing through walls and buckling decking.  A heart beat later the fleet master slammed into the ground to lay motionless, now truly dead. With the explosions so close, I had seconds before the resulting power surge would rip the hub apart.  Already I could feel it building with my new ability.  I only had one chance: Legion's spatial distortion chamber that still hung on my waist.  If I could somehow get the lid open, I could, . . . **** They all shaded their eyes as the largest section of the array, the hub with its cloning chamber and power plant, erupted in a brilliant explosion that rippled back along the siphon itself.  To this point it had been unfazed by the pylon's death even as the entire array maneuvered to position the siphon for its penetration into the atmosphere.  Then filters were kicking in on the main viewer and they were able to drop their hands and watch the resulting explosions rip the siphon to pieces. "Scratch that threat to Earth off our list."  Magda quietly noted, looking over at Ronin and Daria, her sister Valkyries slowly nodding in agreement. "Do, . . do you think he escaped?"  Ambriel asked as the tension evaporated on the Iroquois' bridge.  The survivors of the attack on the siphon exchanged quick looks. "Commander, if there's anybody out there that could."  Magda began with a sad smile, her expression revealing that she wasn't sure she believed her own words. "It'd be Max."

 

Firefall

Ambriel sighed as she watched another fireball arc across the pale lavender of the evening sky.  They had been falling for days now, since the shattered remains of the siphon had begun dropping into the atmosphere.  The sight should've filled her with hope and joy, knowing the Earth was safe from overwhelming destruction.  At least, safe for now. Yet the young human leader was anything but happy, and certainly not filled with joy.  Yes, they had defeated the velkin and their horrible weapon.  But the price they had paid to do so was terribly high. Max Niekro, the man responsible for breathing new life into the human race on top of leading the Risen against the velkin was gone.  He had spent the last of his goa to get her out of the hub to where she could be teleported to safety before being dragged to his doom by the velkin fleet master.  It just seemed so monumentally unfair to have spent the entirety of his second life fighting the aliens that had threatened his home and having the end within sight.  Only to have it snatched away at the last possible moment. Ambriel stifled another sigh and the intense feeling of loss that abruptly threatened to overwhelm her.  'He's gone, girl.'  She silently berated herself.  'And with him the experienced leadership and support he brought to the table.  There's nothing you can do about it so you might as well put it out of your mind and focus on the here and now!' Unfortunately the here and now meant somehow compensating in their small community for the lives lost on the siphon.  Of the soldiers she had taken into space with her, only a third returned.  Ironically it had been Max himself that suggested they wouldn't be ready for the type of combat they'd see on the siphon.  And while her Scorpions, as she had called them, performed above what their experience and training should've allowed them to, he was right.  They were not ready to face Nehvest elites in all out face-to-face warfare.  And they had paid for that lack of experience and skill with their lives. Not that the Risen fared much better.  While effective, the Valkyries provided only short term success as they seemed to run out of energy far too quickly and far too often.  Even the Russian ones, arriving late to the party, struggled against the Nehvest despite their greater experience and psionic stamina.  As for the others, they couldn't get any traction whatsoever as long as the juggernauts were too occupied to help them. That being said, at least the juggernauts had some success, thanks in great part to those jackets they were wearing that let the dangerous radiation the Nehvest threw at them slide right off.  Without them she knew they would've had their protection disrupted and they would've gotten themselves cut to pieces like everybody else.  It truly was a shame that the creator of those jackets, the enigmatic Legion, had itself died in the final attack.  No longer would they be able to turn to the K'ethik neo-shell for weapons, technology and advice on how to fight the velkin.  It was a loss almost as significant as losing Max. Yet somehow, despite the odds, their small group of soldiers managed to plant enough of Legion's anti-matter charges to disrupt the pylon's power grid and send a feedback surge into the siphon so massive, it blew the titanic device into pieces.  It truly was a heroic achievement, accomplished by people she'd now call heroes.  'Starting with you, Max.'  She quietly promised, once again fighting off an overwhelming feeling of loss. She could still remember the moments following the fleet master taking him as if it had just happened.  He had just smiled and winked at her when the hand took hold of him and the fleet master flipped back into that hole and disappeared with them both.  She remembered screaming then, with a wink of light, Ronin had reeled her in. "Where's Max?"  The breathless Valkyrie had asked, eyes wide as she stared at the stunned Ambriel.  "I can't reach him on broadband." "That, . . that monster took him."  Ambriel managed to answer, fighting tears and anger both.  Sorrow had flashed across Ronin's beautiful face then the blond Valkyrie was turning to the small group of psyrens that stood close together in a circle.

"Final sweep."  She tautly commanded even as the decking rumbled beneath their feet to announce the first charge going off in the distance.  She hesitated slightly to give the psyrens time to work.  Then:  "Is everybody cleared out?  Then to the lander.  Now!"  And the Valkyrie was making a short distance teleportation hop, pulling Ambriel with her. A gaping wound in the side of the pylon, the lander's entry point now served as an escape route.  After winking into existence a few metres away, Ronin was urging Ambriel to run towards it. "We have maybe a minute or two, commander."  The Valkyrie breathlessly indicated as she took her own advice and began to run beside the springing human.  "Probably less." Nodding in agreement, Ambriel put her head down and pushed hard for the dark hole in the great curving wall.  Most of Ronin's psyrens were just ahead of her, scrambling up and inside.  Following their lead, she went up the small ladder somebody had erected just below the hole so people could easily access it.  Then it was down a corridor made out of tortured metal before stepping into the now familiar confines of the lander. Dropping into one of the sling seats, she looked over at Ronin, who dropped into the seat beside her. "Did we get everybody?"  She asked between breathless pants.  Ronin bobbed a curt nod. "Everybody that we could get."  The Valkyrie added and Ambriel grimaced as she thought of Max trapped with the fleet master.  'C'mon, Max.'  She silently urged as Ronin raised her voice to tell the lander's computer to close the entryway and shove off.  'Beat that bastard and get the hell out of there!' The lander's doors clanged shut and she felt the small shuttle's thrusters come to life with a rumbling roar.  Then the entire vessel jerked hard as it pulled free of the pylon's metallic flesh before pivoting sharply around. - All landers, this is the Iroquois. -  A tight voice abruptly spoke into her mind.  - You don't have the time to get clear.  Stand by for emergency jump out. -  And the inside of the lander disappeared in a wink of light. The next thing Ambriel knew, she was standing in one of the Iroquois' main cargo and supply bays along with the rest of the lander's passengers.  They were swiftly joined by the contents of several other landers within the range of the Iroquois' psyrens.  A quick glance around made the human's expression tighten.  There were so few of them left.  Then, over the ship's intercom: "All hands, brace for impact."  Captain Isabella ordered in a hard voice.  A second later the Iroquois lurched as she was struck hard amidships, the shift enough to make everybody in the bay fight to maintain their balance. "C'mon."  Ronin grabbed her by the arm as soon as she was steady enough.  "We need to be on the bridge!" Ambriel followed the blond Valkyrie out of the bay at a dead run, the two quickly making their way to an elevator that led to the top deck.  The cruiser lurched hard a couple more times before they got there.  Then they were sprinting down the final corridor to the shifting lights and motion that marked the bridge. Isabella barely looked over as the two of them stepped onto the bridge and joined their Valkyrie sisters, Magda and Daria, who had somehow beaten them there.  Then the latina Risen was looking back at the main screen, which showed a brace of FGs advancing on them. "Hard to port, five percent down angle, full thrust."  Isabella ordered and the four FGs swung out of sight up and to the right. "They've fired again.  Two shots coming in."  Tactical barked.  "Shields are down to thirty percent, captain.  We can't take two hits at the same time from those mass drivers."  Isabella grimaced.

"Full thrust, Nav, full thrust!"  She barked and the rumble of the Iroquois' impellers grew beneath their feet.  And for a moment it looked like the Hammerhead cruiser had dodged the attack.  Then she was bucking hard as lights on the bridge flickered. "That was the second shot and it hit us almost right on top of Engineering."  Science grimly reported with a glance over at the captain.  "There's a good chance the velkin have figured out where to hit us.  Our power grid is now fluctuating and our shields are all but gone.  As long as we don't suffer a structural failure, Engineering thinks we'll hold together." "Yeah, but for how long?"  Isabella quickly countered.  "If we don't get these putas off our tails, they'll pound us into scrap."  She quickly looked down along the bridge.  "We got any bullets left, Tactical?  Something we can use to get those FGs off us?"  She tautly asked and the Risen officer manning the Tactical station quickly shook their head. "Just beam weapons now, sir." "Damn it."  Isabella growled.  "Give me a rear view on the secondary screen."  She ordered and the screens that had been showing the Iroquois' flanks switched to show the FGs in pursuit.  "Bah!  Any of the Star Dragons available to take a rail gun shot?" "Sir!"  Science suddenly interjected.  "I'm reading annihilation events all throughout the pylon.  And they're triggering power grid surges in the siphon and base." "Put it on the main screen."  Isabella commanded and they watched as the siphon array filled the main screen.  Then they were all flinching as multiple bursts of light along the length of the pylon filled the screen with vision-searing brilliance.  Hands went over eyes and Ambriel dully heard the Valkyries saying something.  Whatever they said was lost in the roar that filled her mind at that moment at seeing the entire array blow itself apart without word of whether Max had made it out or not. "Do, . . do you think he escaped?"  She  had stammered, her emotions in turmoil.  And while Magda's answer had truth and reassurance in it, she felt neither of them give her comfort. Then they were all rudely reminded of who was following them as the Iroquois nearly flipped end over end with the force of a blow to her hind quarters.  Regaining her feet, Isabella climbed back into the captain's chair. "Somebody give me a goa-damn status report."  She demanded with a growl as the rest of those who were standing made their way back to their feet from where the impact had knocked them down. "Shields are gone."  Tactical replied, hands moving over their interface.  "And that last hit took advantage of that, striking us directly in the engineering section.  Main power is at fifty percent, primary power grid is offline, secondary grid is at sixty four percent.  And primary fixed beam weapons are offline."  As if to underline Tactical's report, the bridge lights flickered and dimmed as they switched to back up sources. "Meirde."  Isabella hissed.  "And the fleet?  Tell me some of us are left." "I've got the Mohican's transponder on the far side of what's left of the array.  She is under power and moving.  But sensors have Hideku's Star Dragon drifting three hundred kilometres away at twenty degrees up eliptical and ten degrees to solar north.  She appears to be mostly intact.  Outside of those two, I'm not picking up any other transponders."  Science grimly reported. The lights flickered again and the already stuttering rumble beneath their feet faded. "And now we've lost impellers."  Science noted with a sigh. A long few seconds went by as they waited for the next mass driver shot to take them out.  When it didn't come, Ambriel found herself frowning. "What are they waiting for?"  The Russian Valkyrie Daria had growled.  "We are helpless.  They should finish us off."

"Maybe they can't."  Magda countered, looking over at Isabella, the latina Risen wearing a thoughtful expression. "Maybe they can't."  The Iroquois' captain repeated.  "Tactical, can you get us an image of the FGs that were following us?" "Working on it, captain."  Tactical replied, hands moving over their interface.  Then all eyes were being drawn to the big view screen which lit up to show the brace of FGs that had been on their tail when the array exploded.  And not a few sighs of relief were made to see every one of them powered down and drifting, a couple of them showing extensive damage. "They must've somehow been caught in the pulse of radiation sprayed out by the array's destruction."  Science said before returning their attention to their own board.  "I'm reading lots of gamma out there, along with high levels of just about everything else." "How did we manage to avoid that?"  Ronin wanted to know.  Isabella looked over at her. "We were diving down from the array when it exploded."  The captain replied.  "The explosion must've sent a shockwave radiating out perpendicular to the array's axis.  While the explosion itself was in every direction, that perpendicular shockwave carried enough force and rad with it to take those FGs out as they passed through the shockwave's path."  She smiled tightly. "Just as we had hoped it would." "That is some incredible good luck."  Daria pointed out.  "To be clear of that shockwave just enough to avoid getting smashed by it." "You're telling me."  Ronin agreed with a nod. "And now we make sure those FGs aren't going to be powering up any time soon to bother us in the future."  Isabella growled.  "Tactical, all available power to the mobile beam weapon batteries.  Target the closest FG and open fire at their engineering section.  Let's see if we can breach their reactors and blow them to oblivion!" Helpless against the Iroquois' particle beams, one after the other the FGs died as their reactors breached and the cascading failure in their power grids ripped them apart.  Shortly after the last one died, the Mohican appeared with the Star Dragon in tow and together the three ships had limped back to Gagarin. Finding two intact Hammerheads there, Isabella and Mateo moved their crews over and went back to the destroyed array to make a sweep for survivors.  And though some were recovered, their numbers had been pitifully few. Ambriel looked up as yet another fireball began its journey through the upper atmosphere.  This one was big, perhaps a kilometre across, possibly a section of the base.  It would hit hard, wherever it came down.  Hopefully nowhere near any of the human sanctuaries they had yet to liberate, or any Risen facility that had survived the fleet master's secondary offensive.  An impact like that could devastate an entire city. "Ah, there you are, commander."  A sad-looking Magda quietly said, the redheaded Valkyrie stepping clear of the base's main entrance to walk towards her.  "Tovin wanted me to come and find you.  The memorial service is about to start.  She wanted to make sure you were there." "Of course."  Ambriel pasted on a sad smile of her own.  "I wouldn't think of missing it." Nodding, Magda turned and began walking back towards the entrance.  Making to follow her, Ambriel hesitated to take one last look at the massive piece of debris still hanging high in the sky, slowly dying as it made its way deeper into the atmosphere.  'Thank you, Max.'  She silently said, new tears welling up in her eyes to blur the distant red and yellow ball of fire.  'Thanks for everything you did for us.  You showed us the way to fight, and what to hope for.  I can only hope it will be enough to see us through the coming days of darkness.'  A tear trickled down her cheek. 'Goodbye, my friend.' **** With the bulk of the base's personnel at the memorial service held for those that fell during the attack on the array, many duty stations were left unmanned.  Including the monitoring stations in the command center. One of those monitoring stations had a direct connection to Gagarin's sensor array.  So when its screens abruptly came to life, they showed what Gagarin's sensors were looking at: the space beyond the Earth-Moon orbital path and out towards Mars.  And in doing so, they captured hundreds of massive shapes slowly coming to life with light and power. Instantly alerts began to flash, their audibles beeping in an attempt to get somebody's attention.  Beeping and flashing in an empty command center.  The End?  Not quite; if you've found this story interesting and don't want it to end, come and check out the next chapter in the Risen saga,  Risen: Darklight, posting soon to Wattpad. A/N: In the meantime, Risen will remain on Wattpad in its current form as I prepare it for publishing, a first draft run of what will hopefully be a fully edited and complete novel in the near future.  Please, continue to enjoy my story and don't hesitate to leave your observations, comments and suggestions as I've found them all incredibly useful in crafting Risen.  And thanks again for enjoying Risen.  - Bloodsword a.k.a. Shawn J.