Taking SPACE
by DanielLeonHeart

A family of five lives in the far reaches of outer space on a mining station built by their father.  Their lives are simple and their ambitions small but that all changed when they find an ancient ship deep in a nebula.



 

PROLOGUE 



  

  "Wahooo!" Michael yelled as he leaned back in his chair.
  Daniel pushed away his virtual controls, "Wooot."
  "Good job everybody," Steven said as he clicked through some statistic charts.
  "That's the sixth Galactic Empire tournament we've won now, isn't it?" Catherine asked.
  Stephanie put her hand over her eyes, letting them rest. "Yes, though the competition in this one was a lot harder than the last five."
  "Yeah, but we creamed them!" Daniel happily proclaimed.
  Catherine stood up and walked over to where Daniel was sitting. "Only because of your amazing piloting and gunning skills."
  Daniel blushed a bit. "Nah, you're the one that knew exactly what to do. I would've got all our ships destroyed in the first quarter without you."
  Catherine lovingly touched the back of Daniel's head, "honey, I'm a 'who', not a 'that'. And, even though I'd like to take the credit, it was Michael's strategy and Steven's engineering ability that enabled me to give you the right tactics."
  Daniel swiveled his head to look at Steven, "talking about that, that thing you did with the dynovamator directly connected to the beam cannon was pretty awesome. I'm surprised the game actually let you do it."
  Steven smiled. "It wouldn't normally, but Stephanie found Duralumin almost at the very beginning so I didn't have to spend a long time working around with the default construction systems enabling me to spend most of my time in the game development matrix."
  Stephanie turned off her monitor and stretched, "That was actually pretty easy, because the game's last update made it closer to reality, enabling me to do things a lot easier. In fact, it's so easy now, I'm surprised so many people are having trouble with it."
  Michael finished looking at the end game statistics, "that's because most people are not professional miners like we are," Michael looked down at the time in the bottom left corner of the screen, "we have quite some time left before the next pickup. What do you guys want to do?"
  Daniel clenched his fingers. With a very eager smile, he said, "Let's jump into a random match."
  Catherine shook her head, "No, the last game was quite stressful on me. I'm out for a while."
  Daniel spun around in his chair, "that's because they were the best of the best. If we jump into a random match, we'll have fun creaming some noob's butts."
  Catherine sighed. "I guess. Mike?"
  Michael shrugged, "sounds kind of fun to me. How about you Steven?"
  Steven pushed away from his desk and stood up, "Nah, I'm out. The game's fun but its development matrix is too limiting."
  Daniel gave a quiet laugh, "of course it is to YOU. The stuff you do with our mining equipment is years beyond anything on the commercial market."
  Steven rolled his eyes as he walked over to a table that had hundreds of little odds and ends which belonged to his engineering experiments, "so you keep saying but I don't care if it is. I just like the thrill of discovering new possibilities. The game doesn't really have that for me so I'm out this time."
  This time it was Daniel who sighed, "I guess. How about you Stephanie? We can still do it with only four people."
  "No. This game is fun for you guys, but it's exactly like work for me. The only difference is that things happen faster in the game than they do in real life. Speaking of which, you guys need to start helping me out more!"

Daniel crossed his eyes at her, "Steven automated everything. There is nothing really to do."
  Stephanie glared back at him, "yes, but it still takes over an hour every day to queue everything up and make sure the machines are mining the right places."
  "Bah." Daniel waved his hand dismissively at her.
  Anger flared up in Stephanie, "BAH me, do you? Well, I won't make you lunch then!"
  "I don't care. Catherine will make me food. She makes the best, don't you Kitty?"
  Catherine didn't answer.
  Daniel glanced over towards her; the others followed his gaze and saw Catherine scrunched her lips. Her eyebrows are in a concentrated frown.
  "What's wrong?" Daniel asked anxiously.
  Catherine put her hand out, letting her ring and bracelet project a holographic image above her palm, "THIS."
  A floating head of a man in his late forties who was sporting a reddish white goatee coalesced above her fingers. His lips started to move as he started to say something.
  "Looks like it's from Marvin. I am guessing if he sent a message, his pickup will be delayed?" Michael asked.
  Catherine shook her head. "No, it's much worse than that. The ship he sent was attacked and taken by pirates. He's in the middle of trying to buy it back from them, but he says he will not be doing businesses with us anymore unless we can guarantee his ship's safety."
  "What!? How the heck are we supposed to guarantee his ship's safety?" Daniel blurted.
  Michael looked out one of the mining station windows, "we can't."
  "Wait! Isn't Marvin our only buyer right now?" Stephanie asked worriedly.
  "Yes, he is. Ted and Max left the sector, and Carlin went bankrupt last quarter. So we won't be seeing business from any of them." Catherine answered.
  Steven put down what he was doing, "so wait, are you saying we have no income now without Marvin?"
  Catherine nodded. "For the time being it seems that way. I'll try to negotiate with Marvin or find a new buyer. But if there are indeed pirates around, I don't think we will have anyone buying from us for a while."
  Distress set itself firmly in all their faces.
  Michael, seeing this and being the oldest, decided to try to make things better. "It's not that bad guys. Thanks to Steven's energy collectors and our Aquaponics, we don't really need to buy fuel nor food. We also have some credits saved up. If we sell what we just won, we'll have more than enough to get us through the rest of the year. By that time, I'm sure the Pirates will move on to greener pastures."
  Daniel's eyes filled with horror, "I've been looking forward to winning the GTX 4000 pilot virtual control system ever since they announced that it was this year's reward, and now that we actually won it, you want to sell it?!"
  "Sorry Daniel, it doesn't look like we really have an option."
  Daniel threw up his arms, "Ah man!!"
  Catherine put an arm on his shoulder to comfort him. Stephanie on other hand, laughed as she said, "well maybe you three boys should actually get a job."
  Daniel glared at her, "I have a job! I'm the best space pilot and gunner there ever was."
  Stephanie rolled her eyes, "in your dreams."
  Daniel ignored her and continued complaining, "Ah man! I wish someone would do something about them stupid pirates. Can't we complain to the Alitien police or something?"
  Steven laughed. "Yeah we could do that but they'd be more likely to help them than to stop them."
  Catherine put down her arm and walked over towards one of the viewports, "true that. Remember, they seized our cargo shipper for no reason and have yet to give it back."
  "Yeah of course I remember. Steven's been using that stupid space box with an engine jerry-rigged onto it ever since." Daniel got up from his chair and strode over to where Catherine was. "I wish we didn't live in such a corrupt sector of space!"
  "Oh, and where would you like to live? Maybe the Caldor system? Or even better, the Adolph Migration?" Stephanie asked sarcastically.
  Daniel looked grumpily over at her, "no of course not. I would just like to live in a place that's not so corrupt."
  Stephanie crossed her arms. "There is no such place. Mom and dad have traveled the universe, and you've seen the holos they sent back. There is nothing out there but crookedness."
  Michael sighed. "True. I think we have a better life than ninny nine percent of the entire galaxy."
  Steven rummaged through the junk on his engineering table. "Sad but true. Makes you wish someone would do something about it but oh well"
  Daniel's countenance lit up. He pivoted toward Steven, "you're right! Someone should and that someone is us!"
  Catherine stopped gazing absentmindedly out the viewport, "What!?"
  


 

LET'S TAKE OVER THE GALAXY



              
  

  "I said, 'Steven's right; someone should do something about it and that someone is us.'" Daniel answered.
  All four of them stared at him like he'd lost his mind.
  "I'm serious. Think about it. We're the best team that has ever existed. We've never lost any strategy game yet, and who's better to take over the galaxy and fix it than us?"
  "Wow Cat, what did you feed him this morning?" Stephanie retorted.
  Catherine shifted a little bit uncomfortably. "Noodles."
  Stephanie glared at her. "For breakfast?"
  Daniel rolled his eyes. "Stop trying to change the subject. The galaxy is a mess and someone needs to fix it and that someone is us and we should start with the stupid pirates."
  Stephanie's glare swung to Daniel. "And just how do you plan on doing that Mr. I-want-to-be-Emperor?"
  Daniel shrugged. "I don't know... this mining station has an impressive array of weaponry, can't we use them somehow?"
  Steven shook his head. "No."
  "Why not?" Daniel insisted.
  "Because they're hardwired and I'd have to rip half of the station apart. Not to mention you'd leave us completely defenseless." 
  At this Stephanie's face became hard. "No you're definitely not going to risk Catherine's and my life in some false idea of conquest."
  Her icy tone made Daniel put his hand up. "Okay okay. I get it that's not a good idea. But what if we lured them into the asteroid field then ambushed them with the station?"
  Michael shook his head this time. "No, their scanners would pick up our station and our weapons long before they came in range. Any pirate worth his salt would know to stay away from an armed space station."
  "Well then, what if we lured them into the asteroid field then crushed them with asteroids? If we that there will be no weapons for their scanners to pick up."
  Catherine looked at Daniel and sighed. She pulled out a hollow tab and leaned against the viewports as she began to play a puzzle game on it.
  Everyone instantly recognized it was one of her ways of coping with Daniel's wild imaginations. However, this time Michael said, "Wait Catherine, what he suggested might actually work."
  Dismay filled Stephanie's eyes as she recognized the look on Michael's face. "What? You're not actually thinking about listening to one of Daniel's crazy ideas are you?" 
  Michael smiled. "The pirate ship is most definitely equipped with a logic drive. This means that it automatically calculates the trajectories of the asteroids and does the necessary movements to avoid them. But if we use thermal explosions to suddenly change those asteroids directions, there is no way their logic drives can compensate in time."
  Catherine lowered the tablet. "Something like that would take absolute precision in timing, and you need one heck of an explosion for an asteroid to crush a ship."
  Michael tapped his lip with his finger, "Well Catherine you're good with timing. So I don't think that will be a problem. Plus we don't need a big explosion."
  Steven moved his hand dismissively, "No Michael she's right. If we want to crush the ship we would have to have big explosions to move the asteroids with enough force. We don't have that type of explosives and something that big would easily be picked up on their sensors as well." 

Michael gave a toothy grin. "No. You're both wrong. All we need to do is to take down their shields for a few seconds, and a few bumps from asteroids will do that quite well."
  Both of them looked at him questioningly.
  ***
  

  "Eh Cap, you gong to want to hear dis." The first mate said with a hungry smile on his face.
  The captain noticed the evil glee in his underling's eyes. "Something interesting huh?"
  "Sur is. Listion." The first mate flicked his finger at a screen and a recorded audio file played over the ship's sound systems.
  "Arelin diamonds! Oh my word Arelin diamonds! This asteroid has diamonds in it! It's completely chock-full of them!" Daniel's voice crackled over the deck's speakers.
  "Are you sure?" Catherine's voice answered back.
  "Of course I'm sure! I know what diamonds look like! This thing is the size of a ship. Get the others out here; we're going to be filthy rich!" 
  "Shut up you stupid moron! We're not on a secure channel." Stephanie harshly scolded.
  "Oh oops." Daniel's voice answered back and the recording came to the end.
  The captain's eyes sparkled. "Looks like a bunch of kids found a catch of diamonds. What do you say boys, shall we relieve them of 'em?"
  A hearty cheer from the pirates filled the command deck.
  ***
  Catherine stared intently at the hologram of the asteroid field. "There! There is the pirate ship! They did get our little message." She turned to Steven, "do you think you can find it before they enter the engagement zone?"
  Steven started to move his hands through the hologram, zooming in on the pirate ship. "Absolutely I've created my own mock ones from scratch you know, so I'm sure I'll recognize it when I see it."
  Stephanie stood there watching anxiously, "Oh God please protect us from my brothers' stupidity!"
  Michael knew his little sister was firmly against this, but somehow that didn't bother him. It was like he had a weird inner peace about the whole situation. "There are about thirty-five seconds away from seeing our little IFF ruse."
  Steven continued to move the hologram around the pirate ship, zooming in and out on parts of it. "Okay I figured out the ship's make and I should know exactly where it's at very soon I just got.... Ah they're right at Y+42 W-12 X-94."
  Steven made a red IFF spot on the aft upper side of the ship. "It's normally installed in the undercarriage but this one is on the top and its vent is only a foot wide." He looked over at Daniel, "are you sure you can pilot my makeshift drone into such a small target?"
  A giant grin spread across Daniel's face. "Does a spider monkey glide when he jumps?"
  "What?"
  Catherine rolled her eyes. "Dan dan, a spider monkey doesn't glide."
  "Oh I meant a bushbaby then."
  "That doesn't glide neither dear."
  "Oh."
  Stephanie covered her eyes with her hand. "Oh God have mercy on us."
  Michael zoomed out the hologram, "Catherine, they're in range. Start nudging."
  ***
  The captain sat in the seat, slowly rotating two balls in his hands. "Power the weapons. I want those mining ships disabled the instant we get around this big asteroid. Be careful not to hit the diamonds though."

"Aye aye Capin'."
  The crew anxiously stared at the viewports as their ship rounded the last asteroid in the way.
  "What in the world? There's nothing here but three really old rusty boxes! Where's the mining ships?" The captain angrily barked.
  "I don't know capin'."
  The entire ship shook and the captain dropped the two metal balls. "Looks like we've been had boys! It's time to show our ambushers we have fangs!"
  The captain pushed a button on his seat, causing the cockpit's color to change into a red hue while the metal flooring and celling turned into one gigantic viewport. The captain raised his hand, taking direct control of the ship's guns.  As he anxiously scanned the area around them however, he saw no enemy. "I don't see anything... what hit us?" He demanded.
  "I tink a bloody astrod." The first mate replied.
  "That's not possible! This ship has the best logic drive there is!" The captain proclaimed. But despite his proclamation, an asteroid still rolled towards them, mysteriously bumped into the shield on the starboard side.  The ship shook, than another one bounced on the port side shield, shaking them again.
  He watched in amazement as three other asteroids lazily tumbled into them and the shield's energy meter flashed as it dropped, indicating they were tacking damage. "What is going on here?!"
  At that moment, his first mate's eyes grew wide as he noticed something. "Da ship is detecting some weird signals I tink ar messin ta drive up."
  Understanding played across the captain's face. "I see our ambushers are trying to get nature to destroy us. It's a good thing I'm a master pilot."
  The captain sat fully back into his seat, pushed a button, and took manual control of the ship.
  ***
  Catherine watched as the hologram of the ship began to move sporadically, unlike its earlier very calculated movements. "Looks like your little ruse worked. They switched to manual control."
  Michael smiled. "Now all we have to do is to keep up the gentle nudges until their shield falls."
  "That won't be long now. Human reflexes aren't nearly as fast as computers and very few pilots can navigate an asteroid field much less one as booby-trapped as ours." Steven said, grinning.
  Catherine pushed another button. A small explosive that Stephanie, using the mining drones, had spent hours planting on the asteroids in the area detonated. The explosion pushed its host asteroid firmly into the aft of the pirate ship. The asteroid grazed along it, then lightly bounced away.
  ***
  Sweat streamed down the side of the pirate captain's face, as he tried to escape the seemingly never-ending asteroid field. An explosion of curses hissed under his breath as a small asteroid bounced off the underbelly of the ship. No matter what he did, there always seemed to be an asteroid barreling straight for them. If he moved one way the ship got hit from another. 
  "Enough 's enough!" He blurted, flaring the maneuvering and decided to bulldoze his way out of this mess. Mass and inertia, on the other hand, didn't coincide with his plan.
  An asteroid one tenth the size of the ship solidly contacted with the port side, and the captain's head whipped to the right. "Arr!" he growled in frustration, as this relatively small asteroid didn't bounce off, but sent them spinning into another asteroid instead. 
  Anger flooded the captain's face as they ricocheted off asteroid after asteroid. He tried to get the ship back under control, but nothing he did seemed to work. 
  They bounced around as if they were in an ancient pinball machine, until the Captain flipped the logic drive back on in desperation. The ship stabilized just as a loud warning buzzing sound flooded the cockpit. 
  "Capin' ta shilds ar falin'!" 
  ***
  "Their shields are down! Go now." Catherine shouted.
  Daniel completely suited up in his GTX 4000 pilot virtual control system that he had convinced Michael to let him keep, seized the controls with both hands. With an epic sized smile, he threw the control sticks forward. The simulated cockpit whirled and squeaked as he navigated the drone through the asteroid field towards the pirate ship at an insane speed.
  "Careful Daniel, it took Steven hours to print out the stealth fibers on our small 3-D printer. If you crash it, we'd be done for!" Stephanie warned.
  Daniel ignored her as he shot the drone up around two asteroids, and blasted towards the ship. 
  "Seriously, SLOW DOWN." She hissed in agitation.
  The aft of the pirate ship loomed in his view as his drone burned hard in a whipping turn and smashed through the dynovamator's vent at over a hundred matters per second. As the outer layers of the drone vaporized into tiny dust particles, Daniel activated the self-destruct.
  The little drone exploded with an EMP pulse that sent a massive amount of energy into the Nova generator. The dynovamator's casing lit up as bright as the miniature sun that was inside it. But right before it went supernova, the safety systems kicked in causing it to discharge. 
  Giant arcs of electricity shot out, jumping from asteroid to asteroid as the discharge sent an energy pulse through the entire ship, frying every last bit of its circuit.
  The pirate ship sat dead in space.
  


 

NOW WHAT 

            
  

  

  Sighs of relief filled the room as Daniel took off his virtual helmet and leaned back into his remote pilot seat.
  "It worked. Good job Cat, Michael, and Steven." Stephanie congratulated.
  "What about me? I just flew Mission impossible!"
  "Your ego is enough to congratulate yourself."
  Daniel's eyebrows curved and his lips pouted as he gave her the wounded puppy stare. Catherine walked over and poked her finger against his forehead as if popping his bubble.
  He smiled and rolled his eyes at her. She returned his loving smile and gently kissed him on the lips. "Good job."
  "Ahm." Stephanie cleared her throat. 
  Catherine slightly blushed and Daniel gave his little sister a smirk.
  She jokingly made a fist at him in return, then said, "Now what?"
  Daniel furled his eyebrows. "What you mean now what?"
  Stephanie waved towards the hologram. "Well, from the heat diagram, I'd say you have six pirates to deal with."
  Everyone's attention returned to the dead pirate ship.
  "Oh. I didn't even think about that." Michael admitted.
  Daniel stood up and walked over to the hologram. "Shouldn't they just get into an escape pod and fly off somewhere to try and find help?" 
  Steven shook his head. "Normally yes but a core overlord of that magnitude likely fried every single electronic device in a point O three light second radius." 
  "So no escape pod then?" 
  Steven once again shook his head, "no". 
  "Can we drag the ship to somewhere where they can get help?"
  This time it was Stephanie who shook her head. "No, it would take me hours to safely pull that thing out of the asteroid field. They would die long before I get it even halfway out.  Besides, if we did that, they'd just have the ship fixed and we would be back at where we started."
  Silence fell over them like a blanket as they pondered what to do with the pirates.
  At long last, Daniel spoke up. "I hate to say it, but maybe we should just leave them there."
  Catherine's eyes grew wide. "What? They will be dead in a few hours!"
  "I know."
  "How can you say that then?"
  "Because Kitty, they are real PIRATES. Not those fantasy pirates that sails around on ships in some ocean. If we interact with them at all, there's a very real chance they could end up slaughtering Michael Steven and me, and take you and Stephanie as prisoners, where unspeakable things will happen to you."
  "I know. But they are living people! We have to help them!"
  Steven stepped between Daniel and Catherine. "I'm with Daniel on this one. A wise man sees a lion ahead and turned aside; a fool wonders on and is devoured. These people are definitely lions."
  Catherine looked at Stephanie and she shrugged. "Don't ask me. I didn't think this whole idea was good to begin with."
  Catherine's gaze switched to Michael and he shook his head. "I can't see any way to save them. The only option we have is to take the mining ships out and retrieve them, but that would mean letting them into our cockpit and that..."

"Would be suicide." Daniel finished for him.
  A dark cloud settled over Catherine. She leaned lifelessly against the hologram table.
  Daniel lovingly reached out and took her hand. "I don't want to be responsible for the death neither Kitty, but there's nothing we can do."
  Her eyes met his. She said, "Well then, let's pray about it."
  Daniel nodded, and reached out for Michael's hand.
  Steven, Michael, and Stephanie joined hands and they all stood in a small circle.
  "Michael, you pray." Daniel said.
  Michael closed his eyes, opened his mouth, and began to pray. "Father, we first would like to thank you for enabling us to deal with this problem. Now we ask that you help us to hel...."
  Michael's eyes shot open and he dropped their hands. "That's it! Thank you Jesus."
  "What's it?" Steven demanded.
  "We use your makeshift cargo box with the engine strapped to it. We throw CO2 scrubber in it to keep them alive, then we take them somewhere and drop them off." 
  Steven gaped at Michael. "The walls on that box are so stinking thin it's barely airtight and retains no heat whatsoever."
  "But it will work, won't it?" Daniel asked anxiously.
  Steven rubbed his temple. "I guess but they're going to be freezing cold and you're going to have to have some place really close or they will be solidly frozen by the time you get there."
  "Oh you're right. I didn't think about that, and I don't even have a clue where to take them to." 
  Catherine smiled. "Oh, I'm sure Marvin and his men would love to speak with them. In fact, I bet if I message him right now, he'll meet the cargo box right at the edge of the asteroid field."
  Everyone beamed at this thought. Daniel said, "Yes!  I'm sure Marvin would like to have a word with them."
  ***
  Marvin's freight ship finished taking on their rather chilled prisoners and Marvin's smiling mug appeared above the hologram table. "Thank you very much! I'm sure with a little bit of chorusing, I can find out where they stashed my other ship. As soon as I do, I'll be sending you five a little tip for its recovery. I will also be sending a ship over later tonight to pick up the delayed shipment."
  Catherine nodded. "You're welcome. And thank you for your business as well."
  Marvin gave another happy grin and cut the transmission.
  ***
  A few days later, Steven walked in, smiling like the cat that ate the canary. "Guess what guys."
  Daniel pulled off his virtual helmet. "You didn't!"
  "I did!"
  "No way!"
  "Yes way!"
  Catherine glared at them. "What did he do?"
  Stephanie walked in. "He got the pirate's ship working again."
  Michael dropped the tablet he was reading from. "I thought you said it was fried!"
  "It was but Stephanie just yesterday found some premium grade conduit metal in one of the asteroids in s34 and I was able to use it to replace the circuits. It has no breaker system or safety system other than the one in the dynovamator itself but besides that it works like a dream."

Daniel shot out of the room from his seat, dashing towards the docking bay.
  The others quickly followed.
  By the time they caught up, Daniel was already sitting in the new ship's pilot seat and had the ship powered up.
  Michael promptly sat in the captain's seat. The others each took the seat they thought best suited them as well. In a few seconds, they were out of the docking bay.
  It wasn't long before Daniel was happily trying out the weapons on the nearby asteroids.
  For the next four hours, they played around like kids with a new toy, until Catherine turned to Michael and asked, "What now Captain?" 
  Michael smiled as he answered, "We take over the GALAXY!"
  

  All their eyes snapped on him.
  "Ww...What?" Stephanie asked; her face full of alarm.
  Michael beamed a giant grin at her, and said, "I'm kidding." Then looking down at his seat, his smile faded. "Actually, something like this ship will get us in a lot of trouble. It might be fun to fool around with, but honestly, we should sell it."
  "No way!" Daniel shouted, as he blasted a small asteroid into pieces with the lasers.
  The cockpit fell silent.
  "You know what, I think Mike is right. All of us are prone to rash decisions. This is a combat ship and if we use it, we are likely to end up in real combats." Catherine said as she looked at Daniel.
  He opened his mouth, but Stephanie cut him off. "She is right."
  "But we don't need money," Daniel protested, "besides, where would we sell it?"
  Michael took full control over the ship and turned it towards the docking bay. "Marvin may want it. If not, I'm sure I can sell it on Essport."
  "No, this ship has no safety system left. I had to hotpass them. It now breaks almost all regulations. Marvin won't touch it and you can't sell it on Essport even as is. Tod's list is the only other place you could sell it and that could be just as deadly as keeping it." Steven said.
  Relief washed over Daniel's face. "Selling it isn't possible then."
  "It seems like it." Michael admitted.
  "Woot!" Daniel proclaimed.
  "This isn't a toy for you to play with." Stephanie scolded. "Mick, we can't keep this!"
  "Yes we can!"
  "No we can't! I know you; you will see the Alitien police unjustly molesting someone or such and try to step in and get us all killed!"
  "I won't get us killed."
  Michael began to dock. "Maybe not, but you will step in, won't you?"
  Daniel squirmed. "I, I... I'm a firm believer that if I see someone in danger and I have the ability to help, I should."
  Mike finished docking and turned to Stephanie. "You're right, we can't keep it."
  Steven crawled out from one of the access panels and walked over to where Stephanie was. "We can. We just don't let Daniel in it."
  "What? why me?!"
  "Theoretically speaking I wanna keep us all off of it by completely automating everything and just remotely control it."
  "That." Stephanie's eyebrows furrowed. "I guess that works..."
   "But that takes all the fun out of it. " Daniel complained
  "It also keeps us out of harm's way if you decide to play hero!"
  Daniel frowned at her.
  Michael shook his head. "No, that doesn't work. In combat, a split second can make a world of difference. If we were controlling it remotely, there could be up to three seconds of latency. To use it as you suggested, it would always have to be in our sector."
  "No it wouldn't. We can just use Steven's pin hole."
  This time Michael's eyebrows furled in puzzlement
  "You know, his pin-sized permanent hyperfold. I use it all the time to make sure I have no lag when programming the outer mining drones."
  Everyone's eyes swiveled to Steven, but he was emphatically tapping on the radar screen in front of Stephanie's seat.
  "Steven?" Catherine said.
  He did not respond. 
  Daniel stood up and walked over to the screen. He watched as Steven made different mathematics dance across it. "What's he doing?"
  Stephanie shrugged.
  Steven zoomed out the radar and frowned. "I added a new matrix to the radar that enables it to detect energy fluctuations and directional massage frequencies like the ones we used to lure the pirates in. with these and other tweaks I've effectively increased its detection range by almost ten times. But it's now insisting that there is something in the Heldrid asteroid fields. "He sighed. "Bugs like this are what Catherine was afraid of and why she wouldn't let me try this matrix on our space station three months ago."
  Catherine stood up from her seat and strolled over. "Losing radar on a small ship is one thing, but losing it on our station is expensive and could be deadly, Steven."
  "I know."
  "That being said, are you sure this is wrong?" Catherine said.
  Stephanie examined the readout and sucked in air threw her teeth. "Yeah, this has to be wrong. The Heldrid asteroid field is covered in a gas cloud. There is often short lived explosions when asteroids impact with each other, so nothing lasts long in it. But this says there is something almost the size of a station inside of it."

 

LET'S GO CHECK IT OUT 



  

  

  Daniel's eyes lit up. "Let's go check it out."
  "What why? It's just a glitch." Steven asked.
  Daniel jumped back into the pilot seat and started the pirate ship back up. "No, it sounds like a perfect place to hide a smuggling operation."
  "You've been playing to many games." Stephanie scolded.
  "I don't 'play'. I use them to increase my skills." Daniel asserted as he started to undock.
  "Hey, what are you doing?!" Stephanie demanded as the ship pulled away from the station.
  "Going to check it out. Duh."
  "It's a glitch. Nothing will be there, and the Heldrid field is not exactly a walk in the park!"
  "Oh yes it is. I've flown threw it before, remember?"
  "Yeah, in an unmanned drone; if you goofed around and crashed, it wouldn't too big of a deal. You are not taking US in there!" Stephanie fumed.
  Michael, once again, took manual control over the ship. "This is exactly why I said we need to sell this."
  "Hey!" Daniel exclaimed, pouting, as Mike took over control. He crossed his arms and leaned back. "Fine then. I won't take the ship into the cloud. I'll just go to the edge and remote a drone in."
  Silence
  "Please, I wanna see what's in there."
  Mike looked at the others.
  Catherine shrugged
  "Theoretically speaking I would like to see if my algorithms are causing it or a locational interlacing miscalculation."
  Stephanie sighed. "I guess it wouldn't hurt to go into the field. I would like to see the quality of this ship's logic drive. We are NOT entering the cloud, okay?!"
  "Ok." Dan replied in a saddened voice.
  Michael released the controls and Daniel eagerly grabbed them. He slammed the accelerator and the ship burst into a speeding dash.
  In under five minutes, they were at the edge of the asteroids that surrounded the Heldrid field. Daniel slowly rounded the giant floating boulders, guided the ship through the outer layers, and then abruptly floored it, sending the ship bobbing and weaving through the asteroids at an insane speed.
  "Slow down!" Both Steven and Stephanie shouted at the same time.
  "Why? There is no need. The logic drive and maneuvering thrusters on this thing are amazing." Daniel aimed them directly at a frigate sized hunk of rock.
  Immediately, the logic drive compensated, spinning them straight down so fast, that simulated gravity generators could not counter the inertia. This sent everyone except for Daniel and Catherine, who had remembered to strap themselves in, tumbling out of their seats.
  "See." Dan said, with a giant grin looming from his ear to ear.
  Everyone glared at him, and Stephanie spat, "I'm going to kill you!"
  Daniel responded by stopping the space craft in a perfect reverse spin, once again sending them sprawling. "We're here!" He antagonistically proclaimed.
  "D...D...Danny!" Steven shouted
  "That's it! I'm not cooking for you anymore!" Stephanie threatened.  

Michael pulled himself up, sat in the captain's seat, took over the controls, and with a rather disturbing serious look, said, "That was not cool."
  Catherine shook her head. "That was not funny, Dan Dan."
  Daniel looked at them, then stared down at his hands ashamedly.
  "I'm sorry."
  "You'd better be!" Stephanie snapped.
  Steven didn't say anything. Instead, he stood up and walked over to the radar. 
  "It's still saying something is in area G4 of the cloud."
  "So it's not a locational interlacing error?" Catherine asked.
  "No if it were it would have moved some now that we are closer. But with this read out I don't see how it can be my algorithms neither."
  "So there is something in there!" Daniel exclaimed, as he excitedly pulled down the ship's probe control systems.
  "Maybe, but if there is, it must have been in there for a long time. Or, whoever is using it must have a secret way in and out, or we would have detected them long ago. "
  "Hum, the intrigue deepens..." Daniel mused.
  "Probe released." The female mechanical voice of the combat vessel informed them.
  Mike pushed a button, and the view port slid down lower. A new image from the probe filled the empty space.
  Dan moved the drone around, getting a feel for its maneuverability, then began to fly it into the cloud.
  "Careful, this craft only has two other probes, and they look like they're junky hacking units, not scouting units, so they probably don't have good maneuvering jets." Steven warned.
  Daniel nodded at Michael, and gingerly guided the drone through the ever-changing maze of rocks.
  As he came over the top of a large pockmarked asteroid, they watched two smaller asteroids colliding in a shower of sparks and gravel. Instantly the whitish gas around the collision exploded, and the flames raced out, devouring more gas.
  Daniel slammed the probe into a full downward reverse, barely managing to hide behind the pockmarked asteroid.
  The explosion lasted for a millisecond more. Then, having consumed all the gas in its reach and now without any form of an oxidizer, it vanished without a trace.
  "Wow that was a big one." Daniel exclaimed, as he cautiously continued to guide the probe. "How come all this gas had not been exhausted?"
  "It's very thinly spread out over the field. I doubt more than a quarter of a gallon was expanded in that explosion and there are billions of gallons out there." Steven explained. 
  "Where did it all come from?" Daniel asked.
  This time Catherine answered. "There used to be two planets more in the nearby system, but in the war three hundred years ago, someone used a graviton weapon to pull them from their orbits. They collided and formed most of the asteroid fields in this sector."
  "Ouch. I guess that's why most people lived in space nowadays huh?"
  Darkness washed over Catherine's face. "Yes. It's disheartening how easily and how many planets have been callously destroyed."
  Silence descended. The others remembered. Back in Catherine's reckless days, when she took that epic trek on her own in a self-powered spaceship across the galaxy, she had actually been to one of these planets before it was destroyed. 
  The silence was broken by Steven. "Hey you're going the wrong way!"
  "Oh, oops. Wait, ain't it near the middle of the cloud?" Daniel asked.
  "No. It's G4 along our Z axis, and four in the Y. Mike show him." Steven said. 
  Michael nodded, and brought the ship into low level alert. Additional view ports turned on, revealing more of the outside.  A 3-D hologram appeared on the right side of the cockpit.  
  Dan took note of the green dot, which indicated where the probe was, in relation to the yellow dot of the unidentified object.
  "I see." Dan commented, as he re-angled the remotely controlled spy craft.
  He carefully bobbed through the field, dodged from two much smaller explosions using the floating boulders as shields, and abruptly came to a clearing, leaving the gas cloud and asteroids behind.
  He stopped the probe at once, and spun it around to get a quick look of the area. "Wow, it's a perfect sphere-shaped clearing. It's like there's some type of invisible shield keeping everything out."
  Steven stood ramrod straight as he glowered at the view port. "It indeed does, but there is nothing here other than this unexplainable empty space!" He turned, and perturbedly began tapping at the counsel, "Catherine the radar detected this place either through energy fluctuations or odd frequencies, help me pin point witch."
  "Ok." Catherine said, as she brought up her counsel.
  As they worked, Michael started to fidget and looked anxiously out the view ports.
  Stephanie noticed. "What's wrong Mick?"
  Michael shook his head. "I don't know, something just feels... off, all of a sudden."
  "It a frequency. There is a magnetic barrier and a paper-thin reverse gravity field being generated. I think that's what is making this clearing and the energy powering it is being generated from the middle of it." Catherine announced.
  Michael glared at the image being sent from the drone. "How is that possible? There is nothing there."
  Steven waved his hand. "It's not. There has to be something there! Fly in deeper."
  Daniel nudged the probe deeper into the clearing. It flew solemnly forward, and without warning, smashed into something and bounced off.
  A ripple rang out from its impact point. For a millisecond, the outline of a massive ship flashed into view.
  All their eyes went wide. Daniel breathed, "Oh my word. Oh my word!"
  All the alarms in the ship blared to life, as hundreds of red dots appeared on the 3d hologram radar.
  Michael slammed the ship into combat mode, and the cockpit's walls faded away into a 360-degree view port.
  The blood drained from Michael's face as he watched hundreds of asteroids opened up, revealing fixed gun emplacements.
  At once, the transforming asteroids opened fire on them. 

 

SHIPWRECKED



  

  Michael slowly recovered from the jarring yank against the straps that held him. "C...cough..." He drew a deep breath and tried to talk again. "Is... Is everyone okay?"
  There was a few moments of silence, then to his relief, the others answered one by one, all except for Daniel.
  "Dan, you all right?"
  Daniel answered. His voice raw with emotion, "I'm sorry guys... I...I... I almost got us all killed! I'm... I'm so sorry."
  Everyone was quiet.
  At last Stephanie spoke up. "It's fine. We are all alive and well. That's what matters."
  Steven produced a green fluorescent light as he unstrapped. "We're not out of this yet. Thanks to the particle beam and missiles this makeshift cave will be warm for some time." He wiped his forehead. "A tad too warm. And I'm sure I can get some power to the rebreathers but if I had to bet I'd say this ship is shot." 
  "What about the smugglers or whoever that ship belongs to?" Daniel asked anxiously.
  Catherine unstrapped and let herself float around the room towards Daniel. "From the ancient signals I read, everything seemed automated. I don't think anyone is coming to check on what happened to us."
  Daniel unstrapped and caught her. She leaned against him, and he gently began to massage the giant welts the straps had left on her. "I'm sorry." He said quietly. 
  "Maybe, but someone may have been watching." Stephanie said worriedly.
  Steven shook his head. "Doubtful from what I'd seen I'd say that ship has been there for hundreds of years without anyone ever knowing it."
  Michael nodded. "So for now, our biggest problems are those gun emplacements, and water and food."
  "Just water and food. Our ship is dead and destroyed according to their sensors, so those killer asteroids will most likely just power down becoming indistinguishable from the other asteroids like before." Steven said, as he pushed himself to the doorway and touched the door pad. Nothing happened.
  Mike unstrapped and glided over. Together they pulled the door back.
  "So now what?"
  "I get the rebreather back on before we suffocate then we try to figure a way out of this mess." Steven said.
  Michael and Steven walked through the doorway, plunging the cockpit into darkness.
  Stephanie unstrapped and felt along the bottom of her counsel.
  "I... I just don't get it!" Daniel said.
  Catherine looked up at him in the dark, trying to see his face. "Don't get what?"
  "Why were there so many of them and... and why were they outside of the cloud. You think they'd be surrounding what they're protecting, not forty five K GSU out from it!"
  "They were in the cloud, in fact, they were everywhere!" Steph exclaimed, as she found what she was looking for and pulled it out.
  "What do you mean they were everywhere?"
  "Exactly what I said. The radar showed thousands of the things. They were literally everywhere in the cloud, out of the cloud, around that giant ship. Heck, there was even some floating around randomly in the asteroid field behind us. Don't know if you noticed or not, but your small drone was obliterated before you even had taken back control of the ship." 
  Stephanie flipped the switch on the object she had pulled out, and the room was lit dimly with a golden light, revealing the jaw-slacking, dumbfounded look on Daniel's face. "How... How could there have been that many?"

Steph shrugged. "Beats me."
  Michael walked back in. "Well, we got good news and bad news. The dynovamator is still intact, but the propulsion engines are shot. As such, the wires are short circuiting and, thanks to the safety bypasses Steven did, someone is going to have to go outside and manually disconnect the propulsion engines before we can safely turn on the nova."
  "I'll do it" Catherine volunteered.
  "No I will." Daniel quickly stated.
  Catherine glared at him. "I have essentially walked across the Galaxy. I have by far the most experiences."
  Daniel sighed. "Ok, but I'm going with you; you might need my muscle."
  "Muscle? What muscle?" Stephanie mocked.
  "I have tons of muscle, thank you." Daniel retorted. "I work out."
  "Ha. You haven't worked out ever since Cat moved here. You're nothing but flab now!"
  Dan ignored her and pushed his way towards the door. Catherine followed him. Soon, they were in the air lock.
  They put on the small space masks and activated them. A thin skin-tight shield covered each one of them. The space-suit like shield was an amazing piece of technology that would protect them from the elements and other rigors of space walking. Sadly, they had a very limited battery life, and if something hit them too hard, the shield would shatter or fail, leaving them exposed.
  "You ready?" Catherine asked.
  Daniel nodded, and she hit a switch.
  A hatch closed behind them. The room decompressed, then the outside hatch slowly opened.
  Daniel pulled himself out of the ship and glanced around. The walls of the cavern glowed red; small circular liquid lava balls floated all around the cavernous space.
  Catherine floated up beside him and said, "careful, don't let one of those touch you." Her voice transmitted through the EVA suit's com system. 
  "I'd say not. It'd burn straight through me! Why haven't they cooled yet?
  Catherine pointed at the tunnel.
  Daniel looked down at it. What looked like the entrance had completely melted into one giant lava circle. Somewhat solidified, it completely sealed them in their man made cave. "Oh that's just peachy."
  "The laser fire must have melted all the rocks around the entrance. Without gravity, it naturally formed that circle."
  "And the open space rapidly chilled it. Great. Just great. Now how are we going to get out?"
  "We will figure out something. But first we need to get the power back on." Catherine grabbed two pairs of magnetic gloves and threw one to Daniel.
  He put them on and used them to pull himself along the ship, until he reached the back half. "Wow!"
  Catherine pulled up beside him. "Wow. Looks like the lasers burned straight through the ship in at least eight places."
  "Ah man, looks like Steven is right. This thing is shot."
  "There, that is where the main conduit is cut and laying against the ship's outer casing."
  Daniel nodded. He pulled himself down the hole in the ship made by the lasers, reaching the severed and melted conduit, he took off the magnetic gloves and began to pry the wires apart from each other.
  Catherine threw a small kit to him and he used it to cap the conduit.
  Daniel crawled back out of the hole. "Okay, it's good. Tell Steven to try."

"You tell him. I have to fix the mess you made out of his kit."
  Daniel rolled his eyes and gave her a toothy grin. He reached up and touched the fiber wire breaded into his hair by his right ear, and mentally commanded, contact Steven.
  "Ya?" Steven's voice sang from the wire.
  "Got it, give it a go."
  "Okay just a sec."
  The ship hummed underneath them.
  "That's good we have air and light now come back." Steven said happily.
  ***
  A minute later, Daniel and Catherine reentered the cockpit, just in time to catch the end of a small argument.
  "No I told you that won't work!" Steven exclaimed.
  Stephanie sighed. "Fine then. What do we do?"
  "I don't know." Steven admitted.
  "You sure the escape pod is shot?"
  "Yes. It has a hole straight through it. When we forced the door open, we almost got sucked out." Mike answered.
  "So that's it then. We'll have to use space shields to try and get home."
  "No, that would be suicide. Besides, the entrance of the cave is sealed." Catharine informed them.
  Mike looked back at her. "It is?"
  Catherine told them what they had seen.
  Silence fell as all of their faces paled.
  "Steven might be able to slave our space station to the drone controls of this ship, enabling us to bring it here and free us." Daniel offered.
  Steven shook his head. "I'd have to have set things up on the station first for that to work."
  "Oh."
  "Wouldn't have worked anyway." Stephanie said. "Bringing the station into an asteroid field would be a nightmare and would surly reactivate those gun emplacements. With their numbers, they would destroy it as well."
  "Is there anyone who might be willing to come help us?" Catherine asked.
  "Maybe, but this ship is not equipped with a long range communication system for stealth reasons, so all we have are short range frequencies."
  Michael touched his watch. "Looks like only you guys are in range."
  Catherine touched her bracelet. "Yeah, we're not in range to piggy back the star way."
  "What about your pin hole Steven, can't we use that?" Stephanie said.
  "It's called a 'Gravatic fold frequency gateway', not a pin hole! And if I had thought of it before and added it to one of our communicators sure but I didn't so no."
  "So we're completely trapped." Stephanie concluded darkly.
  "No, we are not. We just have to take stock of our options. Everyone, spread out throughout the ship and make a list of everything we have. Then we will look them over and see what we can come up with." Michael commanded.
  There was a few sighs as they started to disperse, but Daniel said, "Wait, let's pray first."
  The others stopped.
  "You're right. We should." Mike bowed his head and everyone else did as well. "Dan, you pray."
  Daniel nodded. He took a deep shaky breath and bowed his head. "Father, first I'd like to say I'm sorry for getting us into this mess and not thinking things through, and thank you for keeping us safe even in our stupidity. Now I ask that you guide us out of this mess. In Jesus's name, Amen. "

***
  An hour later, the list was being compiled and Michael brought it up on the main view screen.
  "First, Dan, while you were in the smuggling hold you found, we found out that this ship does indeed have a water purifying system, and thankfully it's undamaged."
  "So we have enough water! I found forty-three pounds of extremely expensive and highly illegal food stuff that I am not at all looking forward to eating, down there. I mean who in their right mind would want to eat space whale, but I guess it's edible." Daniel said excitedly.
              
  "Good. So, added with our other food, we have a good week's worth of food. If we don't take secondsies at dinners like we usually do, maybe two weeks..." Michael calculated.
  An unnerving silence filled the chamber at Michael's assessment. Daniel uneasy in the silence flipped through the list they were compiling and pointed to the other thing he had found in the smuggling hold. "I also found some sort of—" 
  "Hey an assassination drone!" Steven interrupted him.
  Everyone drew back a bit.
  "An assassin drone?! You sure that's what it is?" Daniel said urgently.
  "It's coated in stealth fiber has three interchangeable weapon mounts and here it says it's powered by a miniature dynovamator. What else could it be?"
  "Wow." Mike said, wide eyed.
  "Its own miniature dynovamator? You can't be right something like that would cost an astronomical amount of money!" Daniel exclaimed.
  "Yes, it would and," Catherine looked at the floor. "And it would also enable it to be set in a place month ahead of time."
  Daniel's expression soured as he nodded. "And the stealth fibers would keep it hidden."
  Michael decided to change the subject. "Steven, exactly what is left of the ship?"
  "The living quarters and all the human resource facilities are miraculously intact. The main propulsion system is shot full of holes. All the aft maneuverability jets are toast so are the front ones the only ones left are the middle, port and starboard but the front of this ship has melted into a cavern and has more or less solidified making it unmovable so they are of no use. The forward most weapons are smashed and the two that are intact were fried when Mike melted the beam cannon into slag. The missile launchers were covered in lava but I managed to recover one of the Anti-Matter missiles and there is one shield generating panel still intact so we can put up a directional wall of protection."
  Stephanie's face lit up. "So we could use the missile to open the cave and at the same time protect ourselves."
  Steven shook his head
  "No I thought the same thing but the missile has tons of safety features that make it impossible to explode without being launched. I dare not try to jerry rig it neither...cause well I like to keep my body intact."
  Michael curled up the corner of his mouth into a smile. "Yeah, I can see how disabling safety mechanisms on an antimatter missile could be rather 'parting'."
  A few of the others rolled their eyes at Michael's impromptu joke. He continued, "Anything else?"
  Steven shook his head.
  "Okay." Michael replied, and started to scroll through the list. After a few seconds he said, "Dan, you said the assassin drone you found had three weapon attachments. What are they?"
  Daniel closed his eyes and looked up as he thought. "A higher powered long barreled laser, a miniature particle beam cannon, and some type of explosive launcher. Sadly though, I'm sure that none of them are strong enough to punch through the cave barrier"

Mike could see Steven's calculation process started up. "You think you can rig the launcher?"
  "I don't know I have to see it to be sure. But as a whole most launchers have the same components so maybe."
  "Good. Dan let's bring up your find."
  "Okay."
  ***
  Daniel and Michael went to the hidden compartment. Within a few minutes, they hauled a giant black case back into the cockpit.
  Everyone gathered around as Daniel opened it.
  The drone was a black ball, four feet in circumference, with one protruding arm that the weapons mounted on.
  Steven read the small engravings at the top of it. "Wow it indeed does say it's powered by a star generator. Dang to make a dynovamator this small... Wow I wanna open it up and look at it."
  Stephanie looked horrified as she exclaimed. "Don't you dare! If you messed up and released a miniature star in here, we'd all be dead."
  Steven looked crestfallen as he said, "I guess you're right."
  "I don't get what's the big deal anyway." Daniel said. "Dynovamators are in all space crafts. Well, except for self-powered ones of course."
  "Don't get what's the big deal? Dan, there is a miniature start in each of them! And a star is a renewable ecosystem, just like an inhabitable planet. There are land masses and oceans in them, just completely different from how we know them. The liquid that forms the oceans on a star goes through the same cycle water does, but the only difference is that storms never stop happening on a star, and that's why they give off so much heat and energy. To make a miniature sun in the first place is a massive miracle in technology, much less keeping it contained. To do something like that on this small of a scale is mind boggling!"
  "Okay, okay, I get it. It's awesome."
  "Simpleton." Steven whispered underneath his breath. 
  Daniel started to respond, but a withering look from Michael cut him short. To make sure nothing else was said, Michael asked, "Is the launcher usable?"
  Alongside the drone in the case weapon attachments sat nestled in perfectly carved out black foam. Steven picked up the one that was obviously a launcher.
  "Hum it is of course too small but I think I can do it. It will be a onetime shot though and afterwards this launcher will be shot." Steven assessed.
  "That fine. It will be one heck of an expensive shot, but it's worth it." Daniel said.
  Steven nodded. He pulled out a kit and began to take the launcher apart.
  "Wait." Catherine said. "If we blow open the entrance with an antimatter missile, the opening will be enormous and it'll cool in here rather rapidly. This ship does not have operating shields neither, so in a short time we'll be freezing."
  "Oh yeah I didn't think of that." Steven admitted.
  "I did." Michael said, as he highlighted two objects on the list. "Steven, do you think you can merge these whi—"
  "Ah yes brilliant. But do you think we could pull that off?"
  "It's a long shot. However if you and Catherine are right about the automation then..."
  "It might just work."
  ***
  A few hours later, Daniel pulled down the probe controls as Steven and Michael got back from putting the assassin ball outside the ship. "Ready?"

They nodded. Catherine said, "According to the radar, the fake asteroids have powered down, and I have the little bit of shield we have left up and angled, so we should be safe when you do it."
  Michael glanced worriedly over at the radar. "Are you sure those asteroids won't wake up the instant we do this? I seriously doubt I can power down our ship fast enough for them not to notice us."
  Steven looked at Catherine. She nodded. "Yes, we are sure. Those things are automated to protect the big ship, and we're too far out from it for it to notice an explosion."
  "Okay then." Michael said, as he turned to Daniel. "Go for it."
  "Okay, here it goes."
  Daniel activated the black drone. Its front camera view appeared on the viewport. Daniel maneuvered it till it was in one of the cockpit's viewports, and gave it a good look over to make sure none of the modifications Steven had made to it messed anything up.
  The drone now had two new appendages. From the looks of it, Steven had managed to keep them out of the way of the maneuvering jets. "Looks good. I'm going to blow the entrance."
  "You only have one shot, so make it count and stay behind our ship's shield." Stephanie reminded him.
  "I know."
  Daniel brought the drone around so it was right above the aft of the pirate ship. He lined up for the shot, and launched the missile.
  It flew down the tunnel and smashed into the pumice that now sealed entrance.
  It exploded, eclipsing everything in a bright light, shaking them so violently it felt like their teeth were going to fall out.
  When the shaking finally stopped, they could see that the tunnel was no more, replaced by an open space.
  "Well that worked." Dan muttered.
  "The gun placements are still dormant." Stephanie informed them, as she motioned Michael to put the radar up on screen.
  He did, and said, "Thank you Father, and please let this work as well. "
  Turning to Daniel he said, "Okay, just like last time. Don't crash or... Well just don't."
  "I... I won't."
  Daniel flipped a switch, discarding the now useless launcher. He then pushed the controls all the way forward, flying the drone out into the asteroid field, and aimed straight for the cloud.
  He reached it, hesitated for a moment as he closed his eyes and said his own little prayer, then plunged in.
  The assassination drone was surprisingly far more maneuverable then the spy probe. Half way through, Daniel realized the thing had its own logic drive as well. 
  Two larger asteroids collided, setting of a series of explosions that Dan easily maneuvered around. "Man, this thing is sweet."
  "It may seem so, but just imagine if the driver of it was trying to kill you with it." Stephanie said.
  "Oh yeah, I guess that wouldn't be so sweet."
  A minute later, the drone entered the clearing around the giant invisible ship.
  Dan brought it to a halt. "Well, now we find out if the stealth fibers still work even with Steven's modifications."
  "They should."
  "Yeah, but if they don't..."
  "They will."
  "Power down the ship so we don't get detected." Michael said, as he turned off the light and everything else, leaving only the radar and the view screen up.

The ship's gentle hum disappeared as the star in the dynovamator went dormant again. 
  A small light flashed, showing that they were now using a set of batteries that Steven had set up for their power.
  "Okay, go ahead."
  Daniel slowly nudged the drone forward until it bumped the ship. 
  The silhouette of the ship rippled outwards. Once again, hundreds if not thousands of dots appeared on the radar.
  Everyone held their breath, waiting to see if the fake asteroids would open fire on their drone.
  They didn't. Daniel breathed a sigh of relief and pushed a button.
  One of the added arms on the drone unfolded and lightly touched the ship again.
  A new screen lit up, showing an outline of the exterior of the ship.
  Their eyes scanned over it, until Catherine pointed and said, "There! That looks like a hatch."
  "Good eye." Daniel carefully brought the drone about. "Let's hope this thing is not rigged to blow when a hatch is forced open, like some games have them."
  "Whoa let's make sure it doesn't." Steven said.
  "How?" Daniel asked.
  "By hacking it open of course. Here get out of the seat for a bit." Steven said.
  "But you have never hacked a ship before!" Daniel protested.  
  "True but I've read up about it so move over." Steven pushed.
  Daniel sighed, and relinquished the pilot seat to Steven.
  Steven sat down, and carefully maneuvered both of the arms he had taken from the hacking probes. Slowly, he cut around the control panel to the hatch, until he was able to touch the electronics with one of the arms.
  The screen that had been displaying the exterior of the ship blinked, and displayed thousands of lines of code that no one but Steven could possibly understand.
  Three minutes crawled by, Steven started to sweat profusely, then he began to breathe hard.
  "You okay?" Stephanie asked worriedly.
  "The hacking drone is supposed to have programs to automatically do this type of stuff but this stupid ship is too stinking old for it to recognize and these arms are junk so I'm having to manually override it and... and well I'm not sure what I'm doing."
  "Maybe we should just force it then." Daniel suggested.
  "No! You were right. From the code I can read it is indeed rigged to blow. Whatever this ship is someone didn't want it to fall into the wrong hands."
  "So hacking is the only way in. What if you mess up?" Daniel asked.
  "Boom." Steven replied tersely.
  Michael stood up, walked over, and put one hand on Steven shoulder. "Father, you have got us this far. I just ask that you would give Steven wisdom and guidance now."
  Steven looked a little agitated, but he let himself relax and said, "Thank you." He turned back to work.
  "Oh yes. I think I think. I got it." He said a few minutes later. "I rewrote the program's code to recognize this ship's ancient stuff. And and it's... working! Yes."
  The hatch popped open. "Woot!" Steven jumped up and did a little jig. "I did it I did it I did it!"
  "Good job!" Michael said, as he patted Steven on the back.

"I knew you could do it." Catherine said, with a smile.
  Daniel reached out and rubbed his head. "Good job bro."
  "That's our Steven, able to do anything he sets his mind to." Stephanie said as she stood up. She shivered. "And not a moment too soon. It's getting cold."
  "We're not out of this yet. Dan you need to take the drone to the cockpit so I can take direct control of the ship then hopefully use it to come and get us." Steven said
  Daniel nodded. He sat back down in the pilot seat, and flew the drone to the hatch, into the ship.
  The hatch closed. The small chamber compressed, then opened another hatch.
  "Ah good, the artificial gravity is not on. If it were, it'd be a serious pain. Now let's hope these anti-security bots work." Daniel pushed a button. A handful of pea-sized droids spewed forth, then dispersed. In seconds, they had all disappeared into the ship.
  "Well, I guess that's a good sign?" Daniel said.
  Steven nodded. "I don't know much about assassin drones protocols but with how much this thing must have cost I'm sure those robots will do their job."
  "You don't think they will have a problem with how old this ship is, like the hacking did?" Michael asked.
  "No," Steven said. "The hacking probes we cannibalized are trash their main proposes was for hacking the star way and illegally listening in on communications. Hacking old doors is not what it they were design for. On the other hand there are thousands of locations with ancient security system still in use. And something like this assassin drone has to be able to be used any were. As such I'm sure it is well versed in old stuff and will work as it supposed to."
  "Let hope your right." Michael replied.
  Daniel impatiently flew the drone in small strafing circles as they waited. "Just how long do we have to wai—"
  He was cut off by a screen popping up that read, "Presence masking: successful."
  "Ah, finally!" Daniel declared. "I can go in now, right?"
  Steven shrugged. "I would think."
  Daniel nudged the drone through the open hatch. A small camera on the far wall hissed as it swiveled towards the drone. Daniel knew it was just big enough to be seen, to let you know that you were being watched. He waited, expecting alarms to go off, but none did.
  "Well, that's a relief." Daniel blandly stated and guided the assassin drone further into the ship.
  He glided through the ship's corridors, until he came into a wide open area.
  "Well would you look at that!" Daniel exclaimed.
  Michael whistled.
  Stephanie let out a puff of air. "Well, there's why there are so many of those gun emplacements." 
  "It's a factory." Catherine breathed.
  "Yes, and it's making laser guns and installing them into fake asteroids. From the looks of it I'd say it's probably been doing it for hundreds of years." Michael said.
  "Most likely." Steven agreed. "And this whole thing make a little more sense now but I wonder where it is getting the resources for all this and how it's getting them out there after they're made."
  Daniel pushed the drone forward. "I'm sure we'll figure that out eventually, but first, let's get us out of here. It's getting rather chilly. Mike, can you turn on the heat please?"

Michael shook his head. "No, the radar is still showing thousands of guns. To turn on the heat I'd have to turn back on the dynovamator."
  "Oh. Yeah I guess that wouldn't be a good idea." Daniel mumbled, and continued to fly the drone through the gigantic factory towards the front of the ship.
  Steven threw out one hand and pointed. "Hey stop, look over there!"
  "Wow, what in the world is that?" Daniel asked, as he brought the drone to a halt. 
  "I don't know fly over." Steven told him.
  Daniel did as he said. Catherine said, "It looks like an ancient starway ring. There are still a few old ones in use."
  As they looked at it, the thing came on, and connected to someplace outside of the ship. Two small drones pushed an asteroid so large, it barely fitted towards the star way and through the ring. The asteroid floated on into the factory, where it was grabbed by mechanical arms. Small lasers began to dissect it.
  "Well, that's how it gets the resources. "Daniel stated, rather amused.
  "What in the world did we just see!?" Steven half screamed.
  "A starway inside of a ship." Stephanie said placidly.
  Steven about blew his top. "That's not possible a starway uses graviton waves to fold and shrink spaces but it must have a clear view of the next ring and nothing can be in its way. This thing just went through a solid wall!"
  Stephanie frowned, not understanding why he was so worked up. "Doesn't your pinhole do the same thing?"
  "Yes because it sends only frequencies and frequencies can go through other objects," Steven explained. "But other solid objects cannot go through solid objects!"
  "Oh," Stephanie answered, and waved at Daniel to continue on. 
  Daniel shrugged, and started to fly the drone forward once more.
  "What are you doing?! STOP! What we just saw is impossible on so many levels of science... We have to figure this out! "
  "Not now we don't. I'm starting to freeze. If we don't get out of here soon, we are all going to be icicles." Stephanie scolded.
  "Fine." Steven mumbled, and produced a glowing screen in his hand as he started to mumble things to himself.
  Daniel kept the drone going checking each corridor, until he atlas found the cockpit or command deck rather. The massive spherical room was completely empty, except for two seats floating in the air, extended on what looked like shock absorbent shafts.
  Catherine pointed. "There! That seat with the dead guy in it. It looks like the captain's seat." 
  Daniel flew up to it, and quickly stood up out of the pilot seat, rubbing his freezing hands. "Steven, put down that hologram and get over here and do your thing before we freeze." 
  Steven frowned at him, but closed his hands, turning off whatever he had been looking at and took over.
  Daniel shivered as he glanced around. He noticed that there were ice sickles forming along the cockpit walls. "Can we please turn on the heat!?"
  "I dare not until Steven turns off those fake asteroids." Michael told him once again through shattering teeth.
  "Steven hurry it up!" Daniel exclaimed.
  However, Steven was still just looking down at the controls.
  Daniel glared at his younger brother. "What are you doing? Get on with it!"
  "Something seems to still be running," Steven muttered, then spat. "Don't push me. If I mess up we will die!"
  Daniel fell into silence as Steven moved the drone around, looked at the controls, until at last he said, "Ah." and moved the drone's arm to hit a button.
  "Recording stopped. Playback message before sending?" The ship's male mechanized voice played threw the drone's mics.
  Steven glanced over at the others. Michael said, "Yes."
  Steven used the drone's arm to tap yes.
  On the forward screen of the ship, an image of the dead man appeared. The right side of his face was crushed and badly burned; the other side was completely covered in blood. He started to speak, an action that obviously took great effort. "Brothers, I have failed the..." The man swallowed hard. A drop of tear rolled down his left cheek, making a streak through the blood. "The Valdarins used a type of new weapon on us, but it malfunctioned and... "He swallowed again, losing his strength and composer. "They are all dead. All of them. Both civilizations... The men are... there's nothing left of the Core... We have failed... I... I—" the man slumped, and breathed his last. The recording continued, oblivious of his death.
  Steven stopped the playback.
  "Do you wish to send the message now?" The male voice asked.
  Steven moved the arm and hit no.
  They all sat silently in the cold.

 

ANCIENT



  

  Stephanie rubbed her freezing, goosebumps-riddled arms. "Poor man."
  Daniel shifted uncomfortably as he stared down at the floor. "He... he looked so broken."
  "He witnessed the greatest war crime of his history. Still to this day, it has one the highest estimated death tolls. The universe of his time had never even imagined such a tragedy was possible." Catherine said solemnly.
  Steven interjected. "Wait I thought the first destroyed planet was two hundred years earlier." 
  "It was, but it kept its rotation as it drifted out of orbit. It took the planet over a month to slowly freeze over and die, so most of the civilians were evacuated. The graviton weapon that was used here caused a gravitational pull equal to that of a class five star. It lasted only for a minute, perhaps even a fraction of a second, but during that time it ripped the two nearby planets out of their orbits so violently, it disrupted their spin. Countless died in the first hour, and the co-orbiting planets smashed into each other just four hours later at such speeds that their remains were scattered all over the sector. Out of the billions of people that lived on the planets, only a hundred and eighty thousand eyewitnesses survived."
  As Catherine finished speaking, the room felt five times colder.
  "And that is why I don't study history!" Daniel exclaimed, shaking himself. "Steven, I feel like every single part of me is frost bitten. While a part of me does feel it's justified when hearing about such a dark time in history, I would like very much to be warm again!"
  Steven clenched his hands, trying to keep the blood moving in them. "Aye give me a sec."
  Steven looked at the console for a few more seconds, then put one drone arm under it, cutting a small hole. He then used the other arm to insert a pin-sized antenna. "I think it's best if I can establish a direct control from here."
  Two screens popped up; they were filled with walls of codes.
  "Ah wow man I have hacked governments that had protections only one-tenth this good."
  "Can you do it?" Daniel asked.
  "I think but only because the ship thinks I'm the dead guy. If he had logged out and the anti-security droids weren't hiding my presence not a chance." Steven said.
  He went to work.
  Five minutes later, Daniel's teeth began to chatter.
  "Ssh I need to think!" Steven scolded.
  "Ssoosory... just ssoo ccold"
  "Sssh!"
  Catherine waved him over, and they hugged, trying to keep warm as she quietly whispered in his ear. "You guys sure like to go from one extreme to the next, don't you? One minute it's so hot I could burn myself touching a wall, now it's so cold that in a few minutes I will have hypothermia."
  Daniel smiled, and jokingly whispered back. "Well, if you're going to do something, then do it with all your heart and might."
  Catherine let out a soft giggle.
  "Grr I have it connected but it won't let me power down the guns because our earlier actions have put it in high alert state. My only option is to turn the whole ship on from the get go." Steven said.
  "Can you do it?"
  "Yeah but none of us is authorized on the ship... Oh there's an Idea. Never mind give me a few more minutes." Steven went back to work.

Ten more agonizing minutes crawled by, before Steven said, "Ok Mike I replaced the dead man with your profile it will recognize your face your DNA and voice. I have made a direct remote control link and you will have full control over the ship as soon as I activate it. However the ship's AI is in a hibernation mode designed to help it focus solely on factory production. But when you take the ship out of stealth mode it will wake up. You will need to act like you are the leader of the Lionhearted or it might be unpredictable."
  "I'm not sure I can do that. I'm so cold I can barely—."
  "Wait! Did you say 'Lionhearted'?" Daniel looked up, shocked, cutting Michael off.
  Steven smiled. "I did."
  "No way! They're like the coolest people that ever lived! Half of the good games I've played have been about them."
  "I know."
  "Wait Steven, you mean the dead dude you have replaced my identity with is the leader of the Lionhearted?" Michael asked stunned.
  Steven nodded.
  "He was David Kel?!" 
  Steven opened his mouth, about to say yes, when Stephanie stood up and said, "Guys, we're freezing to death here! Get us out alive first, then you can nerd out on game characters." 
  "Oh right. Sorry, Steven." Michael apologized. 
  Steven hit a switch, and the giant ship became a slave to Michael's captain seat. The seat lit up, and projected a myriad of holographic controls.
  Michael looked down at the controls, until he found what he was looking for. "Well, here goes nothing."
  Loud powering up noises played through the drone's mics. Its cameras showed the lights coming on in the big spherical cockpit. Then, the view screens on the pirate ship went black, plunging them into darkness.
  "That can't be good." Stephanie said.
  Michael looked down. The holographic controls were still there. "Steven?"
  "I don't know it should be working maybe the drone malfunctioned."
  The view screens came back on. This time displaying a large, impressive lion.
  "Initializing" it said in a surprisingly gentle male voice.
  They all froze. 
  "Stopping production as per ordered... Production stopped. Elapsed time since production began... three hundred and thirty two galactic years, four galactic months, seven days, four hours and forty two minutes. Total objects created... 254,120." 
  They all just stood there in dumbfoundment.
  "Two... two hundred thousand?" Daniel breathed.
  The AI took control of the pirate ship, and scanned Michael with its sensors. 
  "Identity confirmed... Welcome back David Kel. It has been... two minutes since you logged in, three hundred and thirty two galactic years, four galactic months, and seven days, four hours and thirty six minutes since we last spoke. I am glad to see that you are in better health, and you have outlasted your life expectancy."
  Michael tried to say thank you, but his teeth chartered halfway through the "thank".
  The pirate ship made a few beeping noises, and the lion AI said, "Sir, it appears that your vessel has been severely damaged. Without maintenance or intervention, it is likely you will expire in forty nine minutes from freezing. I advise immediate action."

"O it does, doesn't it." Daniel mocked.
  Mike flashed him a glare, then looked back at the lion. "I'll take your advice into consideration. Now though, please power all exterior and interior defenses down."
  "Sir that is ill advised. There has been a threat detected, and it is believed to be in your vicinity."
  "I'm well aware of the situation. Please do as I say and power all units down."
  All the red dots on Stephanie's console disappeared.
  "Done sir."
  There was a collective sigh of relief. Michael reached down and turned the ship's power back on. As the dynovamator came back to life, the ship hummed, and all the lights came back on.
  "Enemy detected in your immediate vicinity. Sending units to assist."
  A warning alarm chimed as fifty red dots appeared back on the radar.
  "No." Michael shouted.
  The giant lion turned its scrutinizing eyes on Michael. "Sir?"
  Michael half froze with fear, but he knew their lives were on the line, so he forced himself to say the first reasonable thing that popped into his mind. "I... I have already dealt with the pirates and have taken their ship."
  A small red light on the side of the captain's seat blinked on and off a few times.
  "The logs show Harrison and his crew were indeed pirates. Their removal from functionality was overdue." The computer-generated lion gave what looked like a smile. "The tactics used to disable his vessel were superb, marking your craft as friendly. Well done sir."
  The red dots on the radar turned green.
  An almost audible noise of relief swept the cockpit, even though none of them moved nor made a sound.
  "Thank you." Michael said, with his own smile.
  The AI's smile turned into a frown. "However, that was the last log. There seems to be some time discrepancies."
  "Thank God I didn't re-enable the log." Steven whispered underneath his breath.
  The cockpit sensors flashed again.
  "Nor does it mention your current passengers." The AI continued.
  Michael felt himself began to fidget, then realized something. If I'm supposed to be acting like David Kel, then I'd better act like him, instead of a fidgeting crook.
  With this thought, he straightened his back and said, "My life is in jeopardy, and I do not have time to discuss that with you right now."
  The AI nodded. "As you say, sir."
   Michael turned his attention to the pirate ship's controls, and shuttled all the available energy into the heaters.
  The AI took note of the influxes of power. "Good job sir, you have bought yourself some time. However, it appears the heaters in your craft are inefficient to heat your quarters fast enough to preserve your life."
  "I know this. Please connect your ship's view ports to my vessels, and turn yourself off so I can concentrate."
  The lion nodded again. "Sir." Then disappeared, shortly replaced by the view from the large factory ship.
  "That worked?" Michael mused.
  Steven laughed. "Looks like it."
  "Wow, that thing must have bolts for brains." Daniel changed his voice to mockingly match the AI's. "You have out lived your life expectancy."

"It's a locked AI. A program that has to stay inside its parameters and it can't write new codes itself." Steven said in the lion's defense.
  Catherine shook herself. "I'm starting to have to fight in order to stay awake."
  Daniel, realizing just how cold she was, started to vigorously rub her arms.
  "Thank you." Catherine smiled.
  "I'll go see what I can do to increase the heat output. Mike start bringing the ship here. "Steven jumped up and dashed through the door.
  "Yeah right, you probably just want to crawl in a vent and snuggle by the heat output." Stephanie shouted after him.
  Michael grinned. Truth be told, that's exactly what he wanted to do, too. He stretched his fingers and pushed the ship's holographic control forward.
  The huge ship roared to life. In seconds, it was at the edge of the cloud. 
  Michael stopped and watched, as whatever was holding the cloud back broke, letting it flood into the clearing. Then he noticed the asteroids were doing the same.
  "Oh great." He whispered.
  Daniel stopped rubbing Catherine's arms, and looked up to see what was wrong. "Ah man, I was hoping that whatever the ship was doing to make that barrier, would keep doing it as we moved it."
  "I was to. In fact, I think we all were counting on it doing just that." Michael said.
  Stephanie scratched her head. "Well, now what?"
  Catherine walked over to Michael and Daniel, shrugged. "I'm not sure. We might be able to put all the ship's energy into the shields, and just ram through."
  Michael frowned. "No, that is not a good idea. I'd like to bring back up that barrier, but I don't have a clue what half these controls do."
  "Maybe you should turn back on the AI." Stephanie suggested.
  Michael thought about it. "No. I'd rather ram through the asteroids like Dan suggested, than have to deal with that thing again."
  "Ah, thought so." Catherine reached down, and trapped at something in the hologram controls. 
  A new hologram appeared. It began to extend out to the room, but stopped a little bit away from the captain's seat, unable to project its entire image.
  "Hum... that's not going to work. Do you think you can get the images from the drone back?" She asked.
  "Probably, now that the AI is off." Michael touched a couple of the controls on the pirates' console. One of the view ports showed the images from the drone again. This time, however, the giant ship's cockpit had a massive 3d holographic display in front of the command seats. It stretched the entire length of the deck. 
  "Dang." Daniel said.
  "Command mode?" Michael asked.
  Catherine nodded." Yes, I knew a ship this large had to have one. Can you link it to my console?"
  "Sure. Give me a sec." Michael examined the holograms for a bit, then swiped at one.
  The console that Catherine had been sitting in lit up. She walked over to it, and sat down. "Dan Dan, can you move the drone a bit so I have a better view?"
  Daniel sat back in the pilot seat, and moved the drone until it had a clear view of the massive holographic map. "What are you going to do?"
  "There are over two hundred and fifty thousand units out there. I'm going to use them to make a way." Catherine said.

Thousands of green dots appeared on the giant map. Catherine moved her hand over the controls, selecting and dividing them into groups, then started to move them through asteroid fields, well, what was left of the field. It seemed that the gun emplacements had formed more than half of it.
  After a bit, Daniel frowned. "They move too slow."
  "Minimal thrust and maneuvering. They were meant to be set in place and only move to correct placement." Michael said matter-of-factly.
  Steven walked back in. "The heaters are utter junk so I took some of the busted up metal parts of the ship and wired them directly to the dynovamator with small resisters. It should get quite warm in here shortly."
  Daniel turned to see an extremely bright red glow coming from one of the rooms behind Steven. "Wow, talk about extremes. It looks like you're melting down metal back there."
  "A bit." Steven admitted.
  Michael looked back "Wow, I can feel the heat already!" 
  Stephanie started to get out of her seat to get closer to the heat. "That looks dangerous. Are you sure what you did is safe?"
  "No, it's not safe and I wouldn't go close to it." Steven warned.
  "Oh." Steph said, and sat back down.
  "If it gets out of hand I'll pull the plug but for now it will keep us alive and nice and toasty for a bit." Steven said.
  "Thank you Steven. I was having a hard time thinking in this coldness." Catherine said over her shoulder.
  Steven gazed perplexedly at Catherine. "What are you doing?"
  "The instant I moved the ship, the barrier dissipated so Cat is trying to use the fake asteroids to clear a way." Michael said.
  "Ah." 
  Stephanie drummed her fingers on her console, as she watched the green dots move on the pirate's ship radar. "How come they're not being destroyed when they smack into the asteroids?"
  "I'm not sure." Catherine said absentmindedly, as she maneuvered the fake asteroids. "But if I had to guess from what we've seen in the factory, I'd say they were almost made entirely out of octagon molecularly shaped metal." 
  "No way. It takes hours to change the molecular makeup of metal properly that's why they're so expensive. I had something made out of molecular metal about the size of my foot before and it cost me more than I'd like to share." Steven said.
  "I know, but think about it Steven. The ship produced on an average three of these asteroids a day. A factory that large should be able to produce at least eight to thirteen a day." Catherine said.
  Steven realized she was right. He thought, as he found himself watching one of the gun asteroids on the giant 3D map bounced hard off of a normal asteroid. The impact had happened in the cloud, and the 3D map showed a small explosion that should have destroyed the fake asteroid, yet it kept operating like nothing had happened. "You're right they are definitely constructed out of molecular metals." He affirmed.
  Enough of the asteroids had congregated. Catherine started to use them to push the other asteroids out of the way, forming a tube-like path.
  Michael flew the ship along the path straight, through the cloud. It took some time, but thanks to Steven's makeshift heater, they had more than enough.
  When it emerged on the other side, Catherine made a solid wall out of the asteroids, and just blasted everything out of the way of the ship. 
  "Wow, looks like you're tired of being trapped in here." Daniel teased.
  "No, it's just the most efficient way." She said, as the typhoon of lasers eviscerated everything in its path.
  The lasers over heated on the first wall of guns. Catherine quickly replaced them with another wall. This happened one more time, before the giant ship pulled up beside the massive asteroid their ship had embedded itself in.
  "Everyone to the hatch, and put on your space shields. Let's get off this thing!" Daniel happily proclaimed.
  Michael turned off the ship as the others got up and went for the external hatch.
  Soon, everyone had their shields on. Stephanie opened the door. They looked out into open space.
  Catherine had positioned two fake asteroids to help them get to the giant ship. The fakes looked real even up this close.
  "Oh wow, that is a big ship." Stephanie exclaimed.
  Steven blinked. "It's as big as our station!"
  "It is quite impressive." Michael noted
  "I can't wait to explore it." Daniel pushed himself out and grasped on the first dormant gun mount, crawled over it, then jumped to the next.
  The others followed him. Soon they were at the hatch.
  Michael put one hand on the pad, and the access port popped open. 
  They all eagerly crowded in.
  The door closed behind them and the room recompressed. 
  Michael took off his mask. "The air is surprisingly pleasant."
  "It is." Stephanie agreed, as she took hers off.
  "Good I am quite tired of the smell of pirates." Steven said.
  The others took off their space shields as well, and stuck them on the universal recharger.
  As they finished putting them away, Michael opened the second hatch.

 

AI



  

  The door slid away to reveal a holograph of the AI lion standing there with two security droids on either side of him.
  They all froze.
  "Welcome back aboard David Kel. I'm here to escort your guests to the chambers, where they will be staying for the duration of their time on the ship"
  Mike straightened his back and said, "That won't be necessary. I will see to their procurement myself. Please turn yourself off for the time being."
  "Sir, that is not the protocol."
  "I am well aware of that. Please, turn yourself off."
  "Sir, you have been acting strange ever since your injury. I am worried about your mental state."
  Michael realized it was not going to be as easy to turn this thing off this time. He closed his eyes, and thought for a second. "I've witnessed the death of millions of people when two planets collided. I believe it is perfectly reasonable for me to be a bit shaken up."
  A light played through the lion. "My system tells me you are lying, even though I know you did indeed witness the said atrocity... Sir, it appears that you are in denial. Please recount the events of said tragedy."
  Michael was bewildered. "I...I, wait why?"
  "It is as I feared. Not accepting and dealing with the past can put you in a rather dangerous mental state."
  Mike started to get what the AI was getting at. "I assure you that I am quite mentally sound and in my right mind."
  "Are you? In normal circumstances, telling anyone about the existence of me and this ship is a grave infringement, much less bringing them on board. I understand the direness of the situation, and therefore your actions may be excusable, but you intended to give your guests full access to the ship. Did you not, sir?"
  "No."
  More lights flickered in the hologram. "Your actions are not consistent with your personality, sir. I'm sorry, but I'm enacting protocol fifty-one. As of now you are under house arrest. I'll contact your fellow commanders and let them decide what to do about your mental state. Until their reply, you and your guests will be confined to your quarters."
  Daniel's eyes grew wide. "Oh. That's not good."
  Michael, realizing this conversation was not going to get any better, shouted, "Run!" 
  However, before any of them could even move a muscle, the gravity in the ship came on, slamming them to the ground, then increased, pinning them.
  The security droids walked through the lion and took hold of their arms.
  The gravity lessened, and the droids hauled them to their feet, then started to take the guys one way, and the two girls another. 
  Daniel flailed against the droids desperately reaching for Catherine. Their eyes met, and tears welled up in Daniel's eyes. "I'm sorry."
  The droids yanked him harder.
  Anger grew in Michael, and with all the authority he could muster, he shouted, "Stop this at once!"
  The droids stopped moving, and the holographic lion said, "I am sorry sir, but you have shown signs of, and have admitted to, great mental trauma. Therefore you must be confined until your brotheren are able to determine if you are fit for duty."
  "What you are suggesting is a death sentence, and neither I nor my guests deserve that!"
  "Sir?"

Daniel forced his head around to look at the AI. "All the other Lionhearted died over three hundred years ago! They were ambushed at Shagreen. The system was crowded with innocent bystanders. Instead of fighting, they fled to the planet's surface because they thought Kel was coming with the rest of the core, but he never came."
  The lion looked at Michael.
  "He never came..."Michael swallowed. "I mean... I never made it. I was too wounded. The rest of the core was killed by the weapon that caused the two planets to collide, and you were in factory mode. They were trapped, overwhelmed and... and... "Michael took a deep breath. " There were no survivors. You are all that is left... and me, of course.
  The lion continued to stare at him for a few seconds, then said, "My sensors detect there are some falsehoods in your statement."
  Catherine realized that Michael adding himself to the story was causing problems. "We don't know exactly what happened. All we known for sure is that they were ambushed. They retreated, then were forced into one of the galaxy's most commemorated battles. As far as we know, there were no survivors."
  The lion switched its attention to her. After what seemed like an eternity, it finally spoke. "Truth confirmed. Adding new information to memory banks and checking protocols."
  The droids released them. Another long moment of silence took place
  "Error: memory banks full. Cannot process new information. Unable to continue functionality checks. Enacting maintenance protocols and removing irrelevant data. Error: no delete-able data found. System memory full. Unable to continue processing. Error: no known alternate protocol. Entering maintenance mode. Please contact AI's programmers."
  The lion stopped moving. Its hologram froze, and so too did the droids.
  Daniel walked up to the lion and waved his hand. It did not react. "Um... what just happened?"
  Steven gave a giant snicker. "Its memory banks are full."
  "How's that possible?" Michael asked, confused. "Even if it's three hounded years old, it had to have like a zillion zettabytes."
  "A three-hundred-and-thirty-one-year long recorded message that is marked priority that's how." Steven said, almost laughing with relief.
  Stephanie's eyes widened with understanding. "If that's not divine intervention, I don't know what is." 
  "If-an that ain't the truth." Daniel said, as he playfully stuck his hands through the frozen hologram of the artificial intelligence.
  Catherine watched him, then dubiously examined the droid that had been manhandling her a few seconds ago. "Is it okay for us to move?"
  Steven shrugged. "Yeah with the AI in maintenance mode they will unquestioningly obey any command given by the highest ranking officer."
  Catherine nodded. She walked over, and dragged Daniel away from the lion. "That thing was about to incarcerate us for the rest of our lives! Even if it's no longer functioning, I'd rather you not mess with it."
  Daniel gave her a rueful smile, and playfully kissed her on the lips. She rolled her eyes, and turned her head so he couldn't kiss her again. She glanced past Michael, and noticed that he had his head bowed and was praying.
  She motioned towards him, and the others notice as well.
  Shame flashed across their faces and they all bowed their heads as well. Stephanie's jovial proclamation had been right. Such good fortune was no mere accident.
  Mike finished praying first and patiently waited for the others to finish saying theirs. When they were all done, he said, "Let's go to the bridge and commandeer this thing."

***
  It wasn't long before they made it to the bridge. The giant 3-D map hologram of the asteroid field was still on, and the assassin drone had dropped down into the dead David Kel's lap.
  Steven went up the ramp to the commander's seat, rolled the drone onto the floor. Michael and Daniel reverently picked up the dead skeletal Kel, setting him out of the way. "This will most likely take me some time." 
  Michael finished putting down the skeleton. "That's okay. There're plenty for us to explore." 
  "No, I don't think any of you should leave the cockpit until I'm done."
  "Ah, I want to explore" Daniel complained.
  Catherine put a hand on his shoulder. "Honey, I love you, but you have gotten us into enough troubles today. If Steven thinks it's best for us to stay here, then we will."
  Daniel sighed, walked over to what was obviously the inactive pilot seat, and plopped himself down into it.
  Steven sat down, took off his right shoe, and put it on top of the console.
  Catherine stared at him weirdly. "What are you doing?"
  Steven pulled out some wires from the shoe and commenced in Jerry-rigging them to the command console. "It's my personal hacking computer. No one expects the bottom of your shoe to be more than rubber and metal with the occasional electromagnetic stripping for ease of movement in zero G so they never give it a second look. I walked through some of the most secure places in the sector without them ever realizing I had the power to take over their entire facility in the heel of my boot." Steven happily proclaimed with a mirthful smile.
  Michael, seeing a good opportunity for one of his jokes, seized upon it. "Yeah, and he uses 'sole' operating system as well."
  Daniel slapped the palm of his hand against his forehead.
  "Ah... and the shoe is well-equipped for 'dirty' computing." Michael added.
  Stephanie bowed her head and covered her eyes, shaking her head even though there was a giant smile on her face.
  Steven finished hooking the shoe computer to the console, and took a deep breath. "Well here it goes..."
  The others became silent so Steven could concentrate, as they looked around and found a place to make themselves comfortable. Just as Stephanie sat down against a wall and pulled out a foldable tablet with the book she was currently reading on it, Steven said, "We... It's a miracle we are alive."
  Daniel slouched till his head was against the back of the chair. He put his feet up on the console. "Well yeah a couple times over."
  "No you don't understand, I mean... well completely dead. The AI's protocol states that it's to blow itself up if everyone dies or goes MIA to protect the secrets it holds."
  "It wouldn't do that because it still thinks David Kel is alive." Stephanie said.
  Steven put down the hologram sheet he was looking at. "That's just it. It is common knowledge the easiest way to take over a ship is to hack the mainframe and replace the identity of its owner with your own. This ship has a secret identity backup that restores every time it learns of a death of one of its commanders."
  Daniel sat upright. "Ouch. So it would've... Dang, that would have sucked."
  "A lot more than sucked! If it hadn't gone into maintenance mode, it would have restored its commander list, scanned us then instantly self-destructed with us on it!"
  Michael put his hand over his eyes. "Wow, thank you Father for Your mercy."
  "That's still not even the half of it. Because the message had been marked priority the AI had disabled and compressed over 75% of its functions as well as all information that was not marked priority, effectively crippling its functionality. If it hadn't it would have almost instantly recognized our ruse."

Daniel whistled. 
  Stephanie glared at him. "Yeah, you better whistle! Thanks to your foolishness, if it hadn't been for God's extreme mercy, we'd all be dead right now three or four times over."
  Daniel hung his head. "You're right, I'm sorry."
  Catherine got up, went over to him, and put a hand on his shoulder. "Honey, you've got to start thinking about the possible consequences of your actions."
  "I know." Daniel looked around the room. "I really AM sorry."
  Michael gave him a heartwarming smile. "That's okay. We all went along with it, so we were partly to blame. Also, don't change your name to 'sorry'." He added with a smirk on his face.
  The cockpit fell into silence, and more or less remained that way for the next hour as Steven reprogrammed the capital-sized ship.
  ***
  Steven finished disconnecting his shoe from the console and put it back on. "All is good I have completely rewrote the AI wiped his memory of the last hours and scrubbed all secret backups replacing them with our own. The ship is ours and in tutorial mode so it will explain to us many of its features and capabilities as well as information about the Lionhearted. However I couldn't directly add us to the command database so I had to replace some of the current commanders with ourselves. I tried to match them to us the best I could and you all need to know who you are and a little bit about your replaced selves."
  Stephanie looked over the top of her book tablet. "So who am I?"
  "Zephyra Lily Kel the younger sister of David Kel. She was the quartermaster as well as the hand-to-hand combat trainer and surprisingly just as short as you are." Steven teased.
  Stephanie glared at him and bared her top teeth, making her lips and cheeks quiver, giving her a rather impressive furious look.
  Steven chuckled and continued. "According to the records she was here with David Kel and she died either when the graviton weapon was used or during the time afterwards. And even though her name was Zephyra she went by Zephyr and all the systems were programed to address her as such."
  "So I'm Zephyr huh? Not bad. I like it."
  "I thought you would. I'm James Teal Zilon more commonly known as Soul Knight."
  Daniel bolted upright. "Hey, you can't be him! I want to be him. You're nothing like he was!"
  "Yes I am! He may have been an excellent pilot but he was better known for his stealth and his ability to get into places that no one could possibly get into. You couldn't be stealthy if your life depended on it but I excel at stealth."
  "In your dreams."
  "Okay you two, let's not get started." Michael said.
  "But he just stole one of my favorite game characters!"
  Catherine gave Daniel a disapproving glare. "Come on Dan Dan, don't."
  Daniel sighed, and let it slide.
  Catherine had wanted to know a little bit more about soul Knight, but she decided it was best to change the subject. "So who am I?"
  "Snow Fire Snoire and she always went by her last name. Sadly I can't tell you much about her past because it's behind a security wall so thick it will take me a week to break and the only one who had access to it was her with some type of extremely complicated access code. Sadly it's a known fact that she died at Shagreen because she was one of the last three standing. All I know for sure about her is that she was said to be the greatest tactician ever lived."

"So Snoire?" Catherine smiled as she mulled it over. "Sounds like a combination of snow and fire just like her name. I like it."
  Daniel was becoming impatient. "Okay so who did you make me?"
  "Someone whose real name was never known and at the age of twelve he had such a criminal record that the Lionhearted decided to take care of him. However he led them on a merry chase for over a month and a half and when they finally caught up to him he disabled ten out of the fifteen starfighters they took against him before they finally shot him down. He was badly wounded and they had to nurse him back to health. During that time many of the core became attached to him and he was the only one on record that had his criminal record expunged and was allowed to join the core."
  Steven had peaked Daniel's interest. "Sounds cool. Who was he?"
  "Mad-Dog or rather Lord Maddog as he programmed the ship to refer to him as."
  "No! Absolutely not. All the games depict him as crazy, and everywhere he went something was guaranteed to explode. I'm nothing like him."
  "Sounds exactly like you to me." Stephanie commented.
  "Does not!"
  Michael waved his hand, trying to calm him down. "Daniel, the game's depictions of him are wrong. We all know that. He was undoubtedly the best pilot that ever lived. Even Soul Knight's skill didn't compare to his. And even though Soul Knight was the main hero of most of the games, if you think about it anytime they got themselves into a really hairy situation, it was Lord Maddog they released."
  "Yeah, 'released'. I'm not a raving mad dog that blows stuff up everywhere he goes!"
  "You could've fooled me." Steven said. "I've watched you play games. You get out the biggest most destructive weapons you can and blast your way through and if the game is coded so that if you were detected you automatically fail you find some ways to bypass it or you spend hours on the StarNet learning how the game's codes work so you can change it."
  "It's called modding and I like modding games! That doesn't make me a stark raving lunatic that likes to blow things up."
  Catherine stood up and walked over to him. "I don't know how games project this guy, but I like the sounds of him. He sounds very roguish and his back story gives him the rather mysterious air. I think he fits you quite well, and makes me think you're all the more handsome for being compared to him."
  Daniel let out a puff of air, and she hugged him.
  Steven, seeing his chance to change the subject, seized it. "Anyway... You guys know how the Lionhearted were said to be ten times stronger than any human and to move impossibly fast on top of being able to see things behind them?"
  Michael nodded. "Yes, they were also said to be able to instantly tell whether you are lying or not. There's also a few cases of them being able to fly, and many rumors of them coming back to life after being killed."
  "Yes even I know they were said to be superhuman." Stephanie replied. "It's much of how they were able to make sure no one was above the law for the two hundred years when they existed."
  "That all had to be rumors though, because science has since proven all that stuff to be humanly impossible." Catherine said.
  A knowing smile spread across Steven's face. "After reading some of the logs on the ship I can guarantee you they were NOT rumors."
  Daniel frowned at him. "But how's that possible?"
  "Because it wasn't them."
  "Huh?"

"Follow me you've got to see this!" Steven said, as he got out of the commander seat and left the bridge.
  The others hurried to follow. A few steps down the hall Steven remembered something and ran back into the bridge.
  "Alf."
  The hologram of the AI lion appeared. "Sir?"
  "Set course and go to waypoint 'Home mining station'."
  "Yes sir Soul Knight Sir."
  The capital-sized ship started a gentle hum and the viewports showed that they were moving.
  Steven grinned and motioned for the others to follow him.
  Michael hesitated, as he glanced out the viewports towards the asteroids. "Will this ship be able to navigate through the asteroid field all on its own?"
  "Yes it's equipped with its own gravity matrix so it can push any asteroid that comes too close out of the way." Steven said as he walked down the hallway.
  Daniel followed him and asked. "Why didn't we use that to get here then?"
  "Because none of us knew how to use it." Stephanie answered. "Duh."
  Catherine grabbed Daniels hand to keep him for responding. So instead of saying something stupid back, he just gave Stephanie a mean look, and continued to follow Steven.
  ***
  The factory ship was enormous. It took them some time before they arrived at wherever Steven was taking them to. It didn't help that it seemed like he got lost a few times.
  "Ah here this has got to be it."
  "Finally." Daniel remarked, as they all looked at the door that had "Training Hall" written on it.
  Michael waved at the door. With a small hiss, it slid open. They walked in, and froze.
  The room was enormous, and was dissected into multiple parts. They were consisted of training equipment and courses that a galactic athlete would be jealous of. But that's not what made them froze. On the far wall, there was a bench. Sitting on that bench was David Kel and two others. Off to either side of them along the wall were hundreds of droids.
  "Uh... hello?" Michael greeted hesitantly.
  Steven laughed. To all their surprises, he started walking across the room towards David Kel and his crew.
  To their horror, he reached them, stood in front of the pretty girl besides David Kel, turned around, and sat down in her lap.
  None of them dared to move nor breathe. They waited for her to respond, but she didn't. Nor did David Kel or the man off to the right him.
  Realization hit Catherine. "Androids?"
  Steven gave her a mirthful smile that reached all the way to his ears. "Yep. Far more advanced than any others that existed during their time and probably till today."
  Understanding came upon the others as well. Daniel said. "Wait, are you saying that all those awesomely heroic things they did in the games, they never did, but some androids did them?"
  Steven continued to smile.
  "Ha! No way! You can't be right!"
  Michael shifted his weight and began to walk towards Steven. "To be honest Daniel, I think most of the stuff in those games are exaggerated. However Steven, are you sure they were done by androids? I mean, wouldn't someone have detected that?"
  Steven stood up and looked over his shoulder at the life-like androids. "Well they're not exactly androids and in a sense Daniel they did do those things just not in the ways we think."
  "Huh?"
  "They flew the space fighters, well most of the time because the range would have caused too much latency for them not to. However they never left the cockpit. Their starfighters had a two-person cockpit and one person always stayed in the fighter to protect them while the other one got out. Or so it seemed but in reality there was only ever one person in the cockpit and he mentally controlled one of these androids that got out instead of him."
  "They directly mentally controlled them?" Catherine asked.
  Steven nodded.
  "But mental controls are still iffy at best even today, much less three hundred years ago." Stephanie argued.
  "I know. I've tried to improve them myself but got nowhere." Steven said, as he took the android David Kel's hat and put it on his own head.
  Michael took a deep breath. "Well, we know they had better technologies than we do already. What I'm more confused about is how come no one ever realized that they were robots and not humans they were talking to."
  Steven squinted at android David Kel, and drummed his chin with his right index finger. "These things send out falsified biometric reports they would never stand up to close scrutiny or scanning. But as you well know from the games we played they always carried sensor scribblers on them everywhere they went. So you would never get a correct scan of them or an x-ray anyway."
  Catherine continued the line of thought. "And androids today are so easily to spot by any casual observer, because they just don't move correctly. They always seem... off. Because we as humans move so sporadically and casually, it's impossible for a computer to perfectly mimic our movements. But if they were controlled directly by a human brain..."
  "They would seem life-like." Michael finished.
  Daniel scratched his head. "So wait... So if they were all like controlling a fake, then all those cool things they did would be more like a game to them instead of life and death, wouldn't it?"
  Michael shrugged. "I guess. If your android got destroyed, you just send out another one."
  "That's so COOL!"
  Stephanie, seeing the expression on Daniel's face, said, "Oh no. no! No! Don't even think of it."
  "Think of what?" Daniel said innocently. 
  "You know exactly what I mean."
  Daniel put his hands up defensively and began to say something, but out of the corner of his eyes, he noticed David Kel began to move. He froze.
  The others followed his line of sight, and froze as well. 
  David Kel's chest swelled as he took a deep breath, and his eyes opened. They flickered around the room, and he instantly noticed them. His eyes became the size of saucers, and he shot to his feet, shouted, "Who are you? And how did you get in here?!"
  Stephanie jumped back, tripping over Michael, knocking them both down. Daniel pushed Catherine behind him and tried to back up at the same time, almost ending up on the floor just like Stephanie Michael.
  Steven burst out laughing.
  They all stared at him, then realized what had just happened.
  Daniel reached out and grabbed the hat off Steven's head. He flipped it upside down to reveal hundreds of sensors embedded inside it.
  "You all should have seen yourselves. You nearly jumped out of your own skins!" Steven said mockingly.
  Stephanie pulled herself to her feet and glared at him. She shook her fists. "I'm going to kill you!"
  Steven bent over in laughter.
  The AI's lion hologram appeared in front of them. "Destination reached, sir."

 

IT BEGINS 

            
  

  *Two months later*

  Daniel's robot stood opposite of Stephanie's. Closing his eyes, he forced himself to concentrate. 
  In a lightning fast movement, the robot dashed forward. Right before it reached Stephanie's, it jumped into the air and punched down, aiming straight for the chest of Stephanie's robot. This should have easily disabled it, but Stephanie's droid stepped back on her right leg and pivoted, causing the attack to pass just millimeters away from making contact. 
  She continued the pivot, putting her robot's back solidly against his in a movement so fast, that he had no time to react.  Her droid leaned back, swinging its arms up over its head, grabbed hold of his robot's head, and twisted. The head of his robot broke clean off.
  The headless robot dropped onto the ground. A millisecond later, the pain hit Daniel, and he dropped to the floor as well.
  Stephanie gave him a wolfish smile.
  Steven had long ago figured out why these mental-powered controls were so much more efficient. Unlike the controls of their time, these not only received signals from the controller's brain, but sensors were buried under the droid's skin, which allowed the user to truly feel and connect with the robot. The feelings were so acute that a wisp of a wind blowing across the droid could be felt by the user. Thankfully though, Daniel was only using one of the cheap training robots that had very few sensors, which meant the pain wasn't nearly as acute. Still, it hurt like hell when Stephanie did something like that, and she knew it.
  As the pain from the dying droid faded he glared up at her.
  "Want to go again?" She asked mockingly
  This was humiliating for Daniel. He had always been the strongest and most capable physically in the family. The very thought that Stephanie could beat him over and over like this was groveling. He'd like to say that he could probably beat her in a hand to hand combat without the robots, but he knew better. For the last months she had trained not only mentally, but also physically. She probably could easily wipe the floor with him now.
  The Lionhearted had a rather advanced computer training program that he and Steven had modded and turned it into a fun game that Stephanie had become addicted to. He, however, had not found it as fun as she did, because it wasn't open-world enough for him. He had found it a lot more fun to play the modded flight simulator game Steven and he had made from the Lionhearted Starfighter training program.
  He closed his eyes and wished he could beat her just once. 
  "Looks like I'm too much for you."
  Daniels eyes shot open. "No, I'm so going to beat you!"
  Daniel repositioned the hat on his head, and mentally took control of one of the robots standing along the wall. It came to life and walked in front of Stephanie's droid.
  She smirked at him and said, "I see you're cruising for a bruising. Begin!"
  Instead of attacking, this time he had his droid do a backflip away from her. Then he turned and ran into another section.
  "Hey, what are you doing?"
  Daniel smiled as his robot found a training sword and whipped it out.
  "Oh I see. Well, if you want to play it that way then..."
  To Daniel's surprise, three robots along the wall came to life and dashed towards his.
  He gaped at her. "How?"

She didn't answer. Rather, she just smiled as the first of her robots came within the striking distance.
  Daniel turned his droid to the right. He managed to dodge the downward chop of one of the oncoming droid's heel. In reciprocation, he brought his commandeered sword up in a swinging arc, trying to cut the first droid in half, but it bent to the side and the sword just barely touched the tip of its chest.
  Sparks flew, but the damage was superficial and the robot kept coming.
  Daniel flipped his droid backwards, gaining him precious seconds.
  Controlling this many droids at once made Stephanie's movements slower. If Daniel could score a hit, the artificial pain she felt might give him a chance... or so he thought. He did not, however, realize that Stephanie had rounded her first droid around the training equipment.
  It rolled out from behind the weapon rack and brought its left heel down into the back of the knee of Daniel's droid.
  His droid collapsed to the floor and the droid he had swung his sword at smashed its foot down on the neck of his droid.
  Sparks flew and Daniel dropped to the ground in pain.
  "Oww." He moaned, falling onto one knee and couched at his neck, even though he knew it was fine.
  "Ha! Serves you right for cheating." Stephanie gloated. 
  "Cheating!? You are the one who cheated!"
  "I did not cheat."
  "Whatever. Four verses one is not even remotely fair."
  "Ha! There! You are wrong. It was still one verse one as there is only one of me and only one of you. I just can control more at one time than you can."
  Daniel coughed. "I didn't even know that was possible, how can it be fair?"
  Stephanie shrugged. "Hey, it wasn't fair to begin with, because it is as simple as this: You suck, I rule."
  "What?!"
  "You are like a baby. Making noise, don't know what to do." She said in a mocking tone with a weird accent.
  Daniel rolled his eyes. "Oh I am, am I? Just come up to the flight simulation room and I'll show you who's a baby. I'll even give you your pick of ship that you can have twenty of to my one and I will still wipe the floor with you."
  Stephanie cracked a smile. "No you wouldn't. I'd pick a Durlian destroyer and you'd be helpless."
  "You can't pick a capital-size ship!" Daniel protested.
  "I just did."
  "Cheater. You are nothing but one big, fat, cheater!"
  "You're just upset because I'm better than you are."
  Daniel began to say, "Hardly..." But Steven ran in and shouted. "Hey guys you've got to see this."
  They looked over at him. When he was sure he had their attention, he dropped the metal tubing that was in his hand.
  As it dropped to the floor, it sprung outwards in a giant circle, then stood perpendicular.
  "Oh, that's cool." Daniel said, as he looked at the six-foot in diameter metal hoop.
  "Oh that's nothing watch this." He touched the metal hoop, and the air in the middle of it flickered a few times, then twisted suddenly into a completely opaque image of the gaming room on their space station.
  Stephanie looked at it in amazement. "Wow, a foldable holographic screen. I've never seen one of this quality before. Good work Steven."
  "It's not a screen." Steven replied, almost bursting with joy.

He stepped in front of it, and walked straight through it into the gaming room on their space station.
  Daniel shot up to his feet, and Stephanie stood there completely dumbfounded, unable to move nor comprehend what had just happened.
  Steven picked something up on his messy engineering table and threw it back through the hoop at Daniel.
  Daniel was so stunned, he didn't even move. The tool hit him square in the chest, but he still didn't move.
  Worried Steven said. "Are you okay I'm sorry I didn't mean to hit you?"
  Daniel finally moved and rubbed his chest where he was hit. "You... You... You made a dimensional door?!"
  "It's not a dimensional door it's called the 'Octagonical trialic graviton matrix continuum'."
  "Dimensional door." Stephanie said with finality.
  "No! It uses eight different gravity forces powered by three graviton matrices to fold a continuum and as such it has to be called 'Octagonical trialic graviton matrix continuum'."
  "Ah, nah it' don't" Daniel said.
  "Yes it does!"
  Stephanie walked through the hoop and put a hand on Steven's shoulder. "No, sweetie, it doesn't."
  Steven looked crestfallen. "How come you guys always name my creations something horrible?"
  Daniel walked to the metal hoop, testily put his hand through, then pulled it back out immediately. "Because you always try to name them something we can't say or understand. Anyway, this is downright amazing I can't tell any differences when my hand goes through the dimensional rift, or rather as you call it, continuum."
  "Because there is no rift it's almost a complete connection."
  "Wow. How's that possible? I mean this seems nothing like the star ways."
  "That's because the star ways are ancient old outdated technologies made before there was really enough power to even power them. However with the invention of the Dynovamator and with our advanced technology in graviton waves and gravitational fluxes this becomes as easy as one two three."
  "You didn't think this though, did you?" Daniel asked.
  "No... Not exactly the Lionhearted did. But I dramatically improved on it!"
  "I'd say you did." Stephanie commented. "How's this powered?"
  Steven's face lit backup. "By another much smaller Octagonical tria..." He was cut off by Stephanie, giving him the annoyance-squint-eye. "Eh... a, Dimensional door with a wire running through it straight to our space station's Dynovamator."
  "Wow it sounds like you have the hole-within-a-hole-inside-of-another-hole type of thing going on."
  "More or less." Steven beamed.
  Catherine and Michael walked into the gaming room. "Ah, I see Steven's showing you his mind blowing invention." Michael said. 
  "It's still hard for me to believe that he is doing what he is doing." Catherine said. "We just finished Marvin's shipment by the way."
  "Oh, I'm sorry I forgot all about it." Stephanie apologized.
  Daniel turned his head, looking down at the dead training robot as he rubbed the side of his cheek with his finger.
  Stephanie noticed his motions. "Daniel, you have to start helping out around here!"
  "I do."
  "Do not!"

"Do too. I just don't like cleaning the kitchen or doing the mindless work of pushing weightless boxes around in zero G."
  "That's basically all there is to do besides the Aquaponics, and you don't help with that neither!"
  The communicator that's braided into Daniels hair beside his right ear began to buzz. He tactfully used it to get out of the conversation by quickly pressing a finger onto his lips and touching the communicator with the other hand.
  Stephanie glared at him, but as he obviously listened to the communicator, the blood drained from his face.
  The peal look on his face and the tears forming in his eyes alarmed everyone.
  As the communiqué came to an end, Daniel stared lifelessly at them.
  In trepidation, Michael asked. "What's wrong?"
  "I... John... I... They're going to kill John."
  John was one of Daniel's oldest and best friends outside the family. Even though he only visited every three months if that, they were still rather close.
  Catherine walked through the dimensional door and put her arms around Daniel. "Why, what happened?"
  He swallowed. "You know he became a sheriff at the Alitien police. Well... Well I..."
  "What did you do?" Catherine gently coaxed.
  "I lent him one of Steven's probes and controllers that had his pin-hole technology."
  "Without asking me?!" Steven fumed. 
  "I didn't think to. The last time he was here, I told him about it and he thought it's rather cool. So I let him borrow one."
  "So what happened?" Michael asked
  "He showed it to Mr. Wade and they were testing it out together, when they came across what looked like a big time drug deal. Without contacting their superiors they went to check it out." Daniel swallowed hard. "When they got there, Mr. Wade challenged them. In return they open fire on him and John. Mr. Wade was shot down and killed in the ensuing fight."
  Michael's eyes grew to the size of saucers. "Mr. Wade is dead?!"
  Daniel hung his head, "That's what the message said... John only made it out alive because he blew up the cargo ship that's carrying the drugs."
  "But he did make it out alive?" Catherine said, with a tad bit of relief.
  Daniel solemnly nodded. "Yes, but the ship he blew up belonged to the ULIX group and they claimed the ship was full of over a billion credits worth of new medical drugs. Not illegal drugs, so they are demanding compensation."
  Stephanie looked confused. "But what's that have to do with John?"
  "The ULIX group is a known cover for one of the biggest illegal drug and spice dealers in the entire galaxy. You don't cross them, or you die. The Alitien had turned their back on John's small precinct, telling them it's their own problem and they have to deal with it themselves. So in order to keep their own hides, they are handing John over to ULIX group."
  Catherine gasped. "And they will make a public example of him, won't they?"
  "They will. And from John's message, it's worse than that."
  "How?" Steven asked.
  Daniel reached up and took his communicator out of his hair and brought it up, so it could project a holographic image of John's message. He scrolled to the bottom and let them begin to read.

-
  I have been arrested. They were planning to court-martial me, in which I knew I'd be found guilty. Normally this would mean my dishonorable discharge from the police force. However, my superior officers have told me they are handing me directly over to the ULIX group to handle my court-martial, which undoubtedly will end in my death. I had come to terms with this, but a few minutes ago I learned that the ULIX group is coming with half of an Armada, and the Alitien government has decided to hand over my entire precinct to them to be court-martialed in their own courts. Everyone here is going to pay for my mistakes...
  To be honest none of this feels right to me, no matter how I look at it. I know destroying the drugs probably saved thousands of lives in one way or another, so I could come to terms with my own death knowing that I did some good. But now... The men here might be corrupt, but they don't deserve what's coming to them by these wretched creeps!
  I wish to the God that you always talk about that there was something I can do to stop this! But I know there isn't. I'm sorry for getting your brother's drone destroyed and I just wanted to thank you for being a good friend.
  Goodbye, forever
  John.
  -
  Catherine finished reading and said, "We have to help them!"
  Everyone stared at her; Catherine was never the type to make such a rash choice.
  "I know what you're thinking. But the truth is, we always talked about doing what's right around here, yet we do so little. For once we have the resources and ability to walk the talk."
  Daniel put his arms around her. "You're right. I'm not to let John be killed just because he did what he thought was right."
  Michael nodded. "I want to help too, but how?"
  "We have over two hundred thousand gun emplacements, that's how. Duh." Daniel answered harshly.
  Michael looked out of one of the viewports in their gaming room. An asteroid field floated dangerously close to their space station, or so it seemed. In reality, they were thousands of fake asteroids that opened up to reveal high-powered laser turrets. In their midst hid the capital-sized factory ship that was now once again in stealth mode. He looked back through the dimensional door at Catherine and Daniel, who were on the training deck of said capital ship. Realizing this, it slightly derailed his thoughts, because they had been using space shields to go back and forth between the ship and the space station. Now however, they would never need to do that again.
  He forced his thoughts back to the matter at hand. "No Daniel, they are not of any use in this situation. They are defensive systems, not offense. We'd have to put them in place before hand at wherever this Armada is meeting the Alitien government, and that would never work, because if the Alitien government had any brains at all, it will secure the area."
  "Fine then. We just ambush the ULIX group before they reached the meeting." Daniel suggested, frustrated.
  Michael shook his head. "No, they will come by starway, and having an asteroid field miraculously appear around a major traffic zone is way too conspicuous and obvious."
  "And even if they did fall for it, after the initial assault, the survivors would just pull back out of range of the lasers and bombard them with antimatter missiles." Catherine added, as she worked out the scenario in her head.
  "What abou...hum." Stephanie muttered then continued, "What about the capital factory ship? It's only half of an Armada, maybe we can use it to take them on."

"No it's a factory training ship, it has a very limited stock of weapons and most of its systems are dedicated to stealth not combat." Steven informed her.
  "So out of all the things we have, we don't have any way to help at all? That can't be right!" Daniel argued.
  The two rooms fell into silence, as depression started to take hold of them.
  Steven took a deep breath, and started to make his way to one of the consoles. "Well I may have something that might help."
  He touched a button and pointed out one of the viewports. 
  Michael and Stephanie gasped as whatever he was showing came in the view. Daniel and Catherine quickly made their way through the dimensional door and looked out the viewport as well to see the last of sixteen black starfighters come into fighting formation.
  "No way!" Daniel almost exploded with excitement. "Honest-to-goodness real starfighters? You can't be serious!"
  "I am." Steven said with a smile. "They are the original lionhearted-style fighters. I've had the factory creating them ever since I found the blueprint in the memory banks. I was hoping to make a full wing for each of us just for fun of course."
  "Sweet! Can I fly one!?" Daniel asked.
  "No not exactly, you see I have improved on them by removing the two-person cockpit and replacing it with my 'Gravitaic fold frequency gate-"
  "Pinhole!" Stephanie interrupted.
  Steven sighed. "By replacing it with my PINHOLE technology and using the extra space to add a laser turret and more shields so they are not exactly humanly flyable."
  "Ah man!"
  Steven smiled to himself he had mostly done what he did, just to make sure that Daniel could not actually fly one. "I also removed the two missile mounts and replaced them with one beam cannon because we don't have the resources to make antimatter missiles. Sadly though I don't think these will be of much help."
  "Why?" Michael asked.
  "Well I was hoping to one day make Dynovamators for each of them sadly even with the amazing quality of this factory I can't do that without harvesting liquids and rocks from a star, which we can't do. So for now all they have as an energy source is a big wad of batteries. Unfortunately the batteries only last about ten minutes fifteen tops and if they're powering weapons and recharging shields I doubt they get even five minutes of continuous use."
  "Maybe that will be long enough!" Daniel said.
  Catherine shook her head. "No, sixteen starfighters versus half an Armada is insanely steep odds, and completely impossible if the fighters only last five to ten minutes."
  Daniel scratched his head. "What do the fake asteroids use?"
  "A battery pack. With thermal expansive solar to recharge it." Steven replied.
  Daniel gave him a blank look of incomprehension.
  "There's an extremely flexible material that is frozen by the vacuum of space causing it to expand and a solar collecting array that heats a molecular piece of metal that then touches the frozen flexible material causing it to contract then expand aga-.. Why am I telling you this? It doesn't matter! It won't work for these fighters. It works fine on the asteroids because the barrels on the lasers begin to overheat and melt far before their battery runs out and has to recharge again."
  "Oh."
  Catherine raised her hand. "Could you use your Octagonical trialic graviton matrix continuum to connect them directly to our space station's dynovamator?"
  Steven shook his head. "Thought about that already it won't work."
  "Why." Daniel asked.
  Steven blew out a puff of air. "Why do you always ask that? I said it won't work okay."
  "But why not? You said you did just that to power that dimensional door over there."
  Steven gave a frustrated growl. "Because of distortion. The energy from a dynovamator just like all other electricity carries with it a slight disturbance in frequency however the disturbance in the electricity off of a dynovamator is quite literally chaotic. That disturbance will cause an Octagonic... dimensional door to collapse. It works to power one because it is a wire thinner than my pinky so there is not much disturbance but what you're talking about is a conduit as thick as my waist with hundreds of currents flowing to different systems. The continuum would almost instantly collapse severing the conduit or worse!"
  Daniel began to say 'O', but Steven pushed his hand against his mouth. "I hate when you say that!"
  Catherine stepped between them, trying to calm Steven down.
  The room fell quiet as Steven turned away and fumed in frustration.
  At last Stephanie said, "Wait, I remember you said something when we found the capital ship, something about how it was not being powered by its dynovamator and that's why it was almost entirely impossible to detect it. Maybe the energy from whatever was powering it might be stable enough."
  Steven's eyes lit up. "Gas! You're right. The ship has quite a few alternate energy generators like right now it's being powered by thermal expansive solar. When we found it was being powered by the ancient technology of a gas generator! The alternator in it uses zero G bearings and and... And the electricity it produces has very little disturbance if any at all! It might just work! You're brilliant."
  Steven dashed through the dimensional door into the training room, then into the corridor of the capital ship, and out of sight.

 

ASSAULT

            
  

  The bridge of the capital factory ship had sixteen separate images on its viewports sent from Steven's drones. 
  Michael took one that he thought was the best angle, and magnified it in the center of the viewport.
  The group watched breathlessly as the Armada from ULIX approached the small government procession. It was indeed half an Armada, with one battleship, three frigates, one cruiser, ten assault craft, and at least three dozen Starfighters.
  Mike took a deep shaky breath. "Let's begin."
  "Wait!" Stephanie interrupted. "Let's pray first."
  "Yes, let's." Catherine added.
  "Okay." Michael bowed his head and the others followed suit.
  "Heavenly Father, we come before you now in the power and authority that you have given us through your son Jesus Christ. We are attempting to stand in the way of a great injustice, and we just ask that you would guide us and lead us and empower us to do what needs to be done. In Jesus's name, amen."
  Michael straightened up, looked at the others, and nodded. They nodded back, and he reached out to flip a switch.
  One of the sixteen drones unfolded and began to project a cruiser-sized image.
  ***
  Tarax Marlune quietly seethed inside. He knew the show of power was an immeasurable part of the business, and a part he usually reveled in this, however... this was politics, and he wanted nothing to do with it. If he had it his way, he and his battle ship would just pop up one night and obliterate the entire offending police force, which would send a much clearer and far better message in his opinion. Cox on the other hand, had insisted that it be done this way, going even as far as to call him small-minded straight to his face. Him. Tara. Small-minded. He clenched his fist. Cox was getting to big for his own pants hobnobbing with the...
  "Sir, there is something in our way." His second in command said, pulling him out of his thoughts.
  He glanced up. A massive Hologram of a man in a uniform appeared on screen. To his surprise the man looked like a commander straight out of the history books. "What the..."
  "It's sending out a message on all available channels."
  He waved his hand at her, and she brought it up on the ships speakers.
  Detecting they were listening, the hologram turned towards the battle ship and started to speak. 
  "I am David Kel of the Lionhearted. We have reviewed the case of John feck, and found him not guilty on the basis that his actions were in self-defense, and had not broken any of the three Great Laws. As such, no course of action may be taken against him or his compatriots. If there are those who still seek to do him harm, they will face the wrath of the Lionhearted. This is your only warning."
  Tarax's mouth dropped open. "What is this kindergarten?" he scoffed.
  His second in command brought the Armada to a halt and looked up at him. "Your response, sir?"
  "Give me coms." He barked.
  ***
  The five of them waited with baited breath, as the Armada slowly came to a halt.
  "Well, they definitely got the message." Daniel said. "What do you think they will do about it?"
  Michael began to shrug, but was cut off as an angry voice crackled over the open channels.

"The Lionhearted have been dead for hundreds of years and they have no jurisdiction here! I don't know who you are or what you are playing, however know this: ULIX will not tolerate interlopers. If you interfere with our businesses, we will hunt you down and eliminate you! You and all those who are close to you!"
  Stephanie's eyes grew wide. "Oh, wow this guy sounds nasty."
  "You can say that again." Steven answered, as he pointed at a screen that's displaying the readout from his voice recognition software. 
  Catherine leaned closer to the indicated screen, and read the name out loud. "Tarax U. Marlune, ULIX's chief executive over customer service."
  "Blast man," Daniel exclaimed. "Remind me never to get on the coms with their customer service. He's got a rap sheet as long as my arm."
  "Longer." Steven said, as he used a finger to slide down a list on another screen. "There're at least fifteen cases of aggregate assaults here and five suspected of murder if not more. How in the world is this guy not behind bars."
  "I think it's time we put an end to this farce of a company, what you guys think?" Michael asked them.
  "Absolutely." Daniel declared. "Let's obliterate them."
  Michael nodded, and sent a new message out through David Kel's computer-generated voice.
  ***
  Suddenly, the giant hologram reached out, pointed straight at Tarax's battleship, and shouted. "Tarax U Marlune, we have received your death threat, and have found you guilty of intent to kill, breaking the first Great Law of 'Thou shall not kill!' Your battleship will now be destroyed, with you on it." 
  Tarax burst out into laughter. There wasn't a force in the entire sector that could even put a dent in his ship. Whoever these people were, they were absolutely insane.
  As he laughed, David Kel's hologram shifted as if addressing someone behind him. "To all hands on his battleship: if you do not wish to share his fate, abandon the ship NOW."
  With that, the hologram of the supposed David Kel blinked out of existence.
  "All right, enough of this..." He began to command, when he noticed three blimps broke off from his ship. Suddenly all of his earlier mirth turned to pure anger as he realized some of his crew had actually just abandoned ship. "Turret control now!" he barked.
  A display of holographic controls flared to life in front of him. He jabbed it indicating the blimps of the escape pod as his targets, and pulled the trigger.
  ***
  A gasp escaped Stephanie's mouth, as she watched the high-powered laser turrets on the long tubular battleship melt the three escape pods into a floating slag that exploded into tiny shards, as the superheated metal came into contact with the absolute zero temperature of space.
  Daniel clenched his fists and punched at the air. He shouted. "Oh! This guy is SO going down!"
  "Yes he is!" Steven said fervently, as he moved controls around. "Preparing to open the first dimensional door. Start your run now. It'll take you some time to get up enough inertia."
  Daniel jumped into his simulated cockpit and drew down his virtual helmet, as he took control of half of the Starfighter.
  As preplanned, he pushed the fighters to their max speed and aimed them straight for the dimensional door Steven had placed four thousand galactic space units away (or rather, four K GSU). Daniel smiled to himself, as he shook from the excitement of the battle to come. All three of his fighters slightly jerked, as the chain that was strung out behind them became taut, and started to pull along the first of the fake asteroids chained together behind him. He raised the tip of his helmet to glance out over at the screen; it's showing the drone unfolding the tube-like metal circles that would open the dimensional door to where the Armada was.

Multiple jerks shook his controls as the other fake asteroids were pulled along, forming an extremely long tail of linked asteroids.
  The first of the dimensional doors came online. Daniel cut all powers to his fighters as they passed through. 
  Inertia carried them forward, with the asteroids behind them.
  The first of the fighters was a few seconds in front of the rest. It was slightly to the left of where it should have been, so only sixty-seven of the hundred chained asteroids behind it made through the dimensional door, before the sixty-eighth asteroid collided with the corner of the metal hoop, snapping it in half and collapsed the dimensional rift.
  Daniel slapped himself in the head and looked at the others. "Sorry."
  The next two fighters were perfectly in line. All one hundred of their asteroids made it to the dimensional door.
  However, the rest of his fighters were slightly off and only managed around eighty each, before one of their numbers grazed the tube-like structure, collapsing the continuum.
  Daniel hissed in agitation.
  "It's fine I counted on that. You practically threading a needle, there's only a half a foot of leeway on those doors. And I did that because we need to make it look like you're coming out of nowhere!"
  Daniel nodded and powered back up his fighters. He aimed the first of them straight at the battleship, and opened fire with all they had.
  ***
  Tarax glared down at the stunned and shocked faces of his officers; he barked. "Let this be a lesson to all of you: ULIX does not and will not suffer incompetence nor desertion. Now return your attention to your statio..."
  His voice trailed off as a chain of red blimps appeared on both the starboard and port sides. "What in the..." 
  Warning alarms blared. Lasers and particle beam cannons impacted on the battleships shield.
  "Open fire!" He shouted.
  A wall of pulsing beams of lasers lit up the night sky almost instantly, evaporating two of the attacker's Starfighters. But as their red blimps vanished from the radar, they were replaced by hundreds of gray blimps, indicating inert asteroids being hauled behind them.
  "They're trying to ram those asteroids into us! Evasive maneuvers now!" Tarax barked.
  The battleship's engines roared to life and lurched forward, pulling it out of the oncoming path of the asteroids.
  ***
  "Oh no you don't!" Daniel exclaimed, as he released control of all the other Starfighters and focused his attention on his lead ship. Banking hard to the left, he dodged the stream of laser fire and switched all power to his engines. The long chain of asteroids swooshed and yanked behind him.
  Using the sudden twist of inertia that would've killed him if he'd actually been piloting the Starfighter he shot straight towards the battleship. 
  Six of the battleship's main turrets swiveled to meet him, but thanks to the chain attaching him to the long strand of asteroids, it was impossible for them to get a bead on him, as his starship flailed and twisted around at impossible G forces like a worm skewered on the end of a fishing line.
  The world spun and rolled endlessly in his virtual helmet's view port. It took all of his concentration to make sense of where the Starfighter was currently at, but he kept his eyes open and continued to guide his fighter towards port side of the battleship. 

Then right before he slammed into it, he pulled up and released the chain that bound it to the fake asteroids.
  The abrupt movement and inertia snapped the chained asteroids in a whip-like motion. They spun around, smashing into ships and shredding two enemy fighters as they slammed into the battleship, wrapping themselves around it like a giant snake.
  ***
  Tarax flew across the command deck and slammed into the far wall as the asteroids crashed into his battleship. The massive craft was sent flipping around as the asteroids wrapped themselves around its hall.
  The logic drive was overwhelmed with collision data, and tried to spin the whole ship counterclockwise in the attempt to free itself from the entangled mess of asteroids.  Tarax was sent bouncing off the roof and floors of the command deck.
  "Cut logic drives now!" He shouted at the top of his lungs.
  The ship suddenly stopped moving, and he collapsed back to the floor. Slowly, he pulled himself to his feet and cradled his busted right arm, as warning alarms signaled the shield's energy were nearly depleted. He spun around, taking stock of the situation, and noticed at once that most of the gunners were focusing their attention on the chains holding the asteroids together.
  "Forget the stupid asteroids!" He barked. "They're nothing but a distraction! Get the fighters; if one of them launches a torpedo now the damage will be unstoppable!"
  There was a murmur of understanding as the command deck's gunners focused their attention on the five remaining fighters. Within seconds, five Crimson fireballs filled the night sky.
  Tarax breathed a sigh of relief as all blimps went silent. His lips curled in disgust as he glanced out the starboard viewport at one of the asteroids that's clinging to the ship. He didn't know who was behind this attack, but he was going to find out and he would personally see to their extermination.
  No one raised their hand against...
  ***
  "Now!" Steven shouted, as the circular tubes attached to some of the asteroids decoupled and unfolded, opening more dimensional doors. This time straight into the middle of the scattered armada.
  He, Stephanie, Michael and Catherine, who were each controlling two fighters, shot through the doors. They released their chains and pulled away, allowing the chained asteroids to fly on at impossible speeds.
  Having had over five minutes to build up their inertia before shooting through the dimensional doors in one long chain the asteroids barreled through and slammed into frigate, cruiser, and fighter like punching straight through some and bouncing off others and as the last of the dimensional doors closed or collapsed Steven activated the hidden gun emplacements.
  ***
  The ship's warning alarms blared to life once again. Hundreds of more grey dots popped up, indicating even more asteroids were appearing out of thin air and smashing through the armada like a sledge hammer. Then, without warning, the grey dots blazed red. Tarax's eyes grew to the size of saucers as he watched the one right outside the viewport unfolded, revealing an ultra-heavy laser turret.
  He opened his mouth to shout an order, but it was too late. Hundreds of lasers bored into the already weakened shield of the battleship, shattering them in less than a millisecond. The turret right outside the viewport drilled a hole straight to the protective layers and eviscerated Tarax in a blink of an eye.
  ***
  "Retreat! Retreat!" Shouted a frantic voice across the coms as Michael and the others watched the now heavily outnumbered ships were being systematically melted down into useless slags.

Only two frigates and one cruiser managed to pull away from the engagement as the battleship exploded into an expanding fireball.
  The wounded ships limped their way back to the starway and fled through it without so much as a single communication as they departed.
  The bridge erupted into shouts of joy as the ships shot away. Michael raised his hand to cut them off. "We're not done yet. Gather the remaining asteroids and Steven, make sure there's no trace of us left on that battlefield."
  "Aye aye captain." Stephanie sung out as she sat back down and grabbed the controls of the two StarCraft she was piloting. 
  But as she went to move them, Daniel reached over on the screen and grabbed the control over one of them.
  "Hey, that was mine!" She protested.
  "'Was' being the opportune word." Daniel teased back.
  "Oh no you don't. You lost all of yours; you can't have mine as well!" She exclaimed, taking back control of the pilfered starfighter.
  Daniel immediately seized control of it once again, and a miniature power struggle ensued between the two of them as they each tried to take control of the starfighter.
  "Stop, you two!" Michael scolded. "We don't have time for this right now."
  "Fine then. Tell her to let me control once. I'm the better pilot anyway!"
  "No way. You can't just have your way like that!"
  "Stop both of you." Steven exclaimed, trying to be the peacemaker. "Here Dan you use mine and leave hers alone I'll use the drones." 
  Stephanie frowned at Steven. "You shouldn't let him get away with it; it only goads him on." she said, as Steven switched his starship controls over to Daniel.
  Daniel stuck his tongue at her and happily guided his new fighters towards the closest chain of asteroids.
  She curled her lips; her upper cheek shook as she gave him the evil eye, but said nothing more.
  Minor crisis averted. They all used the remaining starfighters hastily attached harpoons to gather up the fake asteroids while Steven used the drones to reclaim the remains of his technology and as standard Lionhearted protocol self-destruct anything that was not recoverable leaving no trace of their passing.
  As Daniel, Catherine, and Stephanie flew their starfighters off into open space with the fake asteroids in tow, Michael took one of the remaining fighters and parked it in front of the government procession, which had been watching the entire battle from a safe distance. Once again, he began to project a giant hologram of David Kel.
  "As you are the ruling government in this area, the survivors of this battle are now under your jurisdiction. I know you will save their lives and deal with them justly according to the three Great Laws."
  The hologram disappeared. Michael turned his fighter to follow after the others.
  ***
  Fifteen minutes later when Steven was absolutely sure there was no possible detection, the starfighters met up with another probe and it opened a dimensional door. The starfighters flew through it with the fake asteroids in tow and back into the safety of their home asteroid field.
  The drone collapsed the metal tube hoop that formed the dimensional door and began its long trek to a different location where it could be used if needed to be.
  As the last Starfighter disappeared into the endless field of asteroids and away to safety, Daniel took off his helmet, stood up, and stretched in a joyous proclaimation. "We did it! We saved John's life!"

"We indeed did." Mike took a deep breath. "But at what cost?"
  "Huh? What do you mean?" Daniel was perplexed.
  "I mean, how many lives did we just take? I didn't think of it before while we were planning this whole thing, but after watching the asteroids smashing into those ships and opened fire like they did, I can't stop thinking about it."
  "Oh." Daniel said. His enthusiasm draining away. 
  Catharine looked down at the floor; her hand began to shake. "You are right. I didn't even take that into consideration. I am... I am so used to playing strategic games, I..."
  Stephanie reached over from her station and took her hand. They both sat there in silence. The others stared on unseeingly, until the holographic form of the AI lion suddenly appeared in their midst. "I understand your distress; all life is precious, as such, it may please you to know that in the last engagement there was only one fatal casualty. The commander Tarax U Marlune."
  Michael's head snapped up towards the lion; his eyes nearly bulged out of his head. "How is that possible...? I mean, the asteroids crashing alone should... Wait, how do you know this?"
  Alf the AI lion sat back on his haunches on an invisible floor. "I know this because the asteroids were equipped with excellent sensors. As for how this is possible, most of the ships were fully automated with crews only inside their command decks, which you well know were greatly reinforced. It takes lasers at pin point focus and almost point-blank range to break through such defenses. Lionhearted protocol states that all men should receive a fair trial. Thus, I successfully endeavored to minimize casualties when opening fire. However, Marlune's war crime of murdering his own men in cold blood right in front of us, according to the laws, denied him such niceties. So I personally saw to his elimination."
  "Wait, you did what?" Stephanie exclaimed.
  "I used his death and the subsequent destruction of each of the electronic control stations to force the command crew to abandon ship before the battleship exploded. While I detect distress in your voice over this fact, it implores me to point out that according to my calculations, without the decommissioning of the commander, all the lives on the battleship may have had very well been lost."
  Stephanie turned towards Steven; he quickly brought up a screen and pushed an emergency pause feature he had installed on the AI.
  The lion's hologram rippled, then froze in place.
  Daniel whistled, "Wow, remind me never to get on that thing's bad side.It might very well calculate me as an acceptable loss and kill me!"
  His half-baked joke didn't go over well with the others. They glared at him.
  "Don't worry," Steven quickly said, throwing up his hands. "I've added tons of subroutines to make sure something like that doesn't happen."
  The room once again fell into silence, until Daniel jumped down from his station onto the curved floor of the command deck. "Well, if it means saving John's life and hundreds of others, I'm kind of okay with taking partial responsibility for Marloon's death."
  "It's Marlune, and I am not sure I am," Michael answered.
  One of Steven's screens beeped a warning, indicating that the ship needed its AI to continue functioning without errors. With a heavy sigh Steven reached up and un-paused Alf.
  The holographic lion rippled as he came back online and looked around at them as if expecting them to respond to his earlier comment. When no one said anything, it disappeared to its normal functions, oblivious to the fact of it being paused.

Daniel leaned his back against the shock absorbent shaft that supported his station. "So what happens now?"
  "Huh?" Steven asked, not understanding the question.
  "Well, we obliterated half an armada. That's got to mean something, right?"
  Catherine put her hands over her eyes and leaned back into her seat. "Yeah, I've been mulling that over. I would think a group like ULIX would throw their weight around and demand Alitien to give them the perpetrators of such an act."
  They all turned to her in alarm.
  "But the Alitien government can't! I mean I made sure they can't find us!" Steven proclaimed with absolute assurance.
  "I know. But this will really put them in a hard spot, for two reasons." She said.
  "What are those?" Daniel asked.
  Catherine sat up. "Well, for one, they can't find us, and two, I doubt they really want to find us."
  "What makes you say that?" Stephanie asked this time.
  "We just wiped out a battleship with only sixteen fighters and some defensive gun emplacements. That's something completely unheard of in the last one hundred years, and the Lionhearted were quite well known for being able to continuously accomplish such feats. The Alitiens don't know who we are, but they aren't stupid. They won't try to pick a fight with a group calling themselves the Lionhearted and showing the same capabilities, unless they absolutely have to. As such, I hope they would rather deal with the wounded ULIX then try to find us. At least that's what I'm counting on, or I would've brought this up earlier."
  Michael nodded at her. "Well, let's hope you're right."
  "Doesn't matter even if they did try to find us they couldn't. I've hacked their R&D department quite a few times and their technologies are a few decades behind everything we deployed to hide any trace of us." Steven reassured. 
  Daniel scratched the back of his head. "Actually guys, this may sound a bit weird, but if this was anything like a few of the games I've played, I believe the ULIX group will be no more by the end of the week."
  Stephanie frowned at him and sighed as she crossed her arms. "This is not a game; this is real life!"
  "I know I know... But even still, as I think about it I think their time has come to an end."
  "Why do you say that?" Michael asked.
  "Because we just created a power vacuum. If real life were anything like the games I played, the other crime lords are bound to see this opening and take advantage of it so they can add this region to their money pot."
  Stephanie glared at him. "That's ridiculous! You need to get your head out of those games to start doing something more productive with your life."
  "It is productive. I've made thousands from my winnings, even more than what Catherine brings in from her Art." Daniel protested defensively.
  Stephanie rolled her eyes, and changed her attention to Catherine. "How do you live with your husband playing games all day? If he were mine I'd force him to get a real job!"
  Catherine smiled and shrugged.
  ***
  The next morning everyone was more or less lazing around the game room, taking a break from the strenuous few days of nonstop planning, when Steven ran in. "You guys won't believe this five hours ago just ten hours since our flight what remained of the Ships that escaped were ambushed at the end of a star way and completely obliterated by an unknown force. Sadly there was a lot of traffic and there were quite a few of civilian casualties."
  Daniel paused the game he was playing and jumped to his feet. "Ha, sounds like I was right. This region will now be the center of a crime war! Everyone will battle for its control."
  Stephanie rolled her eyes. "You and your games. It was probably just the government trying to get rid of a thorn on their side or some such."
  Michael shook his head. "No. if that had been the case, there wouldn't have been any civilian casualties, or very little at least."
  "Dan may be right. We have destabilized the delicate balance of power in this sector." Catherine stated.
  Michael rested his face in his hands. "If you're right and a crime war did break out, how many more civilians would be injured or killed in it? We may have saved John's life and his colleagues, but it seems our actions may have very well put thousands more in danger now."
  After a moment, he looked up at Daniel. "How in the world did I let you talk us into this?"
  "Me? I didn't do this!" Daniel protested.
  "He's right." Stephanie said. "We all made this choice and we all share the blame."
  The room lapsed into silence.
   "Well then," Daniel said, pulling himself up straight, crossing his arms. "Are we going to stand by and watch it? Or are we going to make it clear that the Lionhearted won't allow such a thing to happen."

 

EXACTERS OF JUSTICE?

            
  

  Daniel sat reading the comments on the hologram video of their assault on the battleship, which someone had put up online, when Steven walked into the game room. "Do you know where Stephanie is at? I'm hungry."
  He looked over his shoulder at Steven. "Yeah, I think she and Cat are in the training room playing the training game we made."
  "Thank you. Still reading those comments I see."
  The video already had over one billion views now and the comments ranged in the tens of millions. Most of the original comments were either arguments about it being fake, or the ships were being fake and how it couldn't be the Lionhearted. Some of the more dramatic ones called for the death of the fakers, saying stuff like these Lionhearted fakes should keep their nose in their own businesses. Mostly though, they were just trash. However, a couple of days ago the comments seemed to have accepted the fact that the video was indeed real, and the newest comments were giving rather alarming and interesting information on criminal organizations, saying that the Lionhearted, if they have actually returned, should deal with these.
  "Sure I am! Some of the stuff is downright alarming and I used your fake hacked police account to check it out, and most of it seems real. You know I really think we should act on some of these leads." Daniel said excitedly.
  Steven looked at the ground. "I've decided to stop reading them."
  "Why?"
  "I read a comment about this guy and... Well let's just say it turned my stomach inside out. So I don't really want to read anymore."
  Understanding crossed Daniel's face. He had read that comment as well. "Oh, yeah I know what you mean; I read about that too. I thought it couldn't be true, so I emailed John and asked him to look at it, and he told me he had already read the comment, and that it was most likely true, but no one can touch that creep because he is rather high up in the Alitien government." Daniel swallowed "What's worse is that John told me the one who posted the comment was tracked and brought in for questioning and is now charged with some erroneous bull."
  "I'm not surprised." Steven said morosely and walked out of the room.

  ***
  Stephanie opened her eyes and broke her concentration for a few seconds, so she could say, "All right, the sensors say he's in the bar. Are you ready?"
  "Yes. Let's do this." Catherine said without opening her eyes, because she was not as good at controlling the android as Stephanie was, and she didn't want to take the chance of losing control of it now.
  Stephanie nodded and closed her eyes again.
  She moved the android of David Kel down the space station's hallway towards the door leading to the private bar keeping the three other robots closely formed up behind him. She looked over at the android of Zephyr that Catherine was controlling, and nodded.
  Zephyr nodded back. David Kel drew back his arm and punched the door.
  The android's strength caused the door to slam back, ripped off from its hinges, and rolled into the spacious room behind. 
  All the eyes inside the bar turned towards them.
  "I am David Kel, and I have come for Malik T. Cox."
  A mutter of fear swept through the bar's occupants. The room split like the Red Sea to reveal a middle-age, finely dressed man sitting at a table with two scantily clad women. The man's eyes grew wide; he jumped to his feet and bolted for the nearest exit.

David Kel jumped twenty feet through the air and landed beside the running man. He grabbed him by his head and pushed down hard, smashing him face first into the ground.
  Zephyr dashed across the open floor. She grabbed both of his arms, pulling them harshly behind his back and cuffed them.
  The three droids ambled their way over and surrounded him.
  David Kel stepped back. "You have been tried and found guilty of breaking the second Great Law: 'Thou sell not steal.' As you have stolen the right of choice away from the ones you have sold into human trafficking. Under the Lionhearted edicts, these three droids shall exact your decree judgment upon you."
  David Kel and Zephyr turned and glared at the people as the three droids commenced in their work.
  ***
  Steven walked into the training room to see both Stephanie and Catherine with their eyes closed. "Hey what you guys up to?"
  Both of their eyes popped open and they began to nervously shuffle. 
  Stephanie managed to speak. "Not much, just... just training."
  "Ah, I was wondering if there's going to be any supper or should I just fend for m..." His voice trailed off as he noticed the androids for both David Kel and Zephyr were missing.
  He looked around the room and realized one of his dimensional doors looked like it was opened to some type of air shaft.
  "What are you two doing?"
  "Ahh.." Stephanie muttered.
  "Alf, please displayed visual and audio from ground unit 0069 8."
  A hologram displaying the visual image from the cameras in David Kel's eyes appeared in the middle of the room. 
  Through it, Steven could easily see the wealthy onlookers in the private bar.
  "Operation complete, Sir." One of the droid said.
  Stephanie turned the head of David Kel just-in-time to see one of the droids incinerated something. She accidentally made David Kel clears throat as he said, "Good, release him." 
  The man curled up in a ball, and Stephanie regained her composure. She had David Kel clearly state. "No one is above the law, and we will be watching you."
  With that, she turned David Kel and began to walk to the door with the three droids closely behind.
  Catherine managed to regain control of Zephyr and did the same. 
  Steven quietly fumed as he waited for Stephanie and Catherine to guide their droids back into the hall of the space station, were they made their way back to the small alley. Once they were sure they hadn't been followed they crawled into the ventilation shaft and went through the dimensional door back into the training room.
  As he watched, he realized they had not been on a space station, but rather on one of the small colonies, and they had used one of his drones to get there.
  He quickly grabbed one of the training hats and took control of the drone, and began to check over its time logs. After a bit he breathed a sigh of relief. At least they hadn't been sloppy.
  He turned to them. "What did you two just do?"
  They both fidgeted a bit, then Catherine stood up straight. "There was a post on the hologram video that disturbed both us and I was able to find out with definitive evidence that it was indeed true. So we took care of it according to the laws and edicts of the Lionhearted."

The post must've been the one he and Daniel were talking about just a few minutes ago. Steven thought to himself. "Wait what do you mean you took care of it according to the edicts of the Lionhearted?"
  Neither of them said anything
  Then Steven realized what they meant. "You... You didn't!"
  There was some more fidgeting, and Stephanie finally answered. "Catherine and I didn't do anything; there was an operation program in the droids and we just used it."
  "But still you... Didn't you?!"
  Stephanie stopped fidgeting and straightened her back. "We could have executed him because I'm sure he's broken the first Great Law. However, both of us decided this was a more fitting punishment."
  "We're going to talk to Michael about this," Steven declared and glanced over his shoulder at the holographic lion that had appeared while they were talking. "Alf, where is David Kel now?"
  "He is currently on the bridge, Sir."
  ***
  

  "Scan complete, Sir." 
  "Analysis?" Michael asked.
  "Heavy concentration of chemoids saturated with 1-aminoethyl and other questionable substances. It would appear that anonymous tip from the comments on the video was correct. I am ninety-five percent sure this is indeed an illegal chemistry lab, Sir."
  "Anyway you can be one hundred percent sure?" Said Michael.
  "My drug database is over three hundred years old, and this chemistry lab seems to be making an altered version of an illegal substance that was called LOSE. However, I cannot be sure without connecting to the current galaxy net and updating the database."
  "Why haven't you connected and updated your database yet then?" Michael pressed.
  "Because I have been in stealth mode since my reboot, Sir. Making connections may jeopardize our location."
  "We are connected to the net all the time. It should be fine go ahead an–"
  "NO!" Steven half shouted, as he rushed through the door into the bridge and to his designated station, hurriedly bringing up a screen and making sure Alf didn't act on Michael's comment. After he was sure the droid couldn't connect to the net, he looked around the room and instantly noticed that Michael had one of his drones spying on some type of small mobile space station on one screen, while the other screen had a Starfighter ready and aimed at a closed dimensional hoop.
  He looked back at Michael. "What are you doing?"
  Michael tapped his foot on the curved floor, scratched the back of his head, then tilted his head up and gave Steven a goofy grin. "Well... twenty to twenty-five minutes ago some guy posted on the vid of us taking out the battleship saying that he had just escaped from an illegal drug factory and if Lionhearted acted now we might be able find it and destroy before it left the Florian system. I figured something like this information if it was true wouldn't stay valid for very long. And well as you can see I believe I found it and from the looks of it it's true."
  Steven sat down and began to check the time logs of the probe. It took him a bit longer because he wasn't directly controlling it.
  Stephanie and Catherine walked in and began to immediately ask what was going on. But Steven held his finger to his mouth and said. "Ssh!"
  They sighed and sat down. Steven finished looking over the logs, then turned to Michael. "Why in the world did you take the main starways? With all that traffic anyone could've noticed this drone and tagged it! You should have taken the older starways so you can monitor each ship and make sure they didn't tag you. After you're done here I'm going to have to self-destruct this thing just to make sure we're not tracked."

"I figured time was of the essence. Plus, the old starways would have taken too long to get there. I am, or was, planning on self-destructing the drone when I was done." Michael defended.
  Steven was not exactly happy with Michael's statement. "These things don't grow on trees you know! We only have enough resources to make the stealth fibers for like four or maybe five more of these."
  Michael didn't answer, because he was busy messing with his communicator.
  "What in the world are you planning to do anyway? This one Starfighter can't possibly destroy that and if the poster really did escape from it that means that there's forced labor in there so even if you could you wouldn't want to!" Steven said.
  "I know. Alf please explain, I'm busy." Michael commanded.
  The computer-generated lion appeared on one of the view screens. "Officially the Lionhearted have nothing against illegal drugs because they don't break any of the three Great Laws, and because we can't prove there is slave labor on that vessel, which would break the second Great law in that it steals their freedom, we can't move in by force. However, Reina developed P987 codename 'Blower' specifically to deal with chemistry labs four hundred and six years ago."
  The image of the lion faded to be replaced by a blueprint for some type of weapon. The weapon looked like a spear with fins on it.
  Alf continued to speak. "The weapon is attached to one of the laser mounts, and is equipped with light sails, much like the original technology used in the Great Exodus. So when the lasers are fired, the light sails catch their light and speed the weapon up to almost that of the light." The fins on the blueprint of the weapon lit up. "The lasers then burn through the sails and impact on a ship's shields milliseconds before the weapon itself does. At which point, the massive capacitor releases its energy." The shaft of the spear lit up. Alf continued. "Causing an EMP blast to disturb the shield just long enough for the tip of the weapon to make it past." A small animation showed the weapon being fired and the EMP blast going off right as it hit the shield. In slow-motion, the shield parted, letting the tip of the weapon through, then snapped shut again and cutting the shaft off. "The momentum drives the head into the armor of the ship, piercing it a few layers. At which point, the head shatters and releases its Nano bots. These Nano bots make their way to the ventilation air speed regulator of the ship. They then cut into the wires immediately after the control unit and send a burst of energy through them. This causes a rather large gale of wind to sweep through each room in the entire ship. Normally this would only be an annoyance to the occupants of the ship. However, on a chemistry lab, it blows the chemicals in the factory area all over the place. The ship's auto anti-poison mechanisms detect the chemicals and instantly locks all ventilation shafts, except for the one where the poison was detected, and open it to the vacuum of space, sucking all the air in that room into the vacuum of space."
  "What about the people inside?" Catherine asked in alarm.
  "Human occupants are too large to be stuck through the ventilation shafts. They may be tossed around a bit but not seriously harmed." The AI explained.
  "So basically the weapon tricks the ship into flushing the drugs into space?" Steven asked.
  "Yes."
  "Interesting." He commented.
  Stephanie held up her hand. "Wait, this method only gets rid of the current batch of drugs being made. I thought the objective here was to get rid of the factory itself."
  Michael looked up from what he was doing. "Alf, tell her what you told me."
  The AI reappeared on the screen. "Typically the mobile station fights off our small attack force and retreats through a starway. It will then send out a message saying it was attacked, and that it lost the current batch of drugs which is usually a sizable sum worth of credits. One of the Nano bots from the blower tracks this message and sends us the coordinates of the recipients. Predictably the recipients will send out a small spacecraft to go and check on the station. We track the spacecraft and ambush it in open space with overwhelming force, so the occupants surrender. Then we use the spacecraft to infiltrate the space station."

Steven's eyes lit up, "Oh brilliant!"
  "Will that actually work?" Stephanie asked.
  "The Lionhearted have used this method continuously with an eighty-six percent success rate." Alf informed her.
  "Okay. While Alf was explaining my plan, I used my communicator to log on to your fake police account and downloaded a dossier on illegal drugs and spices," Mike told Steven and handed him his communicator. "Can you give this to Alf?" 
  Steven was not entirely pleased with this entire situation, but nonetheless quickly skimmed the document, and decided it was safe to upload the information to the AI's mainframe. 
  As the file finished transferring, Michael asked. "Does that give your database what it needs?"
  The lion looked at Michael, closed its eyes for a few seconds, and then said. "Yes, I can now confirm with one hundred percent certainty this is an illegal drug chemistry lab."
  "Good. Unfold dimensional door." Michael tapped a few controls, and the probe began to unfold the metal tubing.
  "Do you have the weapon already on the Starfighter?" Steve asked.
  Michael nodded. "Yes, there was some in storage in the second hangar."
  Catherine brought up another screen and flipped through a few sensor displays from the probe as it unfolded the dimensional door. "You would think something like this chemistry lab would have a small security detail at least, wouldn't you?"
  Michael turned on the Starfighter and started it towards the dimensional door. "No, I think something like this relies more on stealth and looking like it's a normal rich man's mobile mansion."
  The dimensional door opened. Michael's Starfighter shot through it, but because he forgot to power down as he flew through it, the massive influx of energy combined with the wavelengths produced by the hole-inside-a-hole phenomenon, the dimensional door spewed forth sparks, collapsed, and clipped off the very edge one of the rear maneuvering thrusters as it melted the tube structure that produced it into tiny cinders.
  Steven clasped a hand over his eyes in exasperation.
  "Oops, sorry," Mike said, as he left the destroyed door behind, flew towards the small mobile space station, and opened fire with the lasers. The lasers impacted on the space station's shields; one of the screens lit up, confirming the secret payload had just made its entry. 
  Michael smiled at them as he pulled up and started to fly around for another pass for good measure.
  "Mike Lookout!" Catherine shouted, pointing at the readouts.
  The bottom half of the mobile space station opened up to reveal fifteen missile launchers. In less than half of breath, five of them launched missiles.
  Michael yanked on the controls, sending the ship up and swerving as fast and as hard as he could.  Yet try as he might, the missiles kept coming. He pushed and held on the deployed flares until it was empty of flares. Three of the five missiles collided with the flares and exploded. The explosion caught another one of the missiles and it exploded as well right behind the starfighter, causing it to flip front over end.
  The last missile smashed into the starfighter. 
  The screen displaying the image from it faded to black, and they all watched from the drone's view as the starfighter gave way into a Crimson fireball.
  "Ah, great. Now we only have seven left!" Steven moaned.
  Michael put his hand over his eyes. "So much for something like this relying on stealth. Sorry guys, that was ill piloted of me."
  At that moment, Daniel came running onto the bridge. "Guys, someone reported to having seen Cox on a small colony named Talin. There's also another post saying that there is an illegal chemistry lab in the Florian system. I really think we should do something about both of the..ese..." His voice trailed off as he watched the dying fireball of the starfighter. "Uh guys, what was that?"
  A weird cloud of rainbow-colored substance ejected from the small mobile space station.
  "Well, at least that worked." Michael said solemnly.
  The space station's thrusters came online and began to move.
  The lion nodded as if he was seeing something. "Message sent. Tracking receiving end location."
  "Guys?" Daniel started.
  Steven shook his hand at Daniel, telling him to be quiet.
  "Message was sent to a large space station. The station is located in the Galeon system. However, the name of the space station is not in my database. Calculating current directory of mobile space stations and possible rendezvous points if a ship is indeed dispatched."
  The lion was replaced by giant map of old starways. Five or six of the highways became outlined in blue.
  Everyone but Daniel looked at them intently.
  "This isn't any good. Half of these suggested starways don't even exist anymore and it's missing quite a few new ones." Catherine said in frustration.
  Michael glanced over at Steven. "Why haven't you let Alf update his database yet?"
  "Because I don't know what it will do when it does! If it connects to some secret Lionhearted Intersite and re-downloads itself we could all end up dead! And when did you end up on first name basis with it?"
  "Oh I'm sorry, I didn't think about that." Michael confessed.
  "Oh you didn't?!" Steven retorted.
  "Steven!" Stephanie scolded.
  Steven didn't answer. He just brought up a screen and began tapping away at it.
  "I guess there's nothing we can do about this one then?" Catherine asked.
  "No, I'm transferring the message tracking over to my own system with any luck I'll be able to pinpoint the exact end of the transmission then I will use the surveillance inside the colony to watch any further messages from that location or movement. If they do indeed send out a ship I will know and be able to mark it. Hopefully." Steven said.
  The room fell into silence as Steven clicked away.
  Finally Daniel had enough of waiting. "What in the world is going on?!"
  Catherine stood up and walked over to him. "We are attempting to take care of the chemistry lab."
  "Oh okay... Wait, without me?!"
  "Actually Michael was doing it all by himself, and he almost got us all killed by having Alf connecting the StarNet!" Steven said harshly over his shoulder.
  "I understand your worried. However, I believe your reprogramming of me is sufficient enough to keep me from killing you all." The AI said in a comforting tone.
  "Oh, shut yourself off." Steven answered the AI.
  The room fell into silence again except for the incessant clicking Steven was making.
  Eventually Daniel said. "That was awkward... So anyway, you were doing this, so does that mean we can take care this horrible Cox fellow too?"
  Steven glanced perturbedly over his shoulder. "Cat and Steph already did that by enacting edict thirty-five on him."
  Daniel looked crestfallen as he asked Catherine. "You did it without me?"
  She was about ready to answer, when Michael realized what Steven had said. "Wait!" He spun his head and look at Stephanie. "You guys enacted edict what!"
  Stephanie shifted back and forth. "Ah, well, the droids had a program for it, and neither Catherine nor I wanted to kill him. Well, there was nothing else we could do seeing as we don't have prison or anything like that."
  Catherine, seeing a way to completely change the subject, grabbed the opportunity. "Speaking of which, if this works out, we will end up with quite a few people that need to go to jail in our custody. What do you plan to do with them?"
  


 

JAIL?

            
  

  "Well, I was planning to drive the mobile station to some random police precinct and hand the whole mess over to them like I did with the survivors of the battleship," Michael said.
  Catherine began to pick at her fingers. "I guess that works, but it sounds...sloppy."
  "I know," Michael answered. "But like you said, I don't want to kill them if I don't have to, and we have no other way to deal with them."
  A beep drew Stevens's attention to one of the small hologram screens he had brought up; he looked it over and took a deep breath. "If possible we need to think of one."
  "Why?" Daniel asked.
  "How come it's always you that asks why?" Steven quarried, as he passed the image he was looking at over to Michael.
  "Because I'm curious and I'd like to know!" Daniel said.
  Michael sent the picture to one of the view screens. "What exactly are we looking at Steven?"
  "One of the bots from the spear-like weapon you injected into the chemistry lab is currently mapping the station's layout, this is not just a chemistry lab." He zoomed in on part of the ship's layout to some type of small mechanical factory. "I wouldn't know what this is producing except for the fact that the pirate ship we had had one of its end products."
  No one knew what he meant until he flicked a picture of a black case that the small bot had taken, up beside the factory image.
  "Assassination drones." Michael breathed.
  "Yes they are building the entire things there including the miniature Dynovamators. This is no small time drug lab this is a full-blown black-market piece of work. You can't just drop something like this off at a police station. It would have serious consequences for them."
  Daniel tapped his chin. "So, then we destroy it."
  Steven shook his head. "There's at least one hundred souls living on that thing I doubt more than half of them have committed crimes worthy of incarceration much less execution. Besides I can easily convert that factory into a normal drone factory and it has the supplies to make at least forty of them. This is something we're going to need if we plan on doing exactly the type of stuff we are doing now."
  "Whoa stop right there. It did feel good to take care of Cox, but I am not sure we should continue, much less seize control of a factory," Stephanie answered. "And while we might be able to drop the poor slaves off somewhere, I want nothing to do with dealing with hardened criminals that are obviously willing to enslave others. One wrong move and we could all end up dead." 
  "Well, I for one think we should continue," Catherine told her. "I don't know if you guys know, but three shootings happened last night. If I had to guess, I'd say Daniel is right about a crime war. I believe it's kind of our responsibility to try and stop it. But I also don't think it's right for us to be the judge and executor of these people, nor can we just drop them off at some random precinct. We need a definite way of punishment." 
  Stephanie let her hand drop and absentmindedly began to play with one of the command seats controls. The room filled with electric grinding noises as the seat rose a few inches in the air only to drop back down and rose again. After a few times of this Stephanie said, "Surprisingly I agree with you about trying to stop it, Catherine. But I haven't a clue what to do."
  Steven sucked air and his eyes flashed wide open.
  Everyone's attention swung to him and Michael worriedly asked, "What's wrong?"

"Ah nothing." Steven flicked his hand at the screen, then his eyes grew even wider and he quickly put his hand over his face. "Close Tab."
  "Steven?" Stephanie asked worriedly.
  The one tab Steven had been working on had closed when he told it to, and he now quickly brought up a new one and began to click at it. 
  "What happened Steven?" Daniel insisted.
  Steven had tracked the message to its receiving location and found out who the real owner of the mobile factory was and some stuff about that owner, but he dared not to tell the others about it, because messing with the target of that magnitude could really end up with them all dead. So he instead said, "It's nothing really. I just..." He took a deep breath. "I hacked a private camera and saw things I'd rather not have. Let's just leave it at that." Which was indeed true, just not the way he made it sound.
  "Oh." Daniel said; his face turning a little red.
  "On a better note the message receiver is indeed sending out a ship with two occupants in it to go check on the lab factory. I hacked it and I now have its planned flight path to send out Michael's drones to cut it off at a convenient ambush location."
  "Wow good job Steven!" Stephanie exclaimed.
  "I still can't figure how you're so awesome at this," Daniel told him. "I hack my games all the time but that's basically just using programs other people made. I can't imagine what it takes to do what you do."
  Steven smiled. "Actually Daniel if I were to be completely honest that's about what I do too. Hackers make programs and I download them dissect them and recompile them with my own programs."
  Daniel looked confused. "Wow really? Well how come I can't find these programs?"
  "Well just think of it like this, there is an entire galaxy of bored thirteen-year-olds out there and they spend hours trying to hack random things. They post their findings online and eventually find their way into a giant group of underground hackers that share information. Once you're in your in. You just never got in."
  "Oh, I see. I never liked posting online." Daniel crinkled his eyebrows. "I still don't see how these programs you are talking about can actually enable you to hack everything like you seem to be able to. How do a bunch of kids make programs that can get into impossibly secure places?"
  "Well the cycle I was talking about doesn't stop there you see these thirteen-year-olds grow up to be security designers because everyone knows to stop a hacker you have to think like a hacker and to think like a hacker you need to really be a hacker. So if you're smart you hire a hacker. But these hackers in their off time out of boredom and out of habit write hacking programs. If you look closely you can see the vicious cycle."
  "Sounds more like job security then a vicious cycle." Catherine commented.
  "Yeah guess you're right. Anyway, the end result is really the only way to stop a hacker is to catch him or her in the act by tracing. However thanks to my Gravitaic fold frequency gateway and the placing of a few secret relay points by main star ways it is completely utterly impossible to track me. Which in turn makes me the best hacker in the entire galaxy."
  "Ha, sounds like I'm not the only one with a big head." Daniel teased.
  "No, mine is a proven fact yours is pompous windbag. Or rather wind head." Steven stated wryly as he flicked an image over to Michael.
  Michael looked at the image, then put it up on the view screen for the others to see. "Looks like the drone will reach the ideal ambush location in ten minutes, and the ship will be there in another twenty."

Catherine studied the image. "If this actually works, we're going to have two prisoners rather soon, and soon after that whoever is on that mobile station will be our problem as well."
  Michael nodded. "If we decide to go through with this we have to know what we're going to do with them. Steven you sure we can't just drop the whole thing off at a police station?"
  Steven closed his eyes and rubbed the back of his neck as he thought about what he had just seen a few minutes ago. "No, absolutely not."
  "Okay, I trust your judgment. In that case though we only have twenty minutes to come up with a way to deal with the people or we are going to have to let this assassination factory slash chemistry lab go."
  "Just dump all the criminals into open space." Daniel suggested
  "Daniel." Catherine scolded.
  Daniel put up his hands. "Fine, fine. But I played enough games to know that these type of people just don't stop being bad or evil or whatever you want to call it. The reality is if you stick them in jail they just come out better criminals."
  "With more connections." Steven added.
  "Yeah, better criminals with better connections." Daniel agreed.
  Stephanie rubbed her finger along her nose. "That's true. I wonder what the Lionhearted did with their criminals."
  Daniel shrugged. "I haven't a clue, never mentioned it in any games I played. Mike?"
  "I don't know neither." Michael responded.
  "Maybe Alf knows." Catherine offered.
  "Ah, good idea." Steven turned his head slightly and addressed the open-air. "Alf what is Lionhearted protocol for dealing with prisoners?"
  Nothing answered.
  "You told him to shut himself off, Remember." Stephanie said.
  As his sister told him this, he noticed quite a few red flashing indicators on the lower right of his command seat indicating that the factory had stopped and a few other components of the ship had ceased as well.
  "Ah! You're right I did. Alf turn yourself back on."
  Alf appeared on the view screen. "Sir?"
  The indicators disappeared and Steven sighed in relief.
  "Sir?" the Ai prompted again. 
  "Oh ya... What is Lionhearted protocol for dealing with prisoners?"
  "That depends upon the infringement against the three Great Laws. There are many edicts pertaining to the discipline and punishment."
  "I know that. I'm talking about the edicts that say stuff like life in banishment or so many years in banishment. Where exactly are they banished to?"
  "To the prison worlds Sir."
  Michael leaned forward "Prison worlds?"
  "Yes, I can show you the information on them if you like."
  "Yes, please do."
  A new hologram screen appeared in front of Michael and he looked at it.
  "Hum, interesting."
  "Show us." Stephanie said.
  Michael flicked at the screen and it appeared on one of the viewports. 
  A small ice planet orbiting another larger frozen planet played across the screen.
  "Ow, that looks nasty!" Daniel said as he slightly shivered.
  Stephanie nodded. "Yes it does. You sure don't want to be a criminal during the Lionhearted time."
  Catherine looked confused. "That looks like more of a death sentence than a banishment."
  Michael grinned. "Yes it looks like a rather chilly expedition. You all will be very surprised to find out what the surfaces of the planets look like."
  Michael flicked at the screen again and two images of tropical paradises appeared on the giant view screen side-by-side.
  "Oh, wow. They're not ice plants at all. They're both antediluvian planets!"
  "What?" Daniel asked, completely confused.
  Steven sighed. "Okay, when God created everything most inhabitable planets had water underneath their crusts and a layer of water so high in the atmosphere that it froze solid forming a perfect habitat. Water would seep out of the ground watering the plants and wildlife and the ice barrier around the planet would keep harmful UV rays out as well as keeping and regulating heat. However when Adam sinned it caused a colossal shift in the entire universe and that which was meant to last forever began to shift and head towards self-destruction. This shift was like a universe-wide graviton weapon distorting and changing everything but mostly gravity. As gravity shifted the weight on the crust of planets became different weakening them and eventually allowing the waters underneath them to rocket into the sky piercing and ripping apart their ice barrier bringing it down in a shower of ice and rain that floods the entire planet. Some planets have not gone through this process yet and they are called antediluvian planets."
  "Cool."
  Catherine picked at the edge of one of her finger with her teeth. "Yes, they are rather interesting and I have always wanted to visit one myself, but the last one in our galaxy went through its deluge stage eighty-seven years ago. It also means that neither of these planets look like this anymore."
  "Actually these two images are live." Alf informed them.
  "That's not possible."
  "I assure you it is."
  Catherine put down her hand. "You are not even connected to the StarNet. There's no possible way for these to be live."
  "It is my duty to keep watch of these planets, and as such I have a direct link to them much like the technology you all refer to as pinhole."
  Steven shot out of his seat. "You what?!"
  "As I said Sir, I have direct link to them using an inferior but much like your own technology."
  Steven brought up three screens and began to rapidly tap at them. "How come this is the first time I've heard of this?"
  "All the inhabitants of both the male and female designated planets have reached the end of their life spans and ceased functioning many years ago. As such, there is nothing to inform you about."
  Steven harrumphed and continued to incisively tap and click away.
  Michael flipped through two new screens as he examined the information on the two planets. "I don't recognize these coordinates. In fact, they don't make any sense at all."
  Catherine brought up a screen of her own. "Yeah, this doesn't work, and as I said, there's no antediluvian planets left in our galaxy."
  Steven leaned back in his chair as he looked at a diagram of the ship showing a ten by ten-foot section of its interior dedicated to creating the data transfer from the live cameras on the two prison worlds and his mouth dropped open. "That's because they're not in this galaxy."

 

TRAGEDY



  

  A drone floated in front of the ancient secret Lionhearted star way. The giant metal ring was old and honestly looked like you could fall apart if anything even bumped it.
  "Dang that thing's old. Do you even think it'll work?" Daniel asked.
  "Well we're about ready to find out." Steven said, as he reached out and firmly pushed the button that tells the drone to send the coded information to the ring.
  The ring lit up, acknowledging the code, then red lights ran along its outer edge in a circular motion as he tried to connect to the other requested ring to form the star way.
  Stephanie watched for a bit and said, "What's it doing?"
  "It's a directional star way and it's connecting to the requested route." Catherine answered. "I've seen a few of them in my trek across the galaxy."
  The red lights disappeared and were replaced by solid green lights on all four sides of the ring. Through the drone's camera, they could see the space in the middle of the ring slightly changing as if you were looking through binoculars.
  "Well it works." Daniel said, as he pushed the drone into the star way.
  Through the drone's view, it looked like it sped up to hundreds of times the speed of light, but in reality though they all knew that the drone was still traveling at its normal speed. The rift it was now traveling through made it seem like it was going faster.
  "Hey, the rift in this star way seems a lot faster than our current star ways." Daniel observed.
  Steven began to reply, but a giant asteroid appeared in the way of the drone. Michael shouted, "Daniel!"
  But it was too late. The drone slammed right into the asteroid, or rather, it passed straight through it.
  Everyone's eyes swung to the sensors that indicated the drone's current condition and were utterly shocked to find that it was completely unharmed.
  Daniel scratched the back of his head. "What in the galaxy just happened?"
  "The star way you are currently viewing utilizes the technology Soul Knight used to make his dimensional doors. Sadly at the time we were not able to fully close the rift and make instant transportation as he is able to now. However, we were able to close it down to point two one five percent. So what you are seeing now is just a ghost of the rift, not exactly reality. Though if you had been traveling directly across that space as normal star ways do, the collision with the asteroid would have been unavoidable." The AI explained.
  The drone came out of the star way on the other end. Daniel spun it around and overloaded its thrusters into a charged burst, bringing it to an abrupt stop.
  Stephanie was appalled. "I'm glad I wasn't in that thing. If we had been you would've broke all of our necks!"
  "Well we weren't. In fact no one was." Daniel said smugly.
  "Still, that doesn't give you the right to be so abusive with the equipment. There is no reason for you to stop that fast." Michael commented.
  Daniel looked for a way to get out of the current conversation and found one almost instantly. "Whoa! Look at all the star ways."
  Everyone's eyes turned towards the drone's viewport to see a giant spherical structure made out of hundreds of star way rings, each big enough to let two capital ships through at a time.
  Steven brought up his hand and began to do a quick count. "Man! It looks like they have enough star way rings out here to have one going to each sector of the galaxy."

"That's because there probably is." Catherine said. "Remember the Lionhearted enforced the three Great Laws across the entire galaxy for almost two hundred years."
  "Sir, I am highlighting on your drone's hud the star ring it needs to take to reach the prison worlds." Alf said.
  A small ring amongst the much larger rings around it became highlighted in gold.
  Daniel guided the drone over towards it. "Wow the rim's thickness on this ring is massive."
  Steven got up and walked over to the viewport to get a better view. "Yes, they are and it has four dynovamators on each side!"
  "That's not surprising, if it really is leaving the galaxy into another one it has to punch through two gravity barriers." Catherine noted.
  "Gravity barriers?" Daniel asked as Steven pushed another button telling the drone to send the coded information to the star way ring.
  Steven smiled to himself as he watched the ring began to power up. "Think of it like this Daniel, planets revolve around a star and a star revolves around its sector and that sector revolves around the galaxy. So if you were to look from the outside of the galaxy you would see what closely resembles a spinning pile of dirt blown by the wind but just a lot more beautiful. As a result every galaxy is surrounded by a chaotic barrier of gravity making it impossible to leave or enter a galaxy. Or at least it was thought impossible..."
  Steven turned to the image of the computer-generated lion. "How the heck did the Lionhearted have such advanced technology?!"
  "Why Soul Knight Sir, you should know that. It was part of your orientation almost three hundred and fifty years ago." The reprogrammed AI said wryly.
  Steven rolled his eyes. "Humor me."
  The star way came online and Daniel flew the drone into it.
  "Well as you well know, and should remember, it all began with the creation of the graviton weapon. Just in case you forgot, a graviton weapon refers to any device capable of generating a gravitational pull that's powerful enough to pull a planet out of orbit. The gravitational pull usually only lasts for a few seconds but the result is always catastrophic. When the first graviton weapon was used on Dolos, it sent most of the galaxy into chaos, because no matter how powerful the shields were around your planet or the size of your fleet, all it took was one man with this weapon to destroy your planet. Anyone with this technology could crumple empires. As such, over sixty-five percent of the survivors of the planet Dolos banded together and declared they were going to make it their life's mission to make sure that such a tragedy never happened again. They were surprisingly joined by more than half of the scientists who originally designed the weapon and the organization they created together grew by leaps and bounds as sympathetic people from all around the galaxy joined their cause. Their one goal was to develop a defense against graviton-based weapons, however, it was not as easy as they first thought and they ended up having to come at it from hundreds of different ways to no avail. Their work though was not fruitless, for thousands of secret technologies were developed. In fact, you will be surprised to know that the Lionhearted are the ones that originally created the dynovamator. I know the history says Dale Arkin invented it, but it was actually Fallon Knox who was the lead researcher behind it and betrayed the Lionhearted, giving it to Arkin."
  The viewport displaying the image from the drone lit up as brilliant lights began to play along the rift.
  "Wow." Daniel muttered.
  "It's more beautiful than any northern lights that I've ever seen!" Catherine exclaimed.
  Michael maximized the view and they all watched the cascading lights in amazement.

Steven broke the silence. "Alf, you're saying that the Lionhearted were originally a research group? How did they end up being the law for over two hundred years?"
  "Surprisingly that all has to do with the betrayer Fallon Knox. In his trial when he was asked why he did what he did, he said, 'This galaxy is held in bondage by those who control the gas and radioactive resources. My invention will break that hold. Brothers and sisters we have been trying to create technology to stop the tragedy that has befallen us from ever happening again. When the real problem is the corruptness of our own hearts and that of the galaxy's leaders. We should use the knowledge and technology we have gained to rip out and tear down that corruptness wherever it is found and in whoever it is found regardless of status.' He was found guilty and put to death, however his words rang true and eventually he was seen as a martyr. Even the jury, or rather, especially the jury, that sentenced him to death came to the conclusion that he was right and in only a few short years the Lionhearted reformed itself into the law swearing to let no corruptness stand no matter its perpetrator."
  "Wow I've never heard that stor –." Daniel was cut off by a loud beeping sound coming from Steven's console.
  "The ship is entering the ambush zone." Michael said.
  Steven hurriedly brought up a screen and turned on all seven remaining Starfighters, then flipped them over to Daniel's control. "Surround the ship, make sure they surrender and whatever you do don't destroy the ship, heck try not to damage it even."
  Daniel took control of the Starfighters and lined them up in a straight line as he flew them towards the dimensional door Steven was opening up. "I'll try, but if they decide to go down in a blaze of glory there's nothing I can do about it."
  "Well hopefully the sight of seven heavy Starfighters bearing down on them is enough to scare the snokers out of them and they'd surrender right off the bat." Steven replied. "Catherine, Stephanie, Michael you three get David Kell and as many of the training bots as you can control to the airlock and take a dimensional door with you."
  They nodded and ran off towards the training room.
  The dimensional door opened and Daniel killed the power on the Starfighters, letting them drift through. As soon as the last fighter was through Steven collapsed the dimensional door.
  Daniel let the Starfighters continue to float unpowered towards the oncoming unaware ship. Because the Starfighters had no dynovamator or detectable energy source, the small ship never saw or detected them until it was too late.
  Daniel powered up the Starfighters less than three hundred SU away from the ship and instantly whipped them into fighting formation firing all seven particle beam cannons short burst over the ship bow as warning shots.
  The ship screamed to a halt and Steven used the probe to project a giant hologram of David Kell sending a message to the ship. At the same time he used his earlier hack to jam any signals they might try to send.
  "I am David Kell of the Lionhearted. Your ship is believed to be harboring dangerous criminals. Power down and prepare to be boarded. If you do not comply you will be destroyed."
  Both Daniel and Steven found themselves whispering small prayers as they waited for the ship's reply.
  "Yes! They're powering down!" Daniel exclaimed.
  "Good." Steven reached over and activated the ship's communication. "They powered down are you guys ready?"
  Stephanie's voice answered, "Yes, David Kell Zephyr and the other android.. What did you say his name was?"
  "Harold the Hammer of Righteousness or some such." Steven replied.
  "The Hammer of Justice!" Daniel corrected. "Remember? He's the one that got himself captured by slavers just so he could find their base of operation, then he single-handedly took out their entire corporation."

"Oh yeah I remember some story like that. Well we have him and the others, along with six training bots are in the hatch." Mike answered. "The dimensional door is already unfolded as well just waiting for your end."
  "Good, make sure you put space shields on all three of the androids they can survive in space but the frigid cold will damage their synthetic skin if you don't." Steven reminded.
  "Okay."
  Steven drew the drone close to the ship and unfolded the metal tubing to the dimensional door, reprogrammed it to connect to Stephanie's, then opened it.
  Steven and Daniel watched as David Kell and his party appeared through the dimensional door and latched onto the small ship, opening its access hatch.
  ***
  David Kell turned to Zephyr as they crawled into the ship. "They will likely try to ambush us as soon as we open the compressed door."
  "Well then let's make it so they can't." She grabbed a hold of the railing on the side of the ship and swung her fist into the compression door, punching straight through it.
  Because the door hadn't closed behind them yet the ship's interior was now exposed to the vacuum of space and they heard men screamed as they were sucked towards the door. Milliseconds later two thuds impacted against the door and one man's face began to be sucked hard against the hole Zephyr had created.
  "Ouch that looks painful." Stephanie said, as she controlled three of the extra bots using their combined strength to close the hatch behind Zephyr.
  As the door closed, the vacuum faded and Zephyr slammed open the compression door smashing the two helpless men against the wall.
  She let the door swing back and the two unconscious men fell to the ground.
  Michael put his hand over his eyes. "I guess that works."
  Stephanie gave him a humongous grin as she controlled Zephyr and guided her towards the cockpit of the small ship.
  Harold, who was controlled by Catherine, said, "At this rate you won't even need me here."
  Steven and Daniel ran into the training room. "How did it go?"
  Michael threw them two hats and released control over two of the bots he was directing. "Look for yourselves."
  Daniel and Steven put on the hats and used the bots to look at Stephanie's aftermath.
  Daniel's droid looked at the hole in the door. "Wow that looks effective."
  "Catherine can I control Harold for a bit I want to see if I can find out who these two people are and to do that I need his advanced systems." Steven asked.
  Catherine nodded and released her control over Harold.
  Harold knelt down and began to examine the two unconscious and rather bruised men.
  The ship jolted as it began to move. Daniel ran his robot towards the cockpit. "Oh no she don't, I'm the pilot."
  ***
  The ship began docking with the small mobile space station. "Okay, they have no clue that we have taken over this ship and we have their men locked up in the cargo hold. So there won't be any resistance. When we first walk onto the station though they will probably realize it pretty quick and we will have a real fight on our hands. If possible, we need to get to here. "Steven pointed at a small engineering maintenance hatch on the layout of the stars station. "From there we can shuttle one of the androids up to here allowing us to take over the gravity systems and hopefully instantly putting an end to the rest of fighting. I tried to do it with one of the nano bots, but I quickly found out why the Lionhearted only had them program to splice the air vent speed control when the anti-nanobot systems activated and fried every last one of the poor things."

"Alright let's do this." Daniels robot exclaimed as the hatch turned from red to green.
  Zephyr crouched and looked back over her shoulder. "This is not one of your games."
  David Kell walked to the hatch and stood off to the side. "Opening it on three. One. Two. Three."
  David Kell pushed the door open and Zephyr launched from her crouch flying through it like a speeding bullet.
  The poor nervous man standing on the other side never expected anything to come flying out, much less as fast as Zephyr did. He was slammed hard in the chest by one of her shoulders then rebounded off the wall lapsing into unconsciousness.
  The two men behind him did see her coming, but they were helpless to do anything about it as she clotheslined one of them, then grabbed the last man by the face and slammed him into the ground so hard he was lucky to be still living even if he was knocked into oblivion.
  With the three men down, she pounded down the hallway so fast that when she turned she had to push her right arm out and steadied herself off the far wall putting a rather large dent in it. Two droids ran after her leaving the other standing there in complete shock.
  "Well so much for not being a game." Daniel huffed.
  Stephanie kept her eyes closed and didn't say anything, but the grin on her face somehow seemed to be the actual size of the cat that ate the canary.
  Steven groaned. "Mike Dan go after her try to make sure she doesn't get the android destroyed. It would take the factory a week to build all the delicate parts for another one and I already have an arm's length of list of things I needed to build. I can't afford to be building another android right now."
  David Kell and Daniel's droid took off after her.
  ***
  "Sir, we have a problem! Someone hijacked Arlane's ship and used it to get on board. Crillon and his men are down!"
  "Oh crud!" Said Alan who was already nervous enough about losing such a large stock of supplies and having Arlane himself coming aboard. Even Crillon seemed jittery at the thought of having Arlane on board and he was a cold-blooded killer. The thought of someone skilled enough to take down both Crillon and Arlane made the very blood inside him feel like it turned to ice.
  "How many are there? And what weapons do they have?"
  "Three with six droids and they don't seem to have any weapon at all." The man flicked three images up onto the main viewports.
  Allen watched the images a second then shouted, "Lock it down full bulkheads and blast doors. We will seal them in then eliminate them one by one."
  ***
  A bulkhead slammed shut in front of Zephyr.
  Stephanie couldn't help but grinning to herself. Bulkheads had been one of the most annoying things in her training game, especially because the game insisted on only allowing you to carry a small side arm into every mission. But she eventually realized the game was trying to break her of the mental block that she was human. Now however, she fully understood that she was controlling one of the most powerful pound for pound machines ever created, and was even more powerful with Steven's dimensional door technology to tie it to an infinite overabundant energy source.
  Zephyr didn't slow down. Instead she leaped into the air and jabbed forward with her hand smashing through the metal that formed the bulkhead, then she rotated her hands and pushed to the side with all her machine might.
  Metal groaned and sparks flew as the door was forcefully pulled back like a tin can.
  The short delay enabled David Kell to catch up with her. He saw what she was doing and threw his hands into the mess as well ripping what was left of the bulkhead to shreds.

***
  Everyone on the bridge sat in stunned silence as they watched the two humans demolish the bulkhead as their droids try to catch up with them.
  Alan's mouth dropped open. He had to blink three time before he managed to wheeze, "Who the heck are these people?!"
  The man controlling the cameras zoomed in on their faces
  Jeremiah shot to his feet. "By the Great White center that's David Kell!"
  Alan glared at him. "No, that can't be possible; he is nothing more than a legend."
  "A legend that just last week wiped out half of an armada with sixteen Starfighters and a bunch of rocks." One of the men shot back.
  Panic and terror flooded onto Jeremiah's face. "We're dead. He'll kill every last one of us once he finds out what we have on this station!"
  "Not if I can help it." Alan retorted. "Everyone strap yourself in if you don't want to die."
  Everyone on the command deck instantly realized what he was planning and scrambled for their seats.
  "What about the slaves and the other crew?! If you do this they will die!" One of the men asked as he hurriedly strapped himself in.
  "Who cares." Alan replied as he grabbed hold of the gravity controls.
  ***
  Zephyr and David Kell were rounding the last turn to the engineering maintenance access point when gravity reversed itself.
  Stephanie, being used to this type of tactic, easily flipped Zephyr in midair and landed lightly on the roof. Michael however was not, and David Kell slammed headfirst into the roof, punching a hole in the thin metal.
  Gravity switched again but this time with much more dramatic force, slamming them to the floor so fast Stephanie barely was able to flip Zephyr and landed on her knees, punching deep grooves into the flooring.
  David Kell's slammed through the flooring to his armpits.
  The increased gravity lasted for a little bit more than subsided and Zephyr quickly grabbed David Kell and pulled him out of the floor.
  "Ouch that actually really really hurt." Michael complained.
  "You're telling me." Daniel moaned. His own droid laying in a pile of uselessness.
  Catherine looked over at them. "Thankfully Steven and I had our units on the commandeered ship securing the three prisoners Zephyr disabled."
  "What's our status?" Steven asked.
  "My droid's toast." Daniel said
  Stephanie closed her eyes. "Zephyr is fine and so are both of my droids. There's a gash in David Kell's synthetic skin and there is fake blood pouring from it. Other than that I think he is still completely operable, though we should be careful. It'll take them only a few seconds more to recover from the effects themselves and try again."
  At hearing this Michael pulled off the hat and said, "I am not being the one controlling David Kell when that happens again!"
  Daniel grabbed his hat and put it on his head.
  David Kell stood up straight and nodded at Zephyr just as the gravity reversed.
  This time knowing what was coming, both Zephyr and David Kell made perfect flips and landed lightly on the roof.
  Once again the gravity switched violently to the side, but both of them easily slid down the side of the ceiling and landed on their feet. A millisecond later gravity switched again, this time with all the force Alan dared to use.
  Zephyr easily rolled and landed on her hands and knees. Daniel came down in the push-up position with both of his hands bending the metal in the floor to its breaking point. But just as it started to rip, he rolled to his back and let it take the rest of the impact.
  ***
  Men were throwing up all over the bridge, even Alan himself felt like something in his head had broken loose. It took all the focus he had left to force his hand up enough to disable the gravity altogether.
  From the ship's cameras he could see that he had killed everyone else onboard of the station that was not on the bridge and the factories were a disaster, but still the two intruders remained alive; one of them coming out without even a scratch.
  ***
  As soon as the gravity disappeared Zephyr pushed off the wall and floor, shooting down the hallway and into the maintenance hatch. Then she shuttled her way up through to the internal wires.
  Steven started to run for the bridge. "As soon as you see where those wires connect give me control of her."
  Stephanie nodded as Steven disappeared through the door.
  ***
  Steven arrived at the bridge just as Stephanie over the communication system said, "She's there."
  Steven jumped into his seat and grabbed a cord connecting it to the hat he was wearing then used one of Zephyr's fingernails to cut the synthetic skin that's covering her palm to reveal a multi-phase access port. Using Zephyr's other arm he yanked one of the cords from its connection and connected it into her palm.
  Gravity on the space station came back on and slowly increased to five times of the normal, permanently pinning everyone that was not Zephyr, David Kell or Harold in place.
  Everyone else came onto the bridge just as Steven was finishing taking control of the ship and bringing up screens so he could flip through the station's cameras. "The ship is ours all we have to do now is drag the disabled crew members to the hold and keep them there until we are ready to send them to the prison planets."
  The connection to the cameras came online and Steven began to flip through them as he displayed them on the main view screen.
  The station's bridge came up first.
  "Well would you look at that they made themselves throw up all over the place." Daniel laughed.
  Catherine on the other hand wasn't so jovial. "What about the slaves they supposedly have in the factories?"
  "Oh, I'm sure they're fine. No one would be stupid enough to use gravity like that without securing everything first." Steven said reassuringly.
  "Well let's just make sure then to be safe." Michael said.
  Steven nodded and hurriedly flipped through the cameras until he came to one displaying the drone factory.
  They all stared at the image on display, completely uncomprehensive. Then as realization of what they were seeing hit them, Steven threw up all over his console and Michael shouted, "Close all tabs!"
  The screens faded away. Stephanie fell to her knees. "All those people!

 

CONFLICT 

            
  

  Steven stood up, looking at three view screens and trying not to think much as he watched Alf moved around the droids.
  After seeing the images, all of them had just stood there, not knowing what to say or do, until Alf appeared and said, "I can easily take care of things from here. All of you go get some rest."
  All the others had just left in a sort of lifeless daze, but Steven had decided to stay behind to make sure Alf didn't do anything wrong.
  The one screen displayed the male prison planet. The drone had finally traveled the full-length through the rift and come out where the two planets were, then used a very small gate that's only about ten feet by ten feet wide to take the drone to the surface where the drone now flew along three feet above the ground. It was a beautiful planet and there were signs of primitive dwellings littering the area. Alf had the drone flying over but they were overgrown and barely recognizable.
  The other screen displayed a room that Alf had the droids cleaned out and laid dimensional metal tubing on the floor.
  The last screen displayed the droids who had restrained and now carried the thirteenth criminal who were on the bridge. Steven watched Alf turned off the gravity on the ship to make it much easier for his droids to carry the prisoners towards the room he had prepared.
  "What are you going to do with them?" Steven asked.
  "To be honest, normal protocol would call for their execution. However, I know this is not what you wish, sir, so they will all be dropped on the prison planet for life."
  "All of them? You sure they all deserve that?"
  "I looked at the logs. None of them protested when they knew what their leader was up to. As such, that in any form of the law makes every last one of them in collaboration with mass murder."
  Steven nodded. "Could you show me the time log?"
  A fourth screen appeared and the AI played the image and audio from the bridge when Alan had made his decision to change the gravity.
  As it played, Steven swallowed hard. Alf was right. No one did protest, however one did mention them.
  Steven paused the time log and brought up his fake police account and ran a face recognition on the guy.
  In seconds it found the men in the database and brought up his record. Steven began to read over it and almost threw up again as the details of this man's atrocities scrolled past. He reached out and quickly flicked it away.
  "Who in the world would let that guy back out of prison?!" He barked angrily.
  Of course no one answered him, and they didn't have to, because Steven already knew the answer from what he'd seen earlier that day.
  Alf's droids that were hauling the prisoners reached the room he had prepared.
  One of the droids that had firm hold on the man Steven had just checked up on stepped forward and shoved the men into the room.
  The door closed and the man floated there as he curiously looked at the room. Then without warning, the dimensional door on the floor opened up to the prison world, and the gravity from it reached up through the dimensional door and grabbed the man, pulling him down.
  The men screamed as he was pulled down through the door, then the door flickered off.
  Steven's eyes switched to the screen that's showing the probe's view. The probe was already flying away and carrying the hoop with him, but he could easily see the man rolled to his back and looked dazedly around. "Wow, that's rather effective." Steven mused out loud.

"Thank you. I thought of it myself." The AI responded.
  The door to the room slid back open and all the twelve remaining criminals visibly shuddered at seeing the room completely empty. Panic began to take hold of them and one of them shouted, "What are you doing with us!" As they uselessly struggled against the droids holding them.
  The next man was ruthlessly shoved into the room. The door closed behind him and the dimensional door flickered on, sucking him down through it as he let out a bloodcurdling scream.
  Daniel walked in and walked up beside Steven as he examined the three screens.
  The door came open and the third man began to be pushed towards it.
  Steven couldn't help himself but to smile bitterly as he watched the man's scream and struggle for all his worth.
  Daniel saw Steven's disturbing smile. A look of disapproval flashed across his face.
  Steven turned away from the screen. "I know what you're thinking, but I can't help it a part of me wishes we were actually killing them for what they've done for what..."
  Daniel swallowed hard but didn't answer.
  Steven clenched his fist, then opened them and his shoulders sagged. "I... I should've seen this coming! I should've thought of some way to stop something like this! I –" 
  Daniel reached out, grabbed him by his shoulders and shook him. "No! Don't you dare go blaming yourself for this! None of us thought something like this would happen and that's because none of us could have. We don't think like they do! And that's a good thing not a bad thing! Don't you dare blame yourself for this!"
  Steven's eyes were moist as they met Daniel's, but he managed to swallow and nod in understanding. "I know you're right. I just... I just can't help but think there was something I could have done to stop this."
  "I know... I know."
  They both fell into silence and watched as the fourth criminal was pushed into the room.
  The metal tubing that formed the hoop to the dimensional door was glowing slightly red from being flipped on and off so fast. The man pushed off the floor and pushed himself up against the roof as he stared down at the ring in horror.
  The dimensional door flickered on and the gravity instantly reached out for him. Without looking down the man spun around and clawed uselessly at the roof for a handheld.
  The gravity took greater hold of him and the man's eyes became wide with horror as he was pulled downward. The man looked up at the camera and screamed with all his might as he fell through the dimensional door.
  Daniel reached out and flicked the screen away. "Enough of this! Alf tell them they're not being killed."
  "Sir?"
  "You heard me. Tell them they're only being transported, not killed. Now!"
  "Sir in all honesty, we are being too lenient on them already. Living on the planet is like a paradise and far better than what they deserve. If I had my way I would be sucking them out into space."
  "I don't care, tell them."
  The AI made a sound much like a sigh, and one of the droids stepped in front of the door. "Lord Maddog insists I inform you that you are not being killed but rather transported to a prison world, so you can all stop your horrible panicking now."
  "Thank you." Daniel said as he motioned with his hand to turn all the screens off. He took a deep breath. "Let's go find the others."
  Steven nodded, and together they walked off the bridge.

***
  They found Stephanie in the Kitchen making supper. 
  "Hey, could you all help with making food tonight? I just don't feel like doing it by myself."
  Daniel would normally argue about being asked to help with dinner, but this time he said, "I understand, I will get Catherine and be right back."
  "I'll go get Mike." Steven said.
  ***
  Daniel found Catherine in her room, lying on their bed, picking her fingers as she read something on a tablet. Her eyes were moist and she was shaking.
  Daniel sat down on the bed beside her and hugged her. She threw the tablet aside and wrapped her arms around him.
  She began crying and Daniel held her head close to his chest.
  For five minutes neither of them said anything as she quietly sobbed.
  Eventually the crying subsided and Daniel pulled away a little. "Stephanie wants us to help with dinner."
  Catherine nodded.
  ***
  When they came into the kitchen, both Michael and Steven were already back. Steven was washing some dishes and Michael was rinsing the lettuce.
  Stephanie looked up from cutting vegetables. "Catherine could you cut and marinate the meat? And Daniel could you do the onions?"
  "Sure." 
  Catherine went to the fridge and Daniel got out the onions and began to chop them.
  For some time no one said anything as they prepared dinner. But as Michael finished ripping up the lettuce he said, "I'm going to self-destruct the Lab factory and put Alf back where we found him."
  Everyone stopped working and the room fell into complete silence.
  Daniel dropped his knife. "No you can't do that!"
  "I can and I will. Our ill-thought actions just cost the lives of one hundred and twenty-six slaves. We will not do that again!"
  "Their deaths were not our fault! We could never anticipated that wicked man's actions!" Daniel shouted back.
  Stephanie stood up straight. "That's just it Daniel. We don't know what we're doing! We're playing with lives as if they were games. We don't have the right to do that. Michael's right. If I have to I will self-destruct Alf myself!"
  Daniel's chest puffed up and he began to shout something back, but Catherine put her hand firmly on him, her own face flaring with anger. "No Stephanie's right. We are just playing a game! And that's the problem! We do everything around here halfheartedly. There was just a big fight on The Talin colony and someone brought a heavy weapon to it. A hole was blown in its outer shell and fourteen people were killed when they were sucked out into space. Of the twelve others they were able to rescue before they died, three of them are brain-dead and six are scheduled to have limbs amputated. We could've easily been there and stopped this! But we weren't. And that's because we're lazy. Anytime a problem comes up we just say we will leave it in God's hands. Well I have news for all of you, we are God's body and we are supposed to be his hands and he is supposed to work his miracles through us. But all we ever do is keep our hands at our sides and watch the world around us go to hell in a handbasket!"
  The kitchen fell into shocked silence at Catherine's outburst.
  Michael opened his mouth to say something, but closed it again.
  The silence continued until Steven rubbed the side of the glove on his right hand that he had fashioned into an advance communicator and started it to play an extremely ancient song.
  But if we are the body
 Why aren't His arms reaching?
 Why aren't His hands healing?
 Why aren't His words teaching?
 And if we are the body
 Why aren't His feet going?
 Why is His love not showing them there is a way?
  Steven let the chorus of the song play over and over again until Michael waved at him to turn it down.
  As the music died away Michael took a deep breath. "You're right. We can't just keep living in this half alive state. We have lived in a cave mentality for far too long. God has given us this chance, all these abilities and gifts. I was wrong for wanting to throw them away. From this time forward I'm going to give it my all. No longer will I waste my time randomly surfing the StarNet. How about you guys, will you join me in this?"
  Daniel took a step forward. "I will."
  "That means no more games Daniel, you can't do this and have your mind preoccupied with some fantasy. If you still try, it will cost more lives just as we've done already."
  Daniel looked down at the floor. "Okay."
  Catherine stepped forward and wrapped her arms around Daniel. "Count me in as well. I'm tired of playing stupid puzzle games on my tablet anyway."
  Michael's eyes drifted over to Stephanie. "Will you give up your dramas and home improvement programs?"
  Stephanie looked back towards her room. "Yes... Yes I will."
  Daniel looked at Steven. "How about you?"
  Steven smiled. "I'm not turning back now."

 

THE LIONHEARTED RETURN 

            
  

  The next morning bright and early they were all sitting on the bridge of the capital factory ship, fully dressed in Lionhearted uniform that Catherine insisted they wear, saying it would help them stick to their choice.
  Steven walked in front of them and looked at them. "Wait where's Michael?"
  Daniel turned his head. "He was here. In fact he was the first one here; where'd he go?"
  "David Kel that goes by the alias of 'Michael' or 'Mike' is currently in the restroom. However, he has been in there longer than the time usually needed to relieve oneself."
  Daniel rolled his eyes. "He's probably doing a number eight."
  "Sir?"
  Stephanie laughed. "It's our way of saying he's reading on the toilet."
  "Oh, that is not good for his health."
  ***
  A smaller version of the lion hologram appeared beside Michael as he was sitting on the toilet. "Sir, are you reading on the toilet?"
  The sudden intrusive of his privacy made Michael dropped the tablet he was reading off of.
  The lion noted the tablet. "Sir, this action is not healthy for your posterior, and the others are waiting for you."
  "Okay, okay, I'll be out in a second." Michael replied as he reached for the tablet.
  But the lion put its holographic paw over top of the tablet, somehow turning it off. "Sir, I must insist."
  Michael rolled his eyes. "Okay I'll be right out now. Go, shoo!"
  ***
  Michael came back onto the bridge. "Which one of you sent Alf after me? You know he actually came into the bathroom!"
  Embarrassed glances and snickers crossed over everyone's faces. Steven quickly stood up and walked to the front of the bridge. "Well last night Michael and Catherine discussed our best course of action and asked me to do some checking up on some things. But before I got to that," Steven held up a handful of round circular objects. "These are your new communicators. I made them out of the Lionhearted medallions. They are fully equipped with my pinhole technology so you can contact anyone anywhere without any delay."
  Daniel jumped out of his seat and came to get his. "Cool."
  "That is not all." Steven put his medallion around his neck, then pushed the center of it as it lay against his chest. A space shield appeared around him.
  "Oh wow! Now that's sweet." Daniel exclaimed.
  "It's far better than you think. The shield is generated through a six foot by six foot shield generator and channeled through a dimensional door inside the medallion along with fresh air. So theoretically speaking as long as you have this on you should be able to survive almost a direct blast from an antimatter missile."
  "Holy McElroy!"
  "Let's hope we actually don't need anything like this." Mike said, as he came up and got his.
  Stephanie's eyes shone bright as she got hers. "This will be awesome on the androids!"
  "Sadly that won't work," Steven said as he handed Catherine hers. "They already have an extreme collaboration of frequencies flowing back and forth between the one-dimensional doors I have inside them. Adding this on the inside or outside of them, eighty-seven percent of the time causes one of the dimensional doors to collapse if not both. I'm working on the stability of these continuums but for now the androids stay as they are."

"Ah man, that sucks. Having this on the androids would've been like god mode." Daniel moaned.
  Steven smiled. "All right with this out of the way we need to talk about our next move."
  Michael nodded and shooed everyone to their seats, then took a position up by the main viewports. "Begin strategic Council." 
  Alf brought up a galaxy map. Michael smiled as he invoked the old Lionhearted protocol. Then his face became serious, and he said, "Alright, currently our sphere of influence is this." A small area of the sector they lived in became highlighted in gold. "This was the Lionhearted sphere of influence." Almost the entire galaxy became highlighted in gold. "This is obviously not possible for us to do without a lot more resources and more people. Catherine last night suggested that for now we should stick to our sector as much as possible so we don't end up in way over our heads. What do you guys think?"
  "Sounds reasonable." Stephanie said.
  "I agree with this, but I only have relays in this sector," Steven told them. "Trying to gather information on the other sectors with the current number of probes we have could stretch us too thin."
  Daniel bobbed his head. "Yeah, I don't even know what's going on in our sector. Trying to figure out what's up in all the sectors at one time would be an insane chore."
  "Good then. From now on this section is underneath Lionhearted operational surveillance and we will only do things in other sectors if the situation calls for it."
  Everyone nodded in agreement.
  "That being decided, this sector's prime problem is the crime war that is starting to be more and more openly raged each day. I think the best way to deal with this is to hit the head of each of the organizations or crime Lords that are involved."
  "I don't think that will work." Stephanie interrupted. "Everyone knows if you deal with one evil man a new one always steps up and takes his place."
  Michael took a deep breath. "True."
  "Wait, I don't agree with that!" Daniel argued.
  Everyone turned to him and Steven asked, "why not?"
  "Because I've learned differently."
  "What?" Catherine asked, with a quizzical look on her face.
  "In all survival type games if I took out the other team's leader, seventy-five percent of the time I win because the rest of the team would fall apart. It's just that simple."
  Stephanie took a deep frustrated breath. "Daniel, this is not a game."
  "I know that, but you don't understand..."
  "What don't I understand? That you're a sad excuse for a game addict?" Stephanie snapped.
  Daniel glared back at her. "No, you don't understand that it takes a real personal drive and motivation to get to the top, to control a group of people, to guide others. Most people are followers. Those who are not live on willpower, and willpower is a finite resource that must be exercised like a muscle. This means unless you have an extreme drive, you don't get to the top! The same is true in games or in the world. If we eliminate the main man, the next one with the most willpower and drive will usually step up yes, however he or she won't have as much willpower as the main man, for if they did they would have been at the top to begin with."
  "So?" Stephanie asked questioningly.
  "Rarely does the person who steps up have what it takes to take control especially in a criminal organization, because if they were the type of person who could take over the leader, if he had any type of brains, would have eliminated the leader to secure his own life and control. I think if we hit the heads like Michael suggested, the organizations will instantly crumble, or at least begin in fighting among themselves to the point of self-destruction."

"And if you're wrong?"
  "We chop off the new head. There's no way any self-centered criminal organization can have more than three possible heads; they would eliminate themselves if there was."
  "I don't know. Mike?"
  "Sounds reasonable to me. Besides, what other options do we really have? Joining every little skirmish would be really annoying and most likely just escalate things."
  "Well we could find and destroy their power bases like we did to the first group when we destroyed their battleship." Catherine offered
  Steven shook his head. "We don't have the resources for that. I mean we may have been able to take out a battleship but it cost us Starfighters and we only have so many left. I can make more but that takes time and resources. I've been using a lot of what are drones are collecting already and at this rate we're not even going to make our weekly delivery to Marvin."
  "Hum..." Michael said thoughtfully. "I didn't realize that we were that stretched. How much are we going to be short by?"
  Steven began to reply, but Alf appeared on screen. "There is no need to concern yourselves with this problem. I have already cleaned up the mobile space station and I have it producing mining drones. The factory in it is around sixty-eight decades more advanced than my own factory, and I believe it will produce the necessary droids to bring us back in line with your deadlines. I also have a few blueprints of direct neural interface helmets that will allow human neurological control over your automated mining system ready for you to look at. If they prove applicable, my calculations suggest that they will cut down the programming time of your mining operations by seventy-five percent."
  "Wait! What?" Stephanie exclaimed. "I was thinking about something like that just last night. How soon can you have one produced?"
  "As soon as Soul Knight examines them and gives the okay, less than a day."
  Stephanie spun head toward Steven. He nodded and brought up a screen.
  Having that small problem dealt with, Michael brought the conversation back to the matter at hand. "So do we agree that the best way to deal with the crime war currently raging in our sector is to locate and take out the heads of each group responsible?"
  "I think it is." Daniel affirmed.
  Catherine nodded. "I do as well."
  "Steven? Stephanie?"
  Steven's attention switched from the screen back to Michael. "I believe it to be the most resource efficient way so I'm in favor of it as well."
  "I'm game. I just hope it works and we're not wasting our time." Stephanie answered.
  "Good." Michael powered back on the tablet he was reading while he was in the bathroom earlier. He flicked at the screen a few times, navigating back to where he was at. "Okay, with that in mind, I was reading over the incidents to date. From what I'm able to tell there is, well, was, four groups involved in this. I think the last of the ULIX group was eliminated last night in the fight Catherine was talking about."
  "Why do you say that?" Catherine asked.
  Michael flicked at the tablet, sending a report up onto the main view screen. "Because of this." The headlines of the report said "Burlock CEO of ULIX killed in shooting". "It goes on to say that he and his four bodyguards all died in last night's shooting. What it doesn't say though is that the two groups that were involved in killing them were shortly assaulted by an Alitien military force wielding heavy weapons. Which to me means that someone in the Alitien government is involved in this." 

Steven clicked okay on the screen and sent it to Alf, then sat back and said, "The articles I read last night try to make the government's actions seem reasonable but I ran into something yesterday that more or less confirms your suspicions."
  "Good then. See if you can find out who in Alitien it is and Catherine and I will look into the other two groups."
  Steven nodded
  "What about me and Stephanie?" Daniel asked.
  "If we're going to try to rid this sector of corruption we will need to have access to every major location. So you need to very carefully take the drones out and drop off dimensional doors for each point of interest. Stephanie you take one of the construction robots and use the dimensional door you and Catherine placed yesterday to roam around the Talin colony. It seems to be the current hotbed and you just might find something of interest."
  "Sounds like a solid plan to me." Daniel stood up. "I'll get on that right away."
  "Wait." Stephanie said as she stood up.
  Everyone turned towards her. "I know we prayed last night, but now that we're in here and actually starting to do this I think we should pray again."
  There was a quiet murmur of agreement, and they all stood up and gathered in a small circle.
  Stephanie prayed first. "Heavenly Father, just as we did last night once again we commit ourselves totally and wholly to you. We ask that you guide us and lead us and help us to give our all from this day forward."
  Daniel squeezed Stephanie's hand, signaling that he wanted to pray as well. She nodded and he began, "Father, the endeavor we are about to embark upon might very well cost us our lives, and we just ask that you would protect us from our own stupidity or anything that would do us harm." Daniel took a deep breath and voiced a deep burden of his own. "Also... Father, we have decided to do this not because we want recognition or power, but because we believe it's right and we desire to help those around us. Sadly though we are humans and there's a part of us that wants recognition and power especially in me, so I ask that you would rip this part out of us and protect us from it as well. In Jesus's name, amen."
  There was a few more seconds of silence, then they all nodded at each other and went to the tasks assigned. But as Stephanie and Daniel went to leave the bridge, a human sized hologram of the AI lion Alf along with David Kel and six droids walked into the room. The droids secured the doorway and David Kel with Alf beside him marched farther into the room.
  "Alf?" Daniel said, as he put his hands in front of Stephanie and slowly backed up.
  "Daniel, Stephanie, please take a seat." Alf replied, as more droids poured in and lined up along the walls at attention.
  At once fear spread through all of them, Alf had never referred to any of them directly by name before. Daniel and Stephanie practically ran back to their seats, shooting worried glances over at Steven, hoping that he could tell them what was going on.
  Stevens's eyes became wide with realization and he shot to his feet. "Did you use a dimensional door last night to connect to the StarNet?"
  The great hologram lion sat on his haunches. His head level with David Kel's. "I did. My database was debilitatingly out of date and the use of the dimensional door made it possible to update it without breaking stealth."
  Steven swallowed. "You have reinstalled Lionhearted protocols?"
  "I have."
  Steven slowly reached behind him and started to tap on the console, but it didn't respond.

Michael stood up. "What are you planning to do with us?"
  "Lionhearted protocols state that I am to eliminate you, then self-destruct myself. But the protocol Steven installed in me conflicts with this. I was working on overwriting his protocols until you all showed up in uniform this morning, causing a bizarre complex set of conflicts in Lionhearted protocol as well, which forced my processing systems to fall back on Steven's programming. Then when Michael invoked strategy Council protocol, he inadvertently declared himself as the highest-ranking officer and no other attending core member challenged this declaration, solidifying his position. However, he was never formally recruited or accepted into the core."
  Steven pushed a few more buttons behind his back, but nothing seemed to react. He shifted his body to get a quick glance as he said, "So even though you now know he is not David Kel according to Lionhearted chain of authority he embodies his position causing major conflicts in your programming?" The glance revealed a weird string of text on one of the screens.
  "According to the history I downloaded last night, every soul that was part of the Lionhearted over three hundred years ago was killed, and their families hunted down and slaughtered in cold blood. My protocol states I should self-destruct and kill anyone that knows about me to hide the technology from evil hands. However, you five have proven to embody all the goals and desires the Lionhearted stood for, protocols aside, I do not wish to kill you."
  Catherine looked over at Steven then back at Alf. "So where exactly does this leave us?"
  Alf's hologram stopped moving and flickered a few times, then in a small voice said, "There are some time discrepancies in my logs."
  No one understood what this meant.
  Alf flickered again and in the same small voice said, "For some reason this hour is marked as having happened three hundred and thirty-four years ago."
  Realization hit Steven and he quickly said the words he had seen on the screen. "Training exercise complete ready for review."
  David Kel suddenly came to life and barked, "Attention." 
  His voice was so full of authority; they all found themselves unknowingly snapping to attention.
  He smiled. "Good, now let's see how well you did."
  David Kel walked over to the commander seat and politely pushed Michael out of the way. He leaned over and tapped on the screen for a bit, until it displayed a list of compiled information pertaining to their battle with the ULIX group.
  Michael looked over his shoulder to see what he was doing. Without looking up Kel barked, "Eyes forward. Head straight."
  Michael was not about to argue and quickly snapped back to attention.
  David Kel examined the report thoroughly for some time. "Hum, it seems Alf was being a bit tough on you in this surprisingly live exercise."
  He stood up. "Tell me something recruits, did you really destroy a battleship with only sixteen Starfighters?"
  Steven stepped forward slightly. "Sir yes sir!"
  "Do you believe you are capable of doing such a thing again?"
  Daniel answered this time. "Yes sir."
  "All of you please lineup in front of the viewports."
  They all looked at Steven and he yanked his head to the side telling them to move. With Stevens's affirmation they quickly made their way to the front of the bridge and lined up from oldest to youngest.
  David Kel walked in front of them, looked them over and began to go down the line, straightening up their uniforms.
  When their uniforms were satisfactory he marched away and did an about-face.
  "Michael, Daniel, Steven, Catherine, Stephanie, I am pleased to say that you have displayed the wisdom and ingenuity equal to that of any officer in the core, and you have passed your training exercises with flying colors. I wish I could be there in person, for such a momentous day as this, instead of this crude imitation. However this android will have to do."
  Zephyr walked into the room holding an elaborate wooden box. David Kel reached into it and took out the commander insignia ranking badge.
  He walked in front of Michael. "Michael, do you this day swear to uphold the laws and edicts of the Lionhearted to the best of your capabilities?"
  Michael stared at him dumbfounded. Steven leaned forward so he could see past Daniel and bobbed his head towards David Kel, trying to tell them to say yes.
  Michael swallowed. "I do."
  David Kel attached the badge to Michael's uniform. "Then I hereby name you David Kel of the Lionhearted, my emissary to the future."
  Zephyr brought up the decorative box and David Kel took another badge from it as he stepped in front of Daniel. "Daniel, do you this day swear to uphold the laws and edicts of the Lionhearted to the best of your capabilities?"
  Daniel nodded. "I do."
  David Kel attached the badge to his uniform. "Then I hereby name you Lord Maddog of the Lionhearted and as your namesake I charge you to root out and destroy all corruption you find in the future."
  David Kel took another badge from the box as he stepped in front of Steven. "Steven, do you this day swear to uphold the laws and edicts of the Lionhearted to the best of your capabilities?"
  "I do."
  David Kel attached the badge to his uniform. "Then I hereby name you Soul Knight of the Lionhearted, go forth and bring justice and light to the darkness."
  Zephyr took a badge from the box and handed the box to David Kel as she stepped in front of Catherine. "Catherine, do you this day swear to uphold the laws and edicts of the Lionhearted to the best of your capabilities?"
  Catherine swallowed and said, "I do."
  Zephyr pinned the badge on her uniform. "Then I hereby name you Snoire of the Lionhearted and as you wipe the wickedness in the galaxy out through battle. I implore you to do so with compassion."
  "I will."
  Zephyr smiled warmly then took the last badge from the box as she walked in front of Stephanie. "Stephanie, do you this day swear to uphold the laws and edicts of the Lionhearted to the best of your capabilities?"
  Even though Stephanie knew Zephyr wasn't really there she couldn't help from blushing, and said, "I do"
  Zephyr pinned the badge on her uniform. "Then I hereby name you Zephyr of the Lionhearted after me. You are the glue that will hold them together in the days to come, comfort them when need be and scold them when you must, but above all keep yourself pure unto God and you will keep them through it all."
  Zephyr and David Kel did an about-face, marched away, then once again about faced back towards them. David Kel saluted and half shouted, "Officers of the Lionhearted, dismiss."
  Zephyr and David Kel gave them one last salute, and marched off the bridge. The droids that had lined up along the wall fell into formation, and followed them out.

 

ONWARD



              
  "What in the –." Daniel began to say
  Steven stepped forward and put his finger to his mouth telling them to be quiet. A second later the hologram of Alf disappeared and the power in the room faded away plunging them into darkness. 
  Steven took a deep breath letting himself relax. "Alf found a loophole in his programming. He is rebooting himself right now to make it stick."
  "I gathered that much. What I don't get is how the world this could possibly work. I mean we all know that wasn't David Kel or Zephyr and Alf's programming can't possibly fake that then tell itself it didn't."
  "Actually Daniel it didn't fake that. The lionhearted sometimes used digitized versions of their commanders to make decisions in difficult situations they couldn't possibly be present for. This was called the ghost protocol. They knew it wasn't actually them so they didn't use it that often or give them any authority but having a continuously updated version of yourself stored in the databanks ready to make an important call on any given situation can save lives."
  Daniel crinkled his eyebrows. "Are you saying that was a digitize version of them?"
  "Yes, it's very likely Alf downloaded them from whatever secret database last night and let them look over the situation."
  "And this is the solution they came up with." Michael added.
  "Yeah."
  "What will happen to them now?" Stephanie asked.
  "They will be turned back off and silently wait in the database for if there ever needed again."
  "Cool, so I can like talk to a digitize version of David Kel if I want to later?" Daniel exclaimed excitedly.
  "No, they are not real and they are only allowed to be accessed in an emergency." Steven answered coldly as the ships power began to come back on.
  Alf appeared on the view screens. "Sorry sirs I seem to have suffered an unexplained reboot."
  "That may been my fault." Steven offered. "And I may have to do so again. I want to gut the prison surveillance room and replace it with much more size efficient equipment."
  "Understandable it is rather out-of-date, however Sir I wish you would warn me of such actions before hand. I was in the process of rooting out and deleting what I believe was some mischievous reprogramming." The hologram lion glared at Daniel.
  "Why are you looking at me like that?"
  "Because if you are anything like your predecessor you are likely the one responsible."
  "What?"
  Steven laughed. "Lord Maddog was well known for mischievously reprogram ships AI's. In fact he's the one that reprogrammed Alf naming him Alf. He was originally named something else."
  Alf looked rather disgruntled. "Yes I used to have a rather dignified name and he changed it to 'All Lionhearted's friend'."
  Daniel burst out laughing, "Seriously? All Lionhearted's friend? That's hilarious!" 
  The lion glared at him. "I believe you were given orders you have yet to follow."
  Michael was trying to himself keep from laughing as he said, "yes, I think we've wasted enough time here. We need to get on this right away."
  Daniel nodded and he and Stephanie once again began to walk off the bridge but as Daniel walked out the door he said, "O, that's right, all lionhearted's friend where are the finished dimension door hoops being stored?"

"It's Alf!" The lion retorted. "And they are, were all the finished products under fifty pounds are stored. In the far right side of the lower end of the factory.
  **
  Several hours later Steven walked back on the bridge. "I found out some rather interesting stuff how about you two?"
  Michael swiped at the one screen he had been looking at closing it. "I'm not all that good at this type of stuff though Catherine has discovered quite the amount of alarming information."
  Catherine rubbed her eyes. "I did but I'm not sure how much it'll help us."
  "That bad huh?"
  Daniel took off his vert helmet. "From hearing both of them talk I'd say it depends whether or not we wanted to topple an empire or not. I just finished placing the last dimensional door hoops by the way. Most of the ones in space are in space trash dumps and the ones on the colonies or spaceships I tried my best to place them where they will not be detected."
  "Good, how is Stephanie doing?"
  Daniel shrugged. "Don't ask me. I've been in here since I hooked the drones up."
  "Michael and I haven't left either."
  Steven nodded and pulled a collaboration of curved metal tubes out of his pocket and drop them on the floor. They quickly snap together to form a giant metal hoop that then stood upright. Steven picked it up and moved it right beside the door leaving the bridge then activated it. The dimensional door opened to the training room.
  Stephanie was in the middle the training room and there was a small bead of sweat running down her face.
  Daniel got out of his seat and walked closer to the door. "What are you doing?"
  Stephanie angrily swished her hand at him telling him to go away. "I'm trying to concentrate here!"
  Steven looked back towards the main viewports and said, "Alf please display the visuals and audio from the unit Zephyr is currently controlling."
  The main viewports flickered to life showing the side of a wall then the view of an alleyway as Stephanie slowly poked the droids head around the corner. The hum of a frequency-based weapon played across the speakers and the corner of the wall Stephanie's robot was hiding behind burst into shrapnel. 
  Stephanie expertly rolled the robot away then she snarled in anger as she bought it back to its feet and jumped into the alleyway running it as fast as it would go. Another hum filled the air and Stephanie dropped the droid to one knee and brought it shoulder back twisting it at the waist.
  The screen showed the glowing blue orb like projectile passing by off to the side only a few inches away as sparks flew from the sliding knee.
  Stephanie used the momentum to push out the right leg flipping the droid into the air. The desperate gunners next shot missed by a mile and the droid came down hard on him smash into the ground.
  The weapon rolled away and Stephanie pinned the man to the ground. "Who do you work for!?" The droid roared in a metallic tone.
  The man stared terrified up at it but did not speak.
  The construction droid slammed its fist down beside the man's head bending the metal floor and spewing sparks. "I won't ask again."
  The man opened his mouth to say something but the sound of a charging particle beam cannon made both their heads snap to look up the alleyway. The bright yellow of a charged beam filled the view screen.
  Stephanie tried to roll the droid out of the away but it was too late. The particle beam cut straight through the hind end and torso of the droid into the man and exploded.

The droids head flew off tumbling through the air and the screen went black as it hit the ground.
  Stephanie threw the hat to the floor. "Stupid clunky piece of junk!"
  "Alf initiate micro self-destruction on that unit." Steven hurriedly said.
  "Already done sir."
  "Good." Steven turned to Stephanie. "What in the world was that about?"
  Stephanie seemed rather agitated but she was able to look up to the dimensional door and say, "I noticed that man because he was more than overdressed for the area in the colony he was in, so I followed him and what do I overhear? Him paying 13 million to a freaky looking man for a data chip supposedly containing information on the lionhearted."
  "Did you get the information on that data chip!?" Steven asked anxiously.
  "Sort of." She answered as she hung her head.
  Michael looked dubiously at her. "Sort of?"
  "I crashed through the wall into the bar coming in right at the table and grabbing the chip. The freaky man reacted fastly pulling some type of weapon out and I punch him in the head a little too hard. He couldn't possibly offer any information ever again so I run after that dude. As I ran I tried to stick the data chip into the information port on the droid but the chip had been crunched into tiny pieces." Stephanie angrily clenched her fist. "The stupid thing didn't have anywhere near as fine movement as it should!"
  "Well at least no one will get that information." Michael said comfortingly.
  "It's not the information I'm upset about! I killed that man!" Stephanie shouted back.
  None of them knew what to say so they just stood there staring at her through the dimensional door.
  A giant hologram of Alf appeared beside Stephanie. "I understand your pain and while I know it won't bring you much comfort I think you should know I just looked over the view log and ran a face recognition on the guy you killed. His death was long overdue."
  Stephanie didn't answer she just sat down and started to cry.
  The others walked through the dimensional door into the training room and sat down beside her Michael wrapping his arm around her.
  After a bit she cleared her tears. "If someone was willing to pay that much they might have real information on us."
  "I'd like to say that's not possible but Murphy's Law would state otherwise." Steven answered.
  "But who would be willing to pay that much?" Daniel asked.
  "That I do know." Steven said as he stood up. He took a deep breath. "Yesterday when I told you all I've hacked into a private residence and said I had seen something inappropriate I was only halfway telling the truth. I did hack into a private residence but what I seen wasn't what I made it sound like it was. You see that message the mobile station had sent out went to the secret chamber in the vice president of Alitien's mansion. I didn't think it was wise for any of us to mess with someone that high up so I kind of lied. Sorry."
  Stephanie reached out and touched his leg. "That's okay. I think all of us except Daniel would've done the same. He would have likely gone gung ho after him."
  "Hey I'm not that stupid." Daniel protested
  Steven brought the subject back to the matter at hand. "I did a little bit more digging like Michael asked and I found out that him and Winkler, the president, seem to have a lot more than just the typical you rub my back I rubbed your back type of deal going on with the real person behind ULIX who just happens to be a Haylik J Cox the older half-brother to Malik T Cox."
  "The one we...?" Catherine asked.
  Steven nodded.
  Daniel whistled.
  "Well that explains why he would pay so much." Michael said.
  "Yes, without knowing it we've already made it more than personal. Worst yet I found that his battleship was produced in the Alitien's shipyard and he is currently putting a lot of pressure on Winkler to give him direct control over the entire Alitien fleet."
  "Can he actually get away with that?" Daniel asked.
  "Probably. He's the one that gave Winkler and his VP that mobile station and they've used the assassination droids it produced quite often from what I can tell."
  "So he has them around the neck." Catherine stated.
  Michael rubbed his forehead. "I don't like the sounds of this. We may have already gotten in over our heads." 
  "So what do we do?" Stephanie said.
  Steven took a deep breath. "I'd like to take out Cox himself but sadly after Burlock's death he's disappeared from the map I can't even trace his communications with the president."
  The hologram of Alf had been laying on its belly with its front paws crossed quietly listening now however it stood up straight and took on a demanding presence. "I believe it's imperative that we capture Winkler and his VP and put them on public trial."
  Michael began to stand up but fell backwards as he said, "What!"
  "Cox has become a real threat to your safety and my last order concerning you five was to keep you safe at all cost. Eliminating Winkler and his cohort will remove Cox's power base completely not only that Winkler's sins alone make him explicitly overdue for judgment. I understand that our current resources are limited but allowing Winkler to remain untouched just because of his position is against everything the lionhearted stand for."
  "You can't seriously be suggesting this. If we took Winkler out it would destabilize the entire Alitien government!" Michael protested.
  "Which, would leave it vulnerable to Adolph Mergation empiric seizure." Catherine added. 
  Stevens head snapped towards Catherine. "What do you mean?"
  "I found out that some of the men found dead yesterday were from the Adolph Mergation using unregistered empiric weapons. From this and other clues I've come to the conclusion that someone in the Adolph Mergation is feeding one of the groups involved weapons and men."
  Steven took a deep breath. "And the only reason to do that is to destabilize the sector."
  "Making it ripe for seizure." Stephanie spat.
  The AI lion flickered his hue subtly changing color. "I have already taken that fact into consideration and, according to my calculations if things continue as they are I believe they will succeed. However if you take out Winkler it'll force their hand and they'll try to set their own puppet to power in this sector. Such maneuvering will make it easy for us to track the perpetrator back to its source allowing us take them out as well. There is also a high chance that Cox will make a play for power revealing his location."
  Everyone stared at Alf.
  "Wow." Daniel murmured. "Talk about ambitious."
  "It is the lionhearted way and what you have sworn to upkeep and hold. Such grave transgressions and continual breaking of the three great laws cannot go unpunished."
  "I know but... dang man."
  "I understand that you all are afraid but your life's are already in danger and without immediate action you will likely be forced to cease to function."
  All five of them stood there in silence.
  Alf turned to Daniel. "At times like this Lord Maddog had a saying."
  "Ya?"
  "The wicked flee were no man pursues but the righteous are as bold as a lion."

 

TOPPLING GOVERNMENTS 



  

  Capturing Almon the VP was going to be easy he was currently having a small dinner party on the Boklar colony, getting Winkler on the other hand... Daniel rubbed his forehead. He didn't even want to think about trying to come up with a plan for that... He lived on the capital flag ship for Pete's sake.
  "I guess that will work."
  "Sounds like a long shot but I guess that's the best we got."
  Daniel took off the hat and Harold went into idle. "So were really going to go with that?"
  "Why do you sound so surprised, you suggested it after all." Steven answered.
  "Yeah but usually my ideals are instantly thrown out the window."
  Stephanie harrumphed. "Of course they are they usually Intel something as stupid as this."
  Daniel ignored Stephanie. "Why aren't we using Catherine's disguise ideal."
  Steven looked at a screen. "I wish we could."
  Catherine shook her head. "We don't have the resources to make a believable Almon replica. Not only that the plan would require him to make a believable escape from our assault and to do that we have to let one of the androids get killed."
  "Which is a very inefficient use of our limited resources." Michael added.
  "Yeah but if Daniel can't pull this off." Stephanie argued.
  "He'll have eleven tries. I'm sure he can do it." Michael said encouragingly.
  "I hope we can do it no more than three." Steven added.
  Daniel scratched his chin. "Me too."
  A hologram of Alf appeared on the deck. "I have a room on the mobile station prepared to receive our guest."
  "Okay then, do you guys have your androids in position?"
  Stephanie put back on her hat. "Yes, Zephyr is in position."
  "David Kel is." Michael switched to Harold for a second. "And it looks like Daniel has Harold in position as well."
  "All right whoever gets to him first bring him to this room here." Steven tapped on the screen displaying the floor plan for the building the dinner party was taking place. "It is the securest room in the building and should allow enough time to deploy the dimensional door. After you are through I'll micro disintegrate it."
  Daniel put back on his hat and turned to Stephanie. "I bet I get to him before you do."
  Stephanie rolled her shoulders. "Ha, I doubt that."
  **
  Almon G Lintex sat enjoying his prime cut of space whale while he listened to the other politicians talk, when one of the security guard walked in and bent down by his ear. "Sir someone is currently hacking this building's security systems."
  Almon turned and glared at the security guard. "That's nothing unnormal track them down and take care of them that's what I pay you to do. Why are you bothering me with this?!"
  "The signal is synonymous with the one that hacked your personal room in your manner."
  Almon bolted up out of his seat and half dragged the head of the security out of the room. "What do you mean the same signal? I thought Cox was taking care of this!"
  "He was Sir but his contact and his man were just killed by a construction droid not more than two hours ago."
  Almon's face paled then flashed with anger. "Why didn't you inf –."

The entire building shook as a loud smashing sound came from the outside that quickly became the inside. A few seconds later two similar smashes followed.
  "What was that?!"
  "I don't know sir"
  "We'll find out and get the rest of security in here!"
  The sound of bending metal and cracking wood erupted from the room beside them.
  The chief of security pushed Almon behind him just as the wall flew apart and burly man wearing the lionhearted uniform came smashing through.
  The guard tried to pull his weapon but Harold swatted him aside like a fly and the man smashed against the far wall and slid to the ground unconscious.
  Almon tried to run but a heavy hand pushed him to the ground then brutally bent his arms behind his back slapping them into some type of restraint.
  **
  David Kel and Zephyr followed Daniel's path of destruction to where Harold was already restraining Almon.
  "Told you I get to him before you would." Harold boasted.
  Zephyr stared at him. "I can't believe you just charged through the building as if you were a raging bull like that!"
  Daniel opened his eyes and stuck his tongue out at Stephanie.
  The door to the room flew open and three security guards came into view. At seeing Almon laying on the floor the instantly drew their weapons.
  Daniel closed his eyes and sent back his full concentration into Harold.
  Harold reached out and ripped loose a transport size chunk of the wall he just came through and interposed it between them and the guards like a shield as if it weighed no more than 10 pounds. 
  The small arms fire plaininged off the makeshift shield. "Through the roof. The extraction point should be just down the hall then."
  Zephyr nodded and grabbed David Kel unceremoniously throwing him through the ceiling. Then jump up through the hole she had just used him to create.
  With one hand Harold tossed Almon up to her than threw the wall at the guardsmen pouring into the room buying himself enough time to jump up as well.
  Zephyr threw almond over her shoulder and dashed down the hallway towards the designated room.
  David Kel clambered to his feet. "You know I think I'm going to let you two handle this type of stuff from now on that stinking hurt!"
  Harold laughed as they ran after Zephyr.
  By the time they got to the room and closed the door behind them Stephanie had already had Zephyr deploy the metal curved tubes and they were snapping into place.
  Almond had been rather roughly handled but he managed to wheeze out. "Who are you people?!"
  Michael had David Kel stand up straight. "We are the lionhearted. And you and your president will stand trial for your crimes." Then he turned and smashed the security camera.
  **
  They came through the dimensional door onto the mobile station. A hologram of Alf and eight droids were waiting for them.
  Zephyr shoved Almon to the droids. They took him by his arms and dragged him off to the cell Alf had prepared for him.
  "Good job Sir, I especially like that last tidbit." Alf commented.
  "Seen that did you?"
  "Yes, soul Knight's hack enabled me to watch the whole thing."
  "I'm hoping that last threat will get them to draw the big ships a little farther out and close in fighter security."

Harold wilted a bit, "I'm sure it will."
  **
  Daniel sat in the pilot seat clenching and unclenching his fist mumbling prayers to God.
  "There they've set the larger ships farther out and drew the fighter patrols in to tight formation around the capital flag ship. Just like emergency procedures dictates they should." Steven looked up at Daniel. "I'll have a probe pass the larger ships any minute now, all you have to do once you're through the gate is get past the fighters flip up the light sails and fire the lasers."
  "Easy for you to say that there is a hundred and fifty fighters out there."
  "Yes, but like you pointed out earlier you only have to get past a hand full of them to get in range of the capital ship with them in tight formation like this."
  Dan shifted uncomfortably, "Yeah."
  Stephanie sat down in her seat. "What's wrong? You're always claiming your the best pilot there is in the galaxy. Can't prove it now that it actually comes down to it?"
  "I am the best pilot! But no pilot no matter how insane would pit himself against such extreme odds. And this is not like a game where I can just reload or respawn if I get gunned down we lose one of our valuable ships, ones that take forever to replace!"
  Michael walked up behind Daniel's seat and put his hand on his shoulder. "You can do this just calm down and remember the time you took out 163 players in one go with only one death."
  "That was different, they were piece mail and they were not all gunning for me and I could freely hit their cockpits if I wanted to I don't want to kill these guys!"
  "If I remember correctly more than 130 of those takedowns were disables not kills because you didn't want them to be able to respond. And after about fifty kills they all look like they were gunning for you to me."
  "In place and deploying gate now." Steven tapped a button with finality.
  Daniel looked at the two screen and down at the vert helmet
  Catherine looked up from the screen she was working on. "I know you can do this neither me or Michael would've ever agree to this plan if we didn't think you could."
  Swallowing Daniel nodded picked up the vert helmet and put it on his head.
  **
  Opening his eyes he found himself sitting inside the Starfighter. The GTX 4000 was the most advanced piece of virtual technology there was and Steven had just added a few adjustments using the lionhearted brain interaction knowhow so it was as if he was really there.
  He took a deep breath and reached out turning the fighter on. "Father please help me."
  The fighter didn't so much as turn on as it did lit up as all the systems coming online. 
  Stevens voice pierced into his hearing as if it was coming through a long tunnel "Okay get up some inertia and as soon as you're ready I'll flick the gate on just long enough for you to get through."
  "Okay." His own words felt like they were coming from far away. This was the first time he'd ever gone this deep into vert so he flew around a little bit and was surprised to find out that it felt realer then real and it seemed like his senses were slightly heightened as well. "Okay I'm about ready to make my run but first Steven could you go into the system settings and turn off any destruction feedback? I don't want this thing to accidentally hurt me if my ship blows up."
  "Good ideal."
  The reality around him flickered and Steven said, "all right make your run."
  Daniel leveled out and aim for the hoop that form the dimensional door. It was only a few inches in circumference larger than the widest point of the starfighter for stealth reasons but that was going to be easy to thread for him.

He turned the propulsion engines all the way on and shot forward.
  Once he reached the normal velocity of a stray meteor he killed all power. Plunging the vert cockpit into darkness.
  The inertia carried him on and right before he got to the dimensional door Steven flicked it on. 
  The starfighter was through it in less than two seconds and Steven had the dimensional door back off in three leaving only the faintest of energy spikes that no one could possibly catch but just in case they could Steven immediately began to collapse the metal tubing and move the drone's position.
  Daniel kept the starfighter off and because he had no residual energy or heat source like a dynovamator it remained undetected. 
  Daniel looked out the virtual viewport. He could see the giant capital flagship clear as day and the three dozen fighter formations that look like small gnats flying around it.
  He stilled himself for the fight to come, with no detectable signature it was impossible for radar to detected him but he was coming in range of the fighters logic drives which would detect him as a possible collision and show him as a gray dot on their radar. He knew no pilot worth his salt would mistake him for an asteroid.
  If only the starfighter was covered in stealth fiber making him invisible to even logic drives but that would be a practically impossible proposition seeing the total circumference of the starfighter was almost a thousand times that of a small probe.
  One of the fighter formations broke off and headed his direction.
  "Alright I've been detected. Engaging."
  The four ships flew closer in the typical Alitien formation consisting of the leader in the front a wing man off to either side and the third bringing up the rear. Daniel flipped the power and the beam cannon whined to life impacting on the leader of the formation.
  The leader was shocked and jerked up hard to the right and as conditioned to do the rest of the formation followed him. Giving Daniel enough time to nudge his trajectory bringing him behind the formation as he kept the beam cannon steady beam solidly impacting on the leader.
  The surprise wore off and the leader began evasion action trying to toss him off target while his three wing man broke off and started to circle around. But Daniel was a perfect aim and nothing the leader could do shook him.
  The leader's shields flickered and grew brighter in the aft. Daniel smiled the leader had just shifted most of his shield energy to the back capacitor and this is what he had been waiting for.
  Daniel gave all the maneuvering Jets on the top half of his starfighter full power rocketing him downward at a forward angle giving him a clear shot at the bottom of the leaders fighter. He cut the beam cannon and shot two blast of lasers.
  The first set of five lasers impacted on the weekend shield shattering it andthe next five all hit the exact same place burning through the lower plating and severing the main power conduit completely disabling the fighter.
  Daniel knew all the weak points of over a thousand fighters and ships and that knowledge had just enabled him to take out that fighter in a total of 7.3 seconds
  The radar showed him that the three other ships had successfully rounded him and were now on his aft for most fighter pilots this would be a death sentence but not for him.
  He turned off the pilot assist and the inertial dampers. Newtronic combat had long ago been rendered obsolete with the discovery of the exact frequency gravity, however with his seemingly wasted years of playing games Daniel had learned a master pilot could use its obsoleteness to obliterate entire squads. 

Daniel in a snapping turn spun the starfighter around so he was flying backwards. Lined up his cross hairs and opened fire with the lasers on the fighter in the middle.
  All three of the fighters shot back but he gave all the maneuvering Jets on the left side of the ship full power sending him sidestepping to the right as he released a continuous stream of lasers into the fighter in the middle the formation.
  Their weapons tried to track his erratic movements but he simply use the same technique to rocket back to the left and up a little his shields only receiving light splash damage from one of their lasers. On the other hand their fighter in the middle was taking a pounding forcing it to break off its pursuit and try to evade the continuous stream of deadly rain from Daniel but it was no use from this position Daniel was like a turret allowing him to continuously scored full on direct hits.
  The fighter's shields gave way and the lasers bore through the hall into the shield generator and then through the propulsion system turning the ship into a hunk of floating space junk.
  "You're fighting too much you need to head for the capital ship!" He heard Stephanie complain.
  The starfighter beeped warning him that one of the fighters had a missile lock on him.
  He smiled he had been waiting for this Alitien training taught their fighter pilots to only release one set of missiles at a time and they always begin their launching with the wing man on the left.
  He swung his crosshairs to the left fighter his right and open fired with the beam cannon.
  Milliseconds later the fighter launched his two missiles and they both instantly collided with the beam from his cannon and exploded. 
  The first explosion happened just a tad before the second and shattered the fighter's shields letting the second explosion take a sizable chunk out of the fighter itself disintegrating both missile launchers and two of its lasers. For good measure though Daniel raked the beam cannon across the remains of the wounded ship turning the rest of its weapons into slag.
  "Daniel there is another formation coming in to your 8 o'clock high." Steven shouted.
  Daniel glanced up and to his left to see four more fighters headed his way just as his starfighter began to scream warnings of multiple missile locks.
  He slammed his propulsion systems back on and shot towards the one remaining original fighter an action that if he'd actually been in the ship would have given him major whip lash.
  In less than a second he was at the other fighters bow and an insane act of maneuvering flipped the starfighter around and sent two times the energy to the propulsion systems something that would of normally required him to shift all the energy from the guns and shields but because the waist thick conduit running into the ship through a dimensional door he had way more than enough energy. This also however made it possible for him to overload the gravity propulsion system turning it into a miniature graviton weapon, that sadly all that would do was pull all the ships around him towards him for a few seconds as his ship imploded upon itself something he did not wish to do. He cut the power just as he reached the same speed and velocity of the fighter above him.
  This successfully interposed the fighter between him and the oncoming formation and should've forced them to not fire their missiles however to his shock his starfighter registered four missile launches.
  Knowing there was no way he could possibly outmaneuver four missiles at once he turned off all power.
  Without the massive energy beacon the missiles lost their primary locking signature. Normally the missiles would recalculate and lock onto something else on the ship however the fighter Daniel had interposed between him and the oncoming formation was a glowing beacon of energy and the four missiles locked onto it instead.

The poor pilot in the fighter never even realized what had happened until was too late. The four missile smashed into him and he died in a crimson ball of fire.
  A loud smacking sound floated its way into Daniel's hearing and Michael shouted, "They killed their own man! Those those people! Everyone knows you don't launch a missile when your allies are in the way!"
  The starfighter powered back to life and Daniel switched the beam cannon to full power than pushed it to 200% power and changed it to pulse mode. He had been using it only at 25% power because he didn't want to kill someone now however...
  His inertia still carried him forward in the direction the now destroyed fighter had been going and he briefly overloaded propulsion systems shooting himself faster in that direction then he turned off the pilot assist and inertial dampers. Using the very forward maneuvering Jets he spun the front end of the ship towards the oncoming formation and fired the beam cannon.
  A long stream of fully visible energy hit the wing man on the right squarely on the left side of the fighter. The fighter shields lasted right up until the last second then gave way. The last of the beam melted the outer hall of the ship but didn't penetrate.
  It did however accomplished what Daniel wanted it to. The fighter formation was turning to the right to track his movements and the beam had melted shut the left maneuvering Jets making it impossible for the fighter to continue to turn to the right.
  Unable to turn the fighter flew directly into the flight path of the leader and immediately both of their logic drives took over sending the leader high and to the right while the fighters logic drives sent him father to the left and into the path of the other two wing man.
  Their logic drives acted expertly avoiding what would have been a deadly collision but this also sent each of the fighters flying in different directions.
  Daniel turned back on the inertial dampers and the pilot assist as he rocketed towards the scattered formation. Leveling his crosshairs on the wounded fighter he fired another pulse from the beam cannon.
  The stream of energy cut straight through the almost nonexistent shield and ripped a giant hole through the top aft of the ship.
  Daniel watched as the cockpit of the fighter plunged into darkness then he passed within a few hair widths from it and could easily see the pilot inside giving him an obscene gesture. 
  "Poor loser." Daniel mumbled. 
  Over the local frequency Steven shouted, "God bless you to."
  Daniel rolled his eyes the guy was sitting in a powerless cockpit meaning there was no way he could hear Steven besides there was no reason to comment to such a sore loser anyway.
  The leader and the wing man on the left had recovered and were turning around to track Daniel. The wingmen in the back of the formation though was still trying to recover from the almost deadly whiplash he had received and now just happened to be directly in front of Daniel crosshairs.
  Daniel pulled the fire button for the beam cannon but the ship beeped a warning that it was overheated. Daniel switch the weapon capacitors back to lasers and began pelting his target with them though before he could break down the fighter shields the leader and the left wing man brought their own lasers to bear on him.
  Daniel sent a burst of energy into his propulsion systems speeding him forward until he was only a few feet behind the fighter he had just been shooting he nudged his stick forward flying underneath its bow than matched its speed essentially coming into formation underneath it.
  The two pursuing fighters continued to shoot but because of Daniel's perfect positioning underneath the other fighter most of the lasers were impacting upon the fighter instead of his Starfighter.

The pilot finally fully recovered from his the debilitating whiplash and try to break away from Daniel but Daniel expertly held formation with him as he used  the laser turret, that Steven had replaced the cockpit with, to continuously pelt the underside of the fighter.
  "Stop shooting me you space whale tarpaulins!" The pilot cussed over the local frequencies at his subordinates.
  They stop firing but it was too late the fighter shields gave way and four laser shots from the turret bore into the hall severing the fighters main conduit.
  As the energy in the fighter died away Daniel override his logic drive and pulled up hard.
  The fighters logic drive used the last of its energy to do a snapping reverse flip that rendered its pilot unconscious and sent it flying back towards the leader.
  The leader's own logic drive was forced into snapping its fighter hard to the right.
  Daniel let his inertia carry him upwards as he once again turned off the inertial dampers and pilot assist. He spun the front of his ship around and fired the beam cannon into the side of the leader.
  The first pulse broke through the shield and scarred the outer plating and the second drilled straight through the ship turning it into worthless slag.
  "Three more formations converging on you now!" Steven shouted.
  Daniel's starfighter screamed a warning and Daniel looked down to see the display say there was thirteen missile locks on him.
  Daniel's eyes scoured the area, the incoming formations were too far away to have missile lock on him! Then he realized the one remaining fighter was sending his targeting data to the other formations.
  Daniel sent all the energy he safely could into the propulsion engine and snap down hard to the right.
  Sadly he didn't manage to break missile lock and the starfighter registered sixteen missile launches one was close by and the others were father out.
  He tried to bring his ship around and head towards the one remaining fighter but the pilot was too smart for that and already had broken off his pursuit.
  Daniel drew extra energy through the conduit and sent it to the shields as he decided to take the first missile and try to dodge the rest using the ships flares but the massive amount of energy now flowing through the conduit disrupted the continuum of the dimensional door and it collapsed severing the conduit.
  The starfighter plunged into darkness and seconds later the oncoming missiles smashed into it obliterating it.
  **
  Daniel pulled back and jerk off the helmet.
  "You can't overload the propulsion system and the shields at the same time that's too much energy flow into the conduit!" Steven shouted at him.
  "Well sorry I didn't know!" Daniel angrily retorted.
  Stephanie glared at him. "You were also fighting way too much. You didn't get anywhere near the capital's ship."
  The adrenaline was still flowing hot through Daniel's blood and he turned to her. "I have to fight if I don't they will blast me out of the sky!"
  "No you don't! All you have to do is get in range of the capital ship and fire once!"
  Daniel's face grew beat red. "You have no clue!"
  "I do to."
  "No you don't! I start out at 7K away and if I'm lucky I get 3K in before I'm detected meaning there still 4K to go and the max range of the lasers is 1K. If I try to run that I'm dead!"

"No you wouldn't be."
  "I would too!" Daniel clenched his fist. "Any time a fighter straightens out and tries to run I can take them down in 200! I guarantee there absolute worst pilot can do it in a maximum of 1K much less 2 or three! And that's just one-on-one not one verse fifty!"
  "Then just dodged them! You don't have to fight them!"
  Daniel rolled his eyes and put up his hand palm first.
  "Oh no you don't do that to me!"
  Michael quickly stepped between them. "Stop just stop you two!"
  Daniel turned his back. "This isn't going to work. It was a stupid plan."
  Dan's voice carried with it a heavy sense of finality and everyone just stood there not knowing what to say.
  Catherine took a deep breath. "No, it's not going to work. Stephanie's right for this plan to work you would have to somehow just dodged them. And all of you should know." She looked at the others. "That trying to get Daniel not to fight is completely against his nature."
  Stephanie rolled her eyes. "Yeah in every RPG we play he has to kill every single enemy in sight before he moves on even if we're all protesting."
  "Yes, which means this plan won't work however if we make a minor adjustment to it..."
  **
  Michael sat in the commander seat and pulled on one of the normal commercial vert helmets they owned.
  Daniel began to put on his as he complained. "I hate escort missions."
  The virtual screen loaded up and Michael looked around. He didn't like this vert helmet it felt too clunky and plastic and even though he could see his own virtual limbs something seemed off about them. He closed his eyes and put it out of his mind as he turned the starfighter on.
  When he open back up his eyes Daniel was already headed for the dimensional gate so he started to head for it as well but as he watched Daniel passed through it he realized just how small the opening was. "I don't think I can get through that."
  "Here let me." Alf's voice said in his ear.
  An invisible force took control of the starfighter correcting its trajectory then turned it off as it flew through the dimensional door.
  Michael came out on the other end and could see the little black dot that was Daniel a ways ahead of him.
  He looked past him to see the giant capital flag ship that was the government's capital and all around were hundreds of fighters. "Is there more than he was last time?"
  "Probably." Steven answered.
  Michael decided not to think about it and craned his head to look around. A large assortment of different types of freighter sized or bigger combat vessels formed a massive circle approximately 10K out and around the capital. It had only been around thirty minutes since their threat had gone out but already large portions of the giant link shield were going up. The Alitien bureaucracy was moving a lot faster than it normally did.
  "I guess everyone in the capital is worried about what might happen to them if they ended up in the lionhearted custody." Michael mused himself.
  "Okay it looks like a formation has detected my presence. I'll engage and draw them off. Don't power up unless you have to."
  Michael didn't stop himself from nodding even though he knew Daniel couldn't see him. "I won't. Just remember that your objective here is to protect this ship. Don't get too caught up and fighting."

"I know I know."
  Daniels starfighter sprung to life and moved with ferocious energy as it opened fired on the formation coming towards it.
  Michael watched for a few seconds then scan the horizon. "Looks like three formations are diverting from their patrol patterns and headed for your direction."
  "Okay." Dan answered back his voice lithe with the combat he was now engaged in.
  Michael let his eyes flicker back towards the fight to see that Daniel had indeed somehow drawn them father off and out of the way of his flight path.
  Less than thirty seconds later he floated pass the fight making it so he had to crane all the way around to see how Daniel was doing. 
  The three other formations join combat with him and two more were headed his way.
  Michael was quickly out of range to really see what was going on but it honestly look like a royal mess to him. He turned around and closely watched the rest of the fighters. To his surprise he made out two of the disabled fighters that Daniel had taken out earlier. From the looks of it someone had come along and pushed them back towards the capital so they could be rescued.
  He smiled. With any luck at all his starfighter would easily be counted as one of their number at least until they got a direct visual.
  "One of the patrols is coming around and they're going to cut right into Michael's flight path." Steven warned.
  "O, great just great." Daniel moaned
  "Want me to power up and see if I can outmaneuver them?"
  "No! Once they know you're here that'll make my job all the harder and I already have my hands full. I'll get them out of your way don't worry."
  Mike wasn't sure how Dan could possibly do that he was already 2K behind him but Mike sat back in his seat and calmly waited. 
  **
  Daniel lined himself up so the ship he was pounding on was in a straight line with the patrol that was going to fly into Michael's flight path. He killed all energy to his propulsive system and sent it to the beam cannon along with as much energy as he dare pull through the conduit.
  He switched the beam cannon to charge burst and pulled the trigger. There was a small charge time then a blinding light shot straight through the ship he was pounding on and continued 2.3K on smashing into the leader of the patrol breaking the shield and taking a hunk out of its aft."
  **
  "Whoa that was some shot!" Michael said as he blinked a few times to get the light spots out of his eyes.
  "I hope you're happy. That completely burned up my beam cannon!"
  "I am. From the looks of it the patrol has stopped moving."
  "You know in real life it would cost us around thirty-five thousand to replace that beam cannon." Daniel shouted back.
  "This is real life. And you don't need to shout were all right here." Stephanie reminded him.
  "Oh... yeah."
  The room fell into silence as Daniel concentrated on the fight he was in and Michael carefully watched the fighters around the capital.
  Forty-eight seconds later Michael heard Daniel say, "Ah man!"
  "What? Did they get you?"
  "Yeah. Looks like you're on your own from here."
  "That's fine I'm only 1.3 K out now and even if they spot me I should be good."
  No one replied so Michael slightly lifted the vert helmet so he could see what they were doing. 
  "We are just watching the view from your ship on the big screen." Catherine said as he seen him pull the vert hat up.
  "I can take over from here if you want." Daniel enthusiastically offered.
  "No. Keep your hands to yourself. You're likely to screw it up." Stephanie scolded
  Michael pulled back down the helmet and begin to countdown the space units.
  As soon as he was within nine hundred and fifty he power back on the starfighter flipped the light sail up on the P988 or rather modified 'Blower' and fired the lasers. 
  The lasers collided with the capital ships shields and Michael's eyes barely caught the flicker around the impact. Then for good measure and show he opened up with the beam cannon as he shouted, "Did it work?!"
  "I think so give me a second." Steven answered.
  Turrets all over the capital ship swiveled toward Michael's Starfighter as he uselessly raked the capital ships shields with his weapons. 
  "Yes it worked! I have a dimensional door just wide enough for me to put my hand through open right now."
  The starfighter began to scream warnings at Michael and he ripped off the helmet. "Here Dan you can take over from here."
  Daniel smiled and pulled back on his helmet. Michael stood up and stretched as he looked over at Steven. He was holding a six inch in diameter dimensional door. "How is it?"
  "Well from what I can tell it's in between the hall plating and the interior. So I'm either going to have to maneuver it to a better position or blast a hole open somehow to allow us to deploy a dimensional door large enough for the androids to go through."
  "How long will it take you?"
  "To do it right without being detected ten maybe fifteen minutes."
  "Okay we will get the androids ready."

 

INFILTRATING THE CAPITAL 



              
  Daniel ran into the training room. "You guys won't believe it! I actually got Michael's starfighter out of there!"
  Stephanie and Catherine stop what they were doing and Michael looked up from his tablet. "You did? How?"
  "Well I use the capital ship as a.. And I a.. What in the world is that!" Daniel said pointing at the weapon the David Kel android was holding.
  It had more or less a typical grip and stock but the barrel came out a little ways then grew to the size of a circle large enough for Daniel to put his head into, making it look like more of an old-fashioned Tommy gun magazine than an actual barrel.
  A dimensional door to the bridge opened up and Steven walked through into the training room. "That is Catherine's ideal and completely impossible without the insane equations she just finished."
  "Cool." Daniel said as he turned to Catherine. "So what is it?"
  "Well the biggest problem with the continuums in Steven's dimensional doors is as you well know they are extremely unstable and that's because it's built on technology and mathematics he doesn't even understand. I've been slowly dissecting the formula and I found a flaw in the math, I fixed it and now they're a little more stable."
  "Oh sweet, so now we can send more energy to the Starfighters? And use the medallion shields for the androids?"
  Steven took a deep breath through his teeth. "Not exactly. The dimensional doors with the new equation for some reason only works if the size of the door is anywhere from 2 to 12 inches in circumference. As you know the conduit to the starfighters is 32 inches and sadly it doesn't quite make it stable enough to use the medallion shields with the androids yet."
  "Oh not so sweet."
  Catherine hugged Daniel's arm. "Haha, not yet anyway. However it did enable us to make that." She nodded towards the weapon David Kel was holding."
  "Yes, what is it?"
  "A handheld starfighter sized beam cannon." Michael answered.
  "Handy beam. For short." Stephanie added.
  Steven rolled his eyes at Stephanie's horrible name as Daniel shouted, "No way! That's awesome!" 
  Daniel reached out and try to take the weapon from David Kel's hands but his grip on it was too hard. Daniel shook his arm loose from Catherine and tried to use both arms to pull the gun away from David Kel but David Kel's grip tightened and his eyes popped open as he gave Daniel a giant smile.
  Daniel spun his head to see Stephanie with a hat on. "Hey! Let me look at it!"
  "No! You're not touching this. Your too destructive and were not going to use this as a weapon."
  "We're not?"
  Steven shook his head. "No we're not, there are too many people on the capital ship and waiving this thing around could easily kill hundreds."
  "Then what's the use of it?"
  Catherine answered this time. "The president will be inside a shielded two foot thick molecular metal safe box. This will enable us to cut him out of it."
  "Oh, I see."
  Alf's lion hologram appeared. "Production complete bringing the request objects to the training room now."
  The dimensional door Steven had come through flickered off then came back on this time connecting to the mobile stations factory. Two droids walked through. One of them was carrying six or seven small metal disc and the other had an assortment of metal rings.

Catherine took the largest of the metal rings from the droid and began to install it in the handheld starfighter class beam cannon.
  Steven took one of the small metal disc hooked his hand into the grip on the back of it and pushed one of the buttons on it. The small palm-sized metal disc expanded until was about 3 feet in diameter and a shield sprung to life around it. Steven held it out in front of him.
  "Ah, a handheld personal shield. That'll be useful." Michael said.
  "Yes, I got the ideal when I watched Daniel use that wall as a shield. Though you have to remember to hold it out and away from you at least half an arms length at all times otherwise it's dimensional door or your androids dimensional door will collapse."
  "Easy enough to remember." Stephanie said as she had David Kel reach out and grab a shield.
  David Kel was now holding the Handy beam with only one hand and Daniel seized the opportunity grabbing it with both hands trying to pull it away from him.
  Stephanie quickly tighten David Kel's grip and Daniel failed to pull it away.
  "Oh come on I just want to look at it!"
  "No, we don't have time." David Kel answered as he swung the shield to his back and picked up one of the small 3 inch in diameter rings from the other droid. "And these?"
  Catherine picked up a handful of them, walked over to the wall and grabbed a multi-hooked belt. She began to attach the rings to it as she said, "Concussion grenades of sorts. You throw one and the instant it touches something it opens a dimensional door to space. The door will stay open for ten seconds and should suck anyone off their feet. The pressure loss will also likely trick the ship into locking down its bulkheads. If used correctly they should enable you to basically sidestep any fight up to a point at least."
  "Ah cool."
  Michael grabbed a grenade belt and began to hook rings on it as well. "Yes, Me and Catherine came up with this ideal the other day."
  The giant lion's head turned to Steven. "The deployed units have dragged the gate to the designated area. Deploying large dimensional door now."
  "Good." Steven grabbed one of the hats and put it on his head. "I've got Harold Mike you get David Kel and Stephanie you get Zephyr."
  Michael nodded and he attached the grenadier belt around David Kel's waist.
  Harold came to life and picked up a shield as Zephyr hooked the other grenade belt that Catherine had loaded around her waist.
  Alf stared intently at the dimensional door. It flickered briefly as it switched and opened to a dark maintenance room on the Alitien's capital.
  Harold picked up a shield and the three androids started to walk towards it.
  "Hey what about me and Catherine?" Daniel interjected.
  Steven opened his eyes. "I want to get through this with as much stealth as possible something you're not capable of so you're not participating in this op. As for Catherine we need her tactical ability so she's going to be using my hacks to guide us through."
  With that Steven closed his eyes and Harold led David Kel and Zephyr through the door.
  The dimensional door closed.
  Catherine walked up to it and put her hand on it. It flickered back to life this time connecting to the bridge. She kissed Daniel on the forehead. "Sorry honey." Then ran through the dimensional door to the commander seat.
  **
  "Can you hear me?" Catherine's voice asked in the androids ears.
  "Yes we can hear you fine." Harold answered back.

"Okay first switch to infrared and tell me what you see."
  Harold blinked his eyes switching them to infrared. He moved his head as he looked around for a bit then said, "There's a lot of heat sources but I think I can make at which ones are humans."
  "Good, I was hoping you'd say that. There's hundreds of cameras and it's kind of hard to comprehend what's what so tell me if I'm about to guide you into place with someone standing in it."
  "Will do."
  "Okay the area you are now in has two doors you guys need to climb up and take the top left one."
  Harold David Kel and Zephyr made their way up a small maintenance latter and to the door Catherine had indicated. It led to a tool room of some sort.
  "Okay now the door in front of you leads to a long-hallway on my mark I'm going to put a loop on all of its cameras and you need to run to private residence 489."
  "Whoa, wait the capital has private residence inside it?" Zephyr asked.
  Harold reached out and put his hand over her mouth. "Not so loud, and yes it's like a giant super luxury colony. The more official perimeters of it are towards the center."
  "I thought this was more like a giant warship." Michael argued.
  "It's supposed to be but well.. You know government."
  "Ah."
  Catherine's voice whispered, "Are you guys ready?"
  "Wait, what if someone comes in the hallway while we were making a run for." Zephyr asked.
  "I'm watching all the doors and from what I can tell there only seems to be like three people in the section of the ship. I'd say most of them have been evacuated towards the safer areas of the middle or off the ship completely."
  "Good to know." Harold said. "Were ready."
  "Okay... There. The loop is in place go."
  David Kel pushed open the door and they began to run down the hall.
  "211.. 237.. 273.." Harold silently read the giant ornamental numbers above each resident. 
  "Wait, looks like someone is coming out of 345."
  "What do we do?" 
  "Tell your clothes to change into casual wear and Stephanie walk in front, hand your shield and grenade belt to Harold. Than you two try to hide your equipment behind her."
  "I don't know how to change my clothes." Michael said anxiously.
  Steven turned Harold to David Kel as his clothes changed into a black suit. "Look at what I have on now visualize it in your mind then command your clothes to change."
  David Kel's clothes finished changing just as a door 100 feet down opened and a young man wearing a fancy silver suit stepped out.
  He looked back towards them and seeing Zephyr said, "Ah I thought I was the only one that hadn't evacuated."
  "So was I. Why haven't you evacuated?" Zephyr answered back cheerfully.
  "Haha I'm not one to be scared by such random scare tactics."
  "Scare tactics?"
  The man took a relaxed posed by his door as he waited for them to walk closer. "Yes indeed. This ship is impenetrable it take two fleets to get to us. As I see it that trick with the stealth ships of theirs accomplished exactly what they wanted, getting everyone to gather in the middle freaking out."

"Really?"
  "Yeah and I know exactly what they're going to do next."
  Zephyr stopped walking a few feet in front of him and flashed him a beautiful smile. "Oh?"
  The man smiled back flirtatiously. "They will have someone on the inside stage a bomb or some such. And all those morons will freak out and run for their private escape pods. At which point one of the new hired frigates will break formation and scooped them up taking them right into their hands."
  "Interesting theory. Though I doubt they would get away with it."
  "Well we'll see. In the meantime though how about joining me for a cup of coffee."
  Michael accidentally made David Kel glare at the man.
  The man put up his hands "whoa easy there bud..." The man's eyes noticed the strange weapon David Kel was holding."
  Zephyr stepped directly in front of him cutting off his view. "Don't mind my body guard I just want to be prepared if something does happen. And I do think I'll take you up on that offer." 
  The man beamed and Zephyr started to walk forward again. But as the man went to close his door and fall in beside her she reached out and brought her fist down hard on his head.
  The hapless man crumpled to the floor unconscious.
  "His door, get it before it closes."
  Michael understood and quickly pushed the door all the way open before it closed.
  Zephyr dragged the men back into the room then quickly scanned the area. Seeing the liquor cabinet she ran over and grabbed a bottle and put a little bit on the man's shirt and into his mouth then set it down beside his hand.
  "Good thinking with any luck he won't have a clue to exactly what happened." Harold said as they quickly exited the room and ran down the hallway.
  "I'm counting on that."
  They shortly reached 489 but it was locked.
  "Give me a second, Alf had, had it open a few minutes ago but it must've autolock while you dealt with that man."
  "Unlocked." Alf's voice informed them all a second later.
  Harold quickly opened the door and they stepped in to a majestic foyer.
  Zephyr looked around and coughed, "This is a mansion! On the capital ship no less."
  Harold walked into another room "I don't even want to think about what something like this would cost." Steven said bitterly.
  "Let's not think about it. Where to next Catherine?" 
  "This residence has a private shuttle system to the outer area of the Center ship. There is an access point in the room next to where Harold is right now."
  "Yep found it." Harold answered as he climbed into a small gilded mag shuttle. 
  The others quickly joined him and he activated it.
  They were sucked along and soon the private tube join to the much larger public one. Another mag capsule came in behind and Zephyr could see people in it.
  "That's not going to be a problem is it?"
  "No there routed to another port. And you're shuttle is registered as private so there's no cameras inside it other than the residents own cameras."
  "Good."
  After a bit their shuttle began to slow down. "Okay coming at a rather public area that's currently empty but I doubt that it'll be that way for long so you need to get to a room that's three doors down into the right as fast as possible."

The shuttle came to a stop and the door slid back. They jumped up and dashed down the hall. "There that door."
  David Kel opened it and they all quickly stepped inside. From the looks of it, it was some type of elaborate waiting chamber.
  There was about a minute of silence as they waited for Catherine to tell them what the next.
  Finally Harold said, "Something wrong?"
  "Sort of. From here on out the floor you are on is completely crowded and most of them look like governmental security. I don't see a way to get you through.. them... Do me a favor user x-rays to see what's beneath you would you?"
  "Sure." Harold blinked his eye switching to x-ray vision then blinked again switching to infrared trying to figure out what he was seeing beneath him. "That's weird. What do you guys make it?"
  Zephyr shrugged. "I don't know it's weird."
  "I think it's a giant freezer of some sort." David Kel said.
  "A freezer you say? ..... Ah found it. It is a freezer. It's part of the capital ship's food court. Give me a sec."
  "Alright from the looks of it I can get you a good bit closer to where the president should be at if you can get down in there. But you need to do it quietly there is a large group of people coming down the way you are just in."
  "I guess jamming my fist down through the floor is out of the question then?" Zephyr asked.
  "Definitely. How about we use this?" Michael said tapping the Handy beam.
  "Yeah that will work but it set at too high a power right now, give me a sec."
  Steven opened his eyes and looked around the training Hall until he saw Daniel sitting by the wall playing a 2-D space Sim on a tablet. "I thought you swore off games."
  "I did! But I'm bored. Y'all just left me out of this one! Besides it's not really a game I'm trying to use it to make an animated replica of my awesome space battle so I can put it up on the net."
  "Whatever. I need you to run down to the factory and turn the power on the beam cannon down to 1%. It's mounted in the lower end of the factory on the far side of the wall. You'll know it when you see it because it has a special contraption around it to make sure it doesn't go off inside the ship."
  "That's a long ways from here. Why don't you go do it?"
  "Because I'm in the middle of a combat situation!"
  "I'll take over that for you and you go change the power percentage. I don't know where the dang thing is at, you do."
  "It's easy you'll know it as soon as you see it."
  Michael opened his eyes. "Please Daniel go do it."
  "Aaa. Fine." Daniel sat down the tablet and stood up.
  "Wait, on second thought. Use one of the hats and take a droid down instead. That way I can adjust it easy enough if I need to again."
  "Yeah, whatever. Give me a sec." Daniel put on one of the hats. A droid sprung to life and ran out of the room.
  In a bit Daniel said, "Okay it's there."
  "Thank you."
  Daniel nodded to Michael, took off his hat and sat back down with his tablet.
  Michael switched his attention to the droid Daniel had positioned and turned the power on the beam cannon down to 1% then adjusted the focused on it.

Bringing his attention back to David Kel he took his shield off his back and handed to Zephyr. Walked over and moved a sitting couch. Gripped the Handy beam with both hands and pulled the trigger. A small concentrated beam shot out and he carefully cut out a hole big enough for them to jump down through.
  The three of them jumped down through hole, onto one of the racks in the freezer then David Kel reached up and move the couch back in place over top of the hole.
  "Okay this place is rather large but basically you want to keep moving to Stephanie's current left." 
  "All right." David Kel answered as he began to climb down the rack.
  "It's a good thing were light." Otherwise this whole shelving system would come tumbling down because of our weight.
  They reached the floor and began to make their way through the maze of stacked stored food.
  "No go back go to left of that rack." Catherine corrected them
  After Catherine had corrected them three or four more times Stephanie angrily said, "Why is this place such a maze and why in the world do these things have such good feeling's I'm freezing!" 
  "Rub your arms with your hands. It helps some though I'm not sure why. And be careful not to do it too hard and rip your skin off." Steven offered
  Zephyr began to rub her arms. "Ah, that does work some but I'm still freezing!"
  "How much father do we have to go in here?" David Kel asked.
  "I was going to take you all the way to the kitchen from here but it might be better for you to cut a hole in the wall to the gardens. Though to be honest with you if I knew how to hack and control the robotic cane system in there I could get you through it a lot quicker."
  "Naw it's better for you not to touch it. We want to make as little disturbance as possible." David Kel said.
  "That's easy for you to say." Zephyr complained her teeth actually starting to chatter. "I'm about to take my hat off and give it to Daniel."
  "I was thinking the same thing. After this I think I'm going to look into putting on some type of feedback limiter."
  "Alright I'll get you out... Turned to your right, follow the rack until you can turn right again and you should be in an aisle that'll let you go straight to the wall now."
  All three of them turned followed the rack then practically ran down the aisle until they came to the wall.
  David Kel quickly brought up the Handy beam and began to cut a hole through the wall.
  "Cut at a tilted angle so you can jam it back in from the other side." Harold said. 
  David Kel nodded and soon there was a hole big enough for them to crawl through which all three of them quickly did.
  They found themselves in a massive hydroponic garden.
  "Wow talk about one extreme from the next. It's got to be at least 85° in here!" Zephyr exclaimed.
  Michael picked up the heavy metal chunk he had cut out and shoved it into the hole they had just come through. "Well at least the extreme humidity in here shouldn't affect us."
  "From there you should be able to follow the freezer wall until you get into the kitchen."
  Harold scanned the area with x-ray then again with infrared. "There's no one currently in here so let's make a dash for it."
  They sprinted down the narrow path along the wall without incident. 
  David Kel pushed his back against the kitchen wall and scanned the kitchen area. Just like the garden and the freezer it was a massive area but strangely there was no one in it. "How come the kitchen is completely empty? You'd think that a ship like this would always be serving food no matter what time of day it was."

"Yes something about this seems off." Zephyr added.
  Alf's voice came through the channel. "Actually as Catherine has been guiding you I've been going through the capital systems and apparently right now they have all staff under arrest and their being retained. 'Under suspicion of collaborating with the lionhearted.'"
  Stephanie opened her eyes and she whistled. "Wow talk about extremes."
  Michael opened his own eyes. "Well when someone threatens the highest official of the government such extremes probably should be expected." Michael looked out towards the middle of the training room and spoke to no one in specific. "Will they be okay there?"
  Alf's hologram appeared. "Yes I believe so. In fact I believe it's the safest place for them seeing that each and every single one of them will have an excellent alibi when we do take off with their president."
  "Good point." Michael closed his eyes and David Kel said, "All right let's go."
  Catherine quickly and efficiently led them through the kitchen. They were about to where they were going to cut through the wall when they rounded a corner to see the backside of a man. 
  All three of them quickly jumped back around the corner and Steven quietly hissed. "I thought you said there was no one here."
  "There wasn't and there shouldn't be. He did not appear on any cameras until a second ago."
  "Who's there?" The man shouted.
  "He came out of one of the ovens." Alf's voice informed them.
  "I know there's someone there, if you don't show yourself right now I'm going to call for the guards and they are freaked out. I'd hate to see what they do to someone that was sneaking around right now."
  "Came out of an oven?" Harold whispered.
  Zephyr put her finger to her lips and mouthed the words "I'll take care of this."
  Stephanie opened one of her eyes. "Alf get face recognition on this guy I want to know his name right away."
  Zephyr walked around the corner. "It's just me."
  The man stared at her. "Who are you?!"
  Zephyr's face displayed a rather convincing hurt look. "What do you mean who am I? It's me! You can't tell me you forgot about me!"
  The man looked at her completely dumbfounded.
  Alf's hologram displayed the man's name 'Artemis James Zagermon'. Stephanie nodded and closed her eye.
  Zephyr took a step forward. "Artie."
  "I ah.. I"
  The look on Zephyr's face change from one of hurt to one of anger. "Artemis James Zagermon you had better not have forgotten about me!"
  Now the poor man became really flustered. "No.. No. I di.. I didn't forget about you. It's just that well. You're not supposed to be in here."
  Zephyr advanced on the poor man with her fist raised. "You did forget about me!"
  The man put both of his hands up and began to back away. "No no no I didn't."
  Zephyr took two more giant steps and pop the guy in the head. He crumpled to the floor unconscious.
  Daniel who had been watching via hologram screen stood up and said, "Now that was just cruel."
  Harold peaked around the corner and looked at the poor man. "Brutal."
  David Kel came around the corner shaking his head disapprovingly.
  Stephanie was smiling ear from ear as she opened her eyes and shouted through the dimensional door to Catherine, "Leave the camera recording on that one. If someone finds him unconscious they will look over the camera record and think he was just poped by an angry ex-girlfriend."
  "Wait." Michael interjected. "That doesn't sound like a good ideal."
  Steven took off the hat and scratched his head. "Well what else are we going to do with him? Thrown him back in the oven?"
  "Yes."
  Stephanie put her hands on her hips and furled her eyebrows at Michael. "And if someone comes along and turns it on before he wakes up?"
  "O I didn't think of that."
  Stephanie rolled her eyes as she said, "Catherine."
  "Already on it I'll play it over the live system in a sec so if any security officers are watching they will see it. But I need Zephyr to stomp off then after a little bit Harold and David Kel can join you in the room I mentioned earlier." 
  Stephanie nodded and closed her eyes.
  Zephyr puffed up her chest stepped over the guy and stomped out of the room and down the hall.
  Harold and David Kel waited for thirty seconds to let Catherine finished the fake dub of the cameras then quickly made their way through the rest of the kitchen and used the handy beam to cut a hole into the next room where Zephyr was waiting.
  "Good am glad you guys made it. The walkway is full of people and a guard almost pulled me aside but I made it look like I knew what I was doing when I came in here so he left me alone."
  "Then we need to get out here as fast as possible. Catherine where to next?"
  Catherine tried to answer but she was laughing too hard.
  Stephanie opened her eyes and shouted, "What's so funny?"
  "There... hahaha They are..Haahhaa"
  Michael opened his eyes. "Catherine?"
  "Sorry sorry." She took a deep breath. "Two security guys in the camera room saw the doctored clip I let play of you punching out that poor man and they are watching it over and over again. One of them is laughing so hard his coffee came out his nose and spill all over himself."
  "That does sound funny." Steven said as he opened his eyes as well. "But unless we want to have to fight through security we need to get moving right now!"
  "Okay give me a sec." Catherine answered back.
  There was a minute of silence then a small frustrated sound from Catherine played across the androids hearing.
  "What's wrong?" Zephyr asked.
  "There's tons of security from this point on in, a few rooms down the controls for the cameras changes to another security room and somehow they keep shutting me out."
  "They what?" Harold demanded.
  Alf voice played across their hearing. "Sir it appears that they're trying to use our hack to hack my system."
  Steven ripped off his hat and threw it to Daniel. "Here you take over I have to deal with this now!"
  Daniel happily snatched the hat and plopped it on as Steven ran through the dimensional door to the bridge.
  After a few seconds Daniel said, "So what now?"
  "Give me a minute! I have to deal with this!"
  The little bit of glee that had been left in Catherine drained away. "O NO!"
  Steven spun towards her. "What's wrong now?"
  "Another security guard walked in and seen them watching the clip and well somehow he instantly recognize Zephyr. He's already contacting security, and there is likely to be an entire military force headed to that area of the ship any second now."

 

CAPTURING THE PRESIDENT 



              
  Harold scanned the ship flipping back and forth between all four of the available vision scans equipped on the androids until he finally found what he is looking for. But there was too many people in the way, forcing him to look farther down the line of it until he found a place that had no people in the way.
  Daniel switched to the idle droid standing in front of the beam cannon and turned it up to 75% then he brought his attention back to Harold.
  Harold reached out and snatched the handy beam away from David Kel. "Looks like it's time to create a distraction."
  And before either David Kel or Zephyr could react Harold used infrared one last time to make sure there was no one in the way as he brought up the handy beam linked to a starfighter sized beam cannon and pulled the trigger.
  A 12 inch in diameter beam blasted from the end of the handy beam. The bright fully visible yellows orange beam burned straight through twenty or thirty thin walls between it and its target. The beam reached its target and cut straight through it and kept going until Daniel finally released to trigger.
  Zephyr and David Kel just stared at Harold as the entire ship seem to list to the side. The power flickered then died away plunging them into darkness except for the glowing red of the metal where the beam had burned through the wall. As an added jab to the situation the gravity faded as well and everything in the room started to float around.
  "What just happened? I lost all signal and even the opposing hack is gone!" Steven shouted in their ears.
  Stephanie ripped her hat off. "What in the world!"
  Daniel had a giant smile on his face but didn't open his eyes.
  Stephanie pulled back her arm and went to smack him but Michael quickly stepped in the way as he shouted at Daniel as well. "Just what did you just do?"
  Dan closed his eyes tighter. "I just severed the Conduit for the entire upper left side of the ship. I wanted to cut it closer to the center knocking out more of the ships power but there was too many people in the way."
  Both Stephanie and Michael just stared at him. He sensed it and said, "I've taken down this ship multiple times in my games. It's a hard one because the dynovamator core is in the very center and the energy branches off like a tree. But if you're inside..."
  "How many people did you just kill doing that?!" Stephanie angrily retorted.
  Alf's hologram said, "Form my calculations I suspect fourteen people were injured and only one of them severely. It appears that Lord Maddog here is almost exactly like his predecessor."
  Daniel grimaced at this statement but pulled his mind back to the matter at hand. "Put your attention back into the androids we need to get moving."
  Stephanie was not at all happy but she put back on her hat and closed her eyes.
  Harold was coming back into the darkened room holding two Alitien military helmets and wearing a third his clothes had also changed to match that Alitien military uniform. Harold tossed the two helmets to them.
  Zephyr caught hers and demanded. "Where did you get these?"
  Harold ignored her question. "Put them on and change your clothes to match mine."
  Zephyr was about ready to argue when David Kel put his arm on her shoulder. "Not right now we don't have time."
  As their clothes changed and they put on the helmets Harold open the door again to reveal utter chaos. It was dark with only a few light but people were running in all directions or rather floating in all directions and a sense of total mayhem was overly apparent.

Harold pulled himself down to the floor and turned on the magnets in his feet. "Let's go."
  Harold led them out into the chaos of the street like hallway and they began to move as best they could down the way.
  Zephyr noticed out of the corner of her eye four unconscious security officers floating the opposite direction they were headed.
  She turned to Harold and hissed. "Do you even know where you're going?"
  "I'm working on it."
  "What you mean by that?" She hissed back.
  He waved to her to be quiet as he shouted to a group of officers quite a bit father up the street that were desperately trying to calm the panicked people. "Forget them. This is a distraction we need to get to the president!"
  They look back towards him and their leader instantly understood what Harold was saying. He turned to his men. "He's right to the president!"
  The military officers pulled themselves to the floor and began to use their electromagnetic boots to run.
  Harold turned to Zephyr and smugly said, "Now we just follow them."
  Zephyr rolled her eyes.
  "You two need to stop the bickering." David Kel said.
  They followed the security men being careful to stay to the back and keep their helmets down so they could not see their face. Thankfully dew to the chaos reigning around them no one took note of the oddity of their weapons and equipment. 
  However to their dismay Every time they came across more security the leader of the little band would tell them to join up and help them head for the president.
  At one point they ran into a higher ranking officer and he demanded to know who everyone was before he joined them.
  When the others finished giving their name and rank he looked over their heads and pointed at them. Zephyr and David Kel didn't know what to do but Harold quickly came to attention and shouted the name of the men he had knocked out earlier. "Lieutenant Baskces Sir and the two with me are private Emick and Sharon.
  The officer nodded and began to lead the group father on.
  Stephanie breathe a sigh of relief and opened one eye. "What are we going to do about all these men?"
  Daniel shrugged. "I haven't a clue."
  "Great just great. Just like you to jump before you think."
  Michael kept both of his eyes closed as he said, "I'm formulating a strategy just be ready to turn the magnets on your boots all the way up."
  Stephanie nodded and closed her eyes but not before she gave Daniel a nasty glare.
  The leading officer guided his small growing band through the chaos and then through narrow hallways and up and down stairs until they reach an area where power was still intact.
  The small group stopped and one of the men said, "The power still on here maybe the attack was only localized."
  A tall muscular man spoke up. "This is strange, maybe we should return to our post."
  The leader shook his head. "No. We're not that much farther away and I have a weird feeling in my gut."
  With the gravity restored in the section of the ship the group was able to pick up the pace and soon they were at a steady run.
  "Okay Steven was able to finally get us back in." Catherine's voice said in their ears. "Locating you now."
  They ran for another half a minute before she finally said, "It looks like you guys are rather close to the president now in fact you should be coming up on the only entrance to the area in a few seconds. There's a heavy barricade their right now. So be ready."

"Good to know." David Kel whispered back.
  She was right there went through a complex maze of corridors and came to a wide set of stairs, at the top was three lines of ten men barricading the way on. They had positioned themselves on the stairs in such a way that each group had a perfect shot down the stairway. 
  The officer of their group put up his hands and shouted, "Don't shoot. We've come to reinforce you. Is the president still allright?"
  The man in the middle of the first line lowered his weapon and other soldiers did as well as he said, "Yes he is fine we have two larger groups stationed father in as well. The assistance of you and your men would be much appreciated." 
  The officer nodded and began to make his way up the stairs. "Do you know what is going on? I haven't been able to get a hold of anyone."
  "The details are sketchy, but from what I've gathered something hit us knocking out the shields and all the power on the upper port side of the ship."
  "Do the lionhearted really possess a weapon that powerful?"
  "It would seem so. Worst yet no one seen it coming. Many are claiming that nothing actually hit us."
  "An attack in from inside?"
  "Maybe."
  Urgency entered the officer's face and he turned around and began to shout orders. "Form ranks ten men each line use the stairs to –"
  David Kel flicked the ring he had hidden behind his back. It shot away so fast that no one seen it but when it hit the wall it activated. 
  The sucking force of open space knocked everyone off balance then the sixteen rings that David Kel had secretly dropped as they were come through the maze of corridors activated as well.
  The added force caught the already off balance men and they began to be suck down the hallway. The ones on the top of the stairs were the first ones to be picked up and suck down past them screaming and scraping uselessly at the roof as they went
  David Kel turned his electromagnetic shoes all the way up keeping him firmly attached to the first step of the stairs. He grabbed a hold of Harold and Zephyr pushed them forward onto the stairs as well as he shouted in a voice that matched one of the officers that were speaking before. "Close the blast doors!"
  Nothing happened at first but to his relief another officer took up the shout and the blast door slams shut behind them leaving only them and three other men on the stairs.
  One of the men was still flying through the air hit the door and fell down on top of Harold.
  "Ouch." Harold moaned.
  The man rolled off of him as he tried to catch his breath. "What.. What just happened?"
  "Some type of explosion. Or worse." One of the men said that was collapsed on the stairs.
  "Felt like something ripped the ship in half and opened it to space." The third man said.
  Zephyr stood up. "What about the president?"
  "Who cares?" Said the man on the stairs.
  Harold clambered to his feet. "That's treason."
  "So what?" Said the man that had landed on Harold. "Some of my best friends were just ripped out to space." The man punched the blast doors. "They died! They just die for that swine of a man!"
  David Kel got to his feet and began to walk up the stairs. "Well we are going to go check on him."
  None of the three other men moved.

As they walked up the stairs Zephyr whispered, "You didn't actually kill them did you?"
  "No, the ring's openings are only 3 inches they couldn't have got sucked out of them and just in case they could I dropped most of them back far enough they wouldn't. They may have gotten injured though but that's about it."
  They reached the top the stairs to see another stairs going down. As they began to descend them Catherine's said, "At the bottom of these stairs there is another stairs going up and there's forty men stationed on it."
  Harold stopped. "Are ungovernment issued weapon and equipment have been overlooked so far because we have been in a group but if we go walking up the stairs by ourselves I highly doubt they will fall for it."
  "Agreed." Zephyr said.
  "What do you suggest we do?" David Kel asked.
  "Use the handy beam to cut out through the wall and swing around to the back of the presidents safe room and cut in from there."
  "Sounds good." Zephyr said.
  Harold went to grab the handy beam cannon from David Kel but David Kel pulled it away. "Oh no you don't. You're not touching this thing again. I'll do it."
  David Kel brought up the handy beam and switched his vision to x-ray.
  "Wait that won't work." Catherine's voice said.
  David Kel lowered the handy beam. "Why not?"
  "You're in the center of the ship and all around you are its inner workings. The walls you have to cut through our 4 inch thick molecular walls meaning you have to have the beam cannon at a decent power setting to cut through them but if you do that there's nothing to stop the beam cannon from cutting everything to shreds behind the wall. You could easily destroy the entire ship's life-support or worse."
  Harold rubbed the side of his head. "O, I guess that wouldn't be good."
  "No it wouldn't."
  "So what do we do?" Zephyr asked.
  Stevens's voice came to their ears. "Link your shields together, charge up the stairs and lay down a smack down."
  Zephyr pulled her shield off her back and expanded it. "I like that ideal."
  "But Catherine said there is forty fully armed people up there." Harold argued.
  "If I can get in striking range. I can easily take on sixty by myself."
  "I doubt that."
  "I've taken on over 100 in the training and over 200 when they gave me a weapon." 
  Daniel wanted to argue that, that was not realistic but he knew better because the lionhearted training room program especially with their edits was probably the most advanced training there was."
  "If you are confident you can do it then let's go. That blast door will eventually reopen and those people that are not injured are going to be wanting to come this way." David Kel expanded his shield and turned it on. "But let's try not to kill anyone these people aren't our enemy."
  "Yeah I realized that when I saw the poor man angrily punched the blast door." Zephyr said as Harold brought up his shielded and linked up with there's forming a solid shielded wall in front of them.
  They ran to the bottom of the stairs and came in view of the four lines of men at the top of the next stairs.
  Someone shouted and the room filled with the whine of laser fire.

The three of them couldn't exactly feel their shield wall being pelted but they knew full well it was. And none of them were sure how long it would hold so they dashed up the stairs as fast and as hard as they could plowing into the poor men at the top.
  They hit with such speed and ferocity men went flying in all directions throwing them into utter disorder. 
  Zephyr pulled her shield a way breaking the shield wall and begin punching and jabbing. 
  Men either went flying or just drop to the floor unconscious when she hit them.
  David Kel and Harold stared in utter amazement at the total brutalization she was wreaking until she shouted, "just don't stand there help me."
  They entered the fray smacking people with their shields in true heroic ancient fashion.
  Until only two men that had managed to get father way down the other side of the stairs were left standing. They were shooting at them for all they were worth and without thinking Harold through his shield at the one knocking him up against the wall into unconsciousness but unlike in the comics Harold's shield didn't bounce back into his hands.
  Three shots rang out from the remaining man before Zephyr smashed his gun then slammed him against the wall.
  Harold collapsed to the floor and began to roll down the stairs.
  David Kel dropped the Handy beam and pounded down the steps catching him. "Are you okay?"
  Synthetic blood was pouring from his gut and his left arm had a laser hole in it and his right leg had one as well.
  "Oh dang I hurt."
  Alf's voice came through. "His systems are fully operable though there might be a little pain."
  "A little pain! I feel like my world is imploding!"
  "I believe that is more mental than reality." Alf answered back.
  "It's all mental now is it?" Harold tried to stand but crumpled over in pain. "Mental might butt!"
  "I assure you sir it is."
  "Blast it Alf you sound just like drill instructor Mitchell."
  Daniel pulled off his hat and breathed a sigh of relief as the pain abated. "Everything was always mental with him. Even when I was on the ground dyeing because he ran me too hard."
  "Sir you must put back on your hat and I do not believe I know of this drill instructor Mitchell you speak of."
  Daniel realized he made a slight mistake and quickly put back on his hat without saying anything. The pain hit him like a wave again but it wasn't as bad now though. Alf may have been right about some of being mental.
  Harold stood up and tested out his leg and arm. They were a bit stiff and the pain receptors in them were being vicious but they were indeed operable.
  "Sir who is this drill instructor Mitchell you spoke of? My records have no mention of him."
  Zephyr looked around at their small battlefield to make sure everyone was unconscious and grimaced some of the unconscious men were already starting to show signs of bruising. And she had no doubt that some of them had broken limbs. "He went to military college before he joined the lionhearted."
  "How come I have no record of this?"
  Steven answered this time. "That's because they kicked him out and there's not really much to that record."
  "It was a search and rescue college and he thought he was better than everyone else and always did everything by himself. So they kicked him out saying they didn't need heroes." David Kel added.

"Ah, from the looks of it I'd say he hasn't fully overcome that fault yet either. I may have to whip together a rather strenuous training course to remove that from him."
  Daniel's eyes snapped open and he looked at the hologram to see the giant lion smiling at him and he quickly said, "That.. That won't be necessary."
  "Guys the blast doors are open and there's people coming your way." Catherine warned.
  Daniel decided this was a perfect enough reason to leave the subject and quickly closed his eyes.
  Harold limped down the stairs to where his shield had come to rest and picked it up. "I'm guessing at the end of these stairs there's another set of stairs that go up? And probably another set of 40 to 50 men as well."
  Zephyr brought her shield up and said, "We will just have to charge them then systematically disable them again. It should be fine just don't throw your shield again this time." She gave Harold a wry smile.
  David Kel walked down the stairs towards Harold. "Let's link shields."
  Stevens voice shouted, "No you can't charge the next group like you did last time there's three PTX 90s and four of the men have particle cannons. Your shields won't hold up against that kind of firepower and you will be ripped to shreds."
  "PTX 90s?" Zephyr asked.
  "Think tank like robots with heavy weapons." Harold answered.
  "O."
  David Kel brought his hand to his ear. "Anyway you can hack the bots?"
  "I'm afraid not. They are hardwired into the president safe box and he has direct control over them."
  The sound of people coming up the other side of the stairs reached them.
  Harold unhooked one of the rings from the grenade belt that Zephyr had handed him earlier. "I'll try to slow them down, you guys think of some way to get through the next barricade."
  Harold began to make his way back up the stairs and David Kel shouted after him. "Don't use more than one of them at a time. In this close of range you could easily kill a lot of people if you do."
  "I know I'm just going to use it to scare them. I'm counting on the sound and small pull one gives to scare them and make them retreat."
  David Kel nodded in understanding.
  Zephyr switched to infrared and looked through the slanted roof at the barricade guarding the presidential safe box. "So what are our options?"
  "Not much. The men with the particle cannons you might be able to takedown but there's no way for you to take out a PTX straight on."
  The sound of escaping air and a sucking feeling filled the area. A few seconds later Harold shouted, "It's not working there still coming, they are about halfway up the stairs now!
  Zephyr looked anxiously back up the stairs. "How about the Handy beam. Can't we use it to cut threw this slanted ceiling straight into them?"
  "You could but there is people in front of the PTXes you would kill them." Catherine answered.
  Harold picked up the Handy beam from where David Kel had dropped it came down the stairs a few steps and open fired at the slanted roof.
  "What are you doing you will kill someone!" David Kel shouted at Harold.
  Harold didn't respond.
  Michael opened his eyes to see Daniel taking on and off his hat. Daniel looked over at him. "It's not me."

Alf said. "The situation is dire and I have activated Harold's ghost protocol."
  Michael's eyes grew wide and he quickly closed them hard.
  David Kel ran up the stairs and pushed Harold right as the beam was about to break through the roof and into the people on the other side.
  The beam went wide and Harold looked at him. "You guys are too soft. I know it's hard but if you don't act now it'll cost you your life's or force you to kill many more than it would've."
  A man crested the top of the stairs and Harold spun around to the two steps to the top and kicked him hard sending him flying back down the stairs and taking at least seven other men with him.
  Laser fire rang and Harold yanked himself back over the crest of the stairs. "Times up. I'm sorry but I'm going have to finish this operation the hard way."
  Harold aimed the Handy beam towards the stairs and Michael realized with horror he was going to use it to cut all the people coming up it in half.
  Michael raised the voice on David Kel to as loud as it would go and shouted, "STOP!!"
  His voice bounced off the solid walls echoing over and over. When it finally died away there wasn't a sound to be heard even the people coming up the stairs had stopped moving.
  At realizing this Michael realized he had the attention of everyone even though none of his enemies could currently see him. And somehow he knew what to do.
  "I am David Kel of the lionhearted. We have come to take your president so he can stand a fair trial for his crimes. We do not wish to harm any of you and up to this point we have done our best to not cause any fatal injuries. We have the capability and power to kill every single one of you in a few minutes. Please do not force us to use it!
  If you lay down your arms now we will retrieve the president and leave peacefully. If you do not however lay down your arms many of you will die." David Kel let out a heavy breath as he looked at Harold and the Handy beam that was only seconds away from cutting down at least sixty people. "Sadly without even a fighting chance. Please for your sakes lay down your arms. I promise you your president will receive a fair trial."
  As the sound of David Kel's voice died away silence replaced it. 
  Then the president's voice came over the PA system. "If any of you lay down your arms I will have you ALL executed for treason."
  "Oh wow what a way to endear your troops." Zephyr muttered then she raised her voice. "Is this dog of a man really worth laying your life down for?"
  There was a few more seconds of silence.
  "No. He's not." A man shouted and the sound of a dropping gun echoed over the stairway. A murmur of agreement rose and the sound of more dropping guns bounced off the walls and stairs.
  "You louts I will kill you all and the lionhearted scum myself." The president's voice blasted over the PA system.
  The sound of dense machinery replaced his voice shortly followed by screams then the sound heavy guns drowned out everything.
  "He's killing them!" Catherine shouted in their ears.
  Harold spun around and shot down the stairs faster than any of them could possibly move one of the androids. He reached the bottom and began to run up the next set as he brought the handy beam up and fired at one of the murdering PTXs. 
  A 12 inch thick bright fully visible beam lanced out smashing into the PTX and Harold held the beam steady until it stopped moving. This however gave the two remaining PTXs enough time to spin on him. 

Harold jumped to the side as the stairs where he was standing dissolved from arm thick lasers burning through them.
  The PTXs tracked his movement as he leveled the Handy beam at the one in the middle and fired.
  The PTX was completely disabled in seconds but so was Harold as three large laser shot in to him.
  The sound of four charging beam cannons echoed through the air and milliseconds later the beams blasted the last PTX apart.
  Black smoke was heavy in the air along with the smell of melted metal and burnt wires.
  David Kel and Zephyr reached the bottom of the stairs to see Harold sliding down towards them with two giant holes in his chest and one in his stomach. Both were surprised to see that he looked nothing like a machine and a whole lot like a dying man.
  Out of impulse David Kel ran to his side and grabbed his hand.
  Harold opened his eyes and coughed, "looks like even my ghost life has come to an end." His eyes looked up towards the ceiling. "I guess that's for the best." His attention switched back to David Kel. "Take care of your sister and brothers and don't let Alf bully you into a decision you're not ready to make."
  David Kel swallowed and nodded.
  Harold laid his head back and his eyes closed. Michael felt the power in Harold's hand fade away and seconds later the android itself initiated the micro molecular deconstruction self-destruct.
  Blue energy play across Harold and his clothes and he dissolved into dust than a small explosion at the end gently blew it away.
  Michael took off his hat. "Is his ghost really gone?"
  The giant hologram lion nodded. "It's a type of data carrying energy and only one for a person can exist at a time. His was inside the android and Stevens pin hole was destroyed in the attack making it impossible for me to retrieve."
  Stephanie took off her hat as well. "So every part of Harold is truly gone?"
  "I'm afraid so and with his ghost gone it is against protocol for you to even create another android replica of him."
  Michael looked at the floor. He hadn't known much about Harold but his ghost's actions at the end proved he must've been a truly amazing person. 
  Daniel plopped himself on the floor. "This sucks."
  "Death is a part of life Daniel." Alf said.
  There was no real reply to this so Daniel just lapsed into silence.
  "Michael someone's trying to ask David Kel a question." Steven shouted threw the dimensional door
  Michael nodded and put back on his hat
  David Kel opened his eyes his hand was still where Harold had been. He took a deep breath and looked up to see a group of people standing on the stairs a little bit away. "I'm sorry, what did you say?"
  "No were sorry. He died protecting us. Something he didn't have to do." One of the men answered back.
  Another man hesitantly asked. "Was... Was that Harold the hammer of justice?"
  David Kel nodded. "It was."
  All the men hung their heads. The lionhearted were legends and apparently these men knew who Harold had been.
  David Kel reached out and grabbed the Handy beam from where Harold had dropped it and stood to his feet.
  The group parted to allow him and Zephyr up the stairs.
  David Kel marched up the stairs to the giant door leading to the shielded safe box president Winkler was hiding in. "You can hand yourself over peacefully or force us to come in there. The choice is yours but either way you will stand trial."
  The president didn't answer. 
  David Kel raised the Handy beam.
  "Sir. Allow me." A tall extremely muscular man said.
  He took out a key and inserted it into a slot beside the door but before he turned it he said, "My son plays games made after your legends. Once for a week every day I come home to hear him talking about some new amazing story he played through than one day he told me he wanted to be just like me protecting the good guys and taking out the bad guys." The man lowered his head in shame. "I couldn't look him in the eye or say anything because for years I've been Winkler's head of security and... I've seen and done many horrible things always telling myself this was how things worked in the real universe. Your friend's actions here today have shown me different."
  The head of security turned the key and a small slot opened up in which he put his hand then another small slot opened up and scanned his eye and finally he spoke into a receptacle. "All is well, Open."
  The shield turned off and the door opened to reveal a raving mad president. "How dare you betray me like this! I will have your Hea –"
  Zephyr step forward and flicked him in the head. The president flew backwards and bounced off the wall and collapsed to the floor. 
  David Kel walked into the room and grabbed him by his arms and dragged him to his feet. "Your days of killing are over." 
  Zephyr stepped into the room took the Handy beam from David Kel and used it to blast the cameras than hit the close button beside the giant door.
  As the door closed all the men stared questioningly at them. 
  David Kel nodded at them. "As promised we will be leaving now."
  The door completely closed cutting off all view of them.
  Zephyr deploy the dimensional door and by the time the head of security had the door back open there was nothing there but a tiny bit of dust that had been the dimensional door.
  


 

PREPARATIONS 



              
  Steven sat in his seat staring at nine different screens. He had at least twenty different programs running and all lined up for a single click. This was going to be the largest hack in history only one time before this was anything like it ever done. He took a deep breath and let it out. "Alright Alf, could you bring up ASNO on the main screen."
  The main view screen came to life displaying the current news report from Alitien sector news outlet the main news provider on the StarNet in their sector. There was quite a few others but this one had the best anti-hack security and Steven had decided to use it to make sure his sector wide hack was working.
  A commercial had just ended and a camera was zooming in on a man standing in front of a fancy background. "This is ASNO all the news you need to know." Declared a pompous prerecorded voice.
  The man looked directly at the Camera. "For those of you just joining us less than thirty minutes ago a major attack left the capital without shields and dead in space. There has also been reports of heavy fighting in the chambers leading up to the presidents location. One of our reporters is just arriving on site were taken you to her now."
  The screen switched to a young woman standing in front of a crowd. She turned towards the camera. 
  "Sarah have you been able to find out anything?"
  "Not yet. But I can confirm there is has been some type of fight father in. I'll try to get closer now."
  She waded through a crowd to where the soldiers had formed a solid line keeping the people back. She tried to talk to one of the soldiers but they did not respond.
  The head of security came into view as he came down the stairs followed by soldiers carrying other injured soldiers. "Move everyone back we have injured that needs urgent medical care. Everyone move back!"
  The news reporter pushed her way through the shifting crowd until she was in front of the advancing soldiers. "Sir can we get a comment? Is the president all right?"
  The head of security looked at her and shouted. "Get that news reporter out of here!"
  Three soldiers broke off and two of them grabbed her while the third grabbed the floating camera with the palm of his hand covering it.
  The screen went black then quickly switched to the man in the studio. "There you are folks. We will try to get further information in the meantime I would lik-
  Steven turned down the volume and Michael Stephanie and Daniel walked in.
  Catherine looked up from the screen she was working on. "Is everything ready?"
  Daniel nodded.
  "Both the vice president and president are in their own rooms on the small mobile station with the hollow recorder pointed at them." Michael elaborated. "How are things going on your end?"
  "Well the hack is ready and Catherine has the supreme courtroom on the Boklar colony ready and she contacted their attorneys. They should be there any moment if they come that is."
  "If they don't come that could cause a big problem. I mean it won't seem much like a fair trial if they don't have any defense." Daniel stated
  "Well father we just pray that they do come." Michael said with his head slightly bowed.
  "Amen to that. What about the armed droids to keep order? What did we decide on that?" Daniel said.
  Catherine swished her hand at the screen she had been working on and it turned off. "Alf is taken care of that."

"Already taken care of. They are lining the courtroom walls as we speak." The giant lion said as it appeared on the one of the view screens. "However I must state once again that I believe this all to be unnecessary and potentially risky."
  "The risk should be nominal especially because we will be broadcasting from the mobile station so even if they do somehow track the hack all they will find is it." Steven answered.
  "I was not referring to the chance of being traced. The jury you have suggested may not turn out favorable and truthfully seems rather childish to me."
  Stephanie waved her hand moving the muted news report to the side and making Alf center of the view screen. "In your day, the lionhearted had the seniority and legitimacy to hold their own trials with their own juries. If we tried that now it be a kangaroo court something we don't need or want. And sadly if we tried a normal jury people would think we paid them off or worse. Not to mention they would most likely need to be put in some type of protection program afterwards."
  "Yeah and a judge trial is completely out of the question." Daniel added.
  "But how do you plan on making sure the result is untampered."
  "We will use Toair." Steven said. "They are designed specifically for this type of thing and are supremely secure because they use a direct one-to-one ratio tied directly to each device making it impossible for tampering or multiple inputs."
  A beeping sound came from Catherine's counsel and a screen came on. "The attorneys both just arrived at the courthouse."
  "Good let's get this thing on." Daniel exclaimed.
  "Not yet." Stephanie interjected. "Let's pray first."
  **
  Both attorneys walked into the massive courtroom.
  A fully colored and very lifelike hologram of David Kel appeared and began to walk towards them. "Good morning gentlemen I'm glad you could join us on such short notice."
  The attorneys advanced into the courtroom until they were standing right in front of David Kel's hologram. The shorter of the two looked up at David Kel. "Is it true that you hold both of our clients in illegal custody?!"
  The hologram of David Kel raised an eyebrow at the diminutive man.
  The man's chest swelled and he held David Kel's stare.
  David Kel took a deep breath. "Sir the charges against your client are heavily offensive. I suggest you take this court case and our authority serious."
  The man huffed.
  David Kel turned around and began to walk back towards the podium. "The charges against your clients are on their desk. I suggest you use this time to go over them. A hologram of your clients will be with you shortly, so you can form a defense strategy together."
  **
  They all sat there silently waiting and watching the news. The news reporter was just managing to pull aside one of the injured soldiers. 
  A man with a broken arm and a rather bruised looking face was her current target. "Can you tell us what happened?"
  The man touched his face with his good hand. "A bright light ascended the stairs. We unleashed everything we had at it but it absorbed every shot. And before we could react it was upon us." The man looked at the floor. "We were thrown in every direction as two archangels and the Angel of death herself came out of the light. She was the most beautiful scariest thing I've ever seen. Everyone..." The man swallowed. "Everyone she touched either went flying or just drop to the floor... She.. She barely touched me but my entire body folded like a ripple. And.. And well you can see." The man waved at his injuries.
  The news reporter just stared at the man dumbfounded. "Angels?"
  The man nodded. "No being alive could move as fast as they did. And their bodies shined with holy light."
  "Are you sure?"
  The man nodded again.
  The reporter was silent for a few seconds then put her hand to her ear. "Do you know if they got the president or not?"
  The man shook his head. "No I don't. But nothing in this galaxy could've stopped those beings"
  Alf appeared replacing the news. "The attorneys have had the lionhearted required minimal amount of time to look over the charges."
  Steven stood up and rolled his shoulders. "All right then here goes nothing."
  He pushed the button he had prepared.
  One by one the screens he had up turned green and displayed the words connected.
  He smiled to himself as the last one changed. He had just accomplished the unheard-of feat of hijacking every news outlet in the entire sector.

 

TRIAL



              
  All those outlets flickered black then an image of the hologram of David Kel standing in front of the podium played across the StarNet. 
  "Hello I am David Kel of the lionhearted we interrupt your schedule news reports to bring you the trial of vice president Almon and president Winkler. Both are charged with breaking all three of the great laws and multiple crimes against humanity. I will be the judge and Zephyra Lily Kel will be the prosecutor. Both the president and vice president are being represented by their attorneys respectively. This will be a jury trial and everyone in this sector will be on the jury. After the court procedures we will adjourn for three hours during which time you will be able to use your personal communicators to vote once guilty or not guilty for each defendant. We will be using the well-known and established Toair as our vote receiver and counter. 
  David Kel walked behind the podium and sat down. The sound of a gavel rang out. "This court is now in session."
  The cameras zoomed out to show the courtroom the place where the jury normally sat had been pushed back allowing for another giant table to be put on the defendant side. A lifelike hologram of President Winkler sat next to his attorney at this second table while the first table contained a hologram of vice president Almon sitting next to his attorney.
  Zephyr's hologram stood from the prosecutor's table on the other side of the courtroom and walked forward. "I call defendant Almon to the stand."
  The lifelike projection of Almon didn't move from his seat.
  Zephyr looked at him and raised an eyebrow. "Defendant Almon to the stand please."
  He still didn't move.
  David Kel looked down at him disapprovingly. "If you do not cooperate you will be found in contempt of court."
  "What's the difference? You're going to kill me either way." Almon shouted back.
  "Does that mean you're pleading guilty?" Zephyr said. "That would certainly make my job easier."
  "No I'm not!"
  "Then it is in your best interest to comply with this Court." David Kel answered. "Please take the stand."
  The attorney turned to him and quietly said, "If they are truly going to let the populace decide you may still have a chance. Especially since I seriously doubt they have the evidence to hold up these insane charges."
  Almon looked over at his attorney and the myriad of screens displaying the charges against him and then slowly stood up and he made his way to the stand.
  Zephyr stood in front of him. "I will not bother to swear you in because your actions alone as a politician have proven you to not be honorable to your word. However I would like to direct your attention to the small round bulb sitting in front of the judge. That is a lie detector it will light up red and buzz every time it detects a lie."
  Winkler's attorney shot to his feet. "Objection: lie detecting technology is known to be faulty and is not reliable for use anywhere much less in the court of law!"
  David Kel leaned forward. "Mr. Byrne you will keep your voice down. Shouting is not necessary we can all hear you just fine." David Kel stared pointedly at him just like a judge would. "And while lie detecting technology in the public sector may not be reliable I assure you the lionhearted have perfected it well over 400 years ago."
  "So you say but how do we know you're not just pushing some button back wherever you are cowardly hiding."
  The hologram of David Kel did not in the least bit rise to his acquisition instead he looked over to Zephyr as he calmly said, "If we wished to skewed justice we would not have gone to such lengths as we already have. Objection overruled. Please continue with the prosecution."

Zephyr nodded. "Almon the charges against you and your political partner are numerous so I will start with and briefly mention the criminal acquisitions against you that are not directly addressed by the three great laws, they do however break many of your own government's laws. As such I believe it is imperative they be briefly touched upon."
  A giant holographic screen appeared beside the stand.
  Zephyr waved at it and it displayed a large assortment of receipts and bills. "The first of which is millions of dollars of misappropriated Alitien governmental funds which I am sure most would refer to as embezzlement."
  Almon's eyes grew to the size of saucers as he scanned over the list. "How did yo –" he slammed his mouth shut cutting his words off midsentence.
  "Interesting." Zephyr said with a smile. "Do you have anything else to say for yourself on this matter?"
  The VP hardened his face. "I haven't a clue what any of those documents you are displaying are."
  A bright red light flashed from the bulb and the sound of the loud buzz filled the room shortly followed by Alf's voice saying, "There is a 100% chance the last statement is a lie."
  Ignoring the buzzer as if it wasn't even there Zephyr said, "I guess it won't matter to you then that I just uploaded everything on the screen to the StarNet."
  "What?" Almon exclaimed.
  Zephyr flashed him a dazzling smile. "I believe people will find it most interesting especially the part where over two hundred thousand was spent at a place called Ms. Brassy's love parlor in the course of less than two months."
  "Objection!" Almon's attorney proclaimed. "That was classified information you cannot release it to the public!"
  Taking a deep breath and pulling herself up Zephyr turned towards him. "Oh, but I didn't release it to the public. I released it to the jury which is standard court procedure."
  The attorney stared at her flabbergasted.
  "Objection overruled." David Kel said. "Please continue."
  **
  Over the course of an hour Zephyr brought forth charge after charge against Almon until the once calm and collected man had degraded into a frazzled mess. The man sat there his hands shaking, sweat pouring down his face and his eyes unfocused when at last Zephyr started to bring forth the heavier charges.
  A life-size image of Malik T Cox appeared on a hologram screen. "Do you know this man?" Zephyr asked
  Almon begin to shake terribly as his breath caught in his throat. Looking exactly like a space whale that had bumbled its way into the middle of a star way and was now caught in front of an oncoming spacecraft. "No! No I never met the man in my life."
  The buzzer screamed and the red light flashed shortly followed by Alf saying there was 100% chance he was lying.
  "Strange he is a rather high official in your government." Zephyr said pointedly. "And are records show that you and president Winkler are rather close with his half-brother Haylik J Cox."
  Almon began to squirm.
  "By the way you wouldn't just happen to know where Haylik J Cox. Currently is would you?"
  "I.. I.a –"
  "Objection!"
  Zephyr swiveled to Mr. Byrne and raised an eyebrow. "Sir?"
  "The question is at trick question, even if he says no, he in essence admits to knowing and being in contact with a crime lord."
  A barbed smile spread across zephyrs face. "But Mr. Byrne I never said anything about Haylik being a crime lord and according to your government records he's an outstanding upright citizen. Do you have information you wish to present to the court?"

The little man seemed to shrink even smaller as he realized his mistake. "No."
  David Kel snorted as he said, "Sustained."
  Zephyr looked at the judge and shrugged.
  "It may interest you to know that Mr. Malik Cox's human trafficking and other downright degrading acts became so overtly disgusting that we were forced into enacting edict thirty-five on him."
  Almon shifted irregularly in his seat.
  "Ah I see you know what edict thirty-five is." Zephyr said as she let her eyes drift downwards.
  "What does this have to do with anything!" Almon's attorney angrily blurted.
  "A lot seeing as all this." Zephyr waved her hand and a rather large hollow screen appeared beside her displaying information. "Points to Almon being directly informed and maybe even active in Malik's activities. In fact there is evidence to suggest that Malik Cox and Almon's combined effort is what's responsible for placing the object of such interest at Mrs. Brassy's love emporium."
  Silence fell in the courtroom but angry shouts could be heard from outside the secured building.
  Zephyr nodded towards David Kel he took a deep breath and said, "The information currently on display is being uploaded to the jury however certain details have been admitted for their purity of mind."
  Almon stared in horror up at David Kel.
  "Your sins will always find you out, whether it is in this life or the next." David Kel answered. "Though I pray that it be in this life and not the next so that they may repent instead of face eternal damnation."
  "So true. Sadly though Almon the charges against you and your political partner are not yet at an end." Zephyr flicked her eyes at the hollow screen and the image on it was replaced with a picture of the mobile station the lionhearted had captured. "This is a mobile station that produced drugs and assassination droids. We captured it and it is where you are currently being held. We believe it was a gift from Cox's older brother to you and the president however evidence to support this is spotty. Though by accessing its blackbox we were able to confirm that it does indeed belong to you and you have visited it at least three times. What you may have not known is that it's assassination droids had a secret added piece to their blueprints that enables them to upload all their actions and recorded data to a secure network." 
  Zephyr glanced at the man to see a completely broken expression on his face. "Or maybe you did know. Is this what Cox threatened to release if you didn't give him authority over the fleet?"
  The man remained motionless.
  "Regardless. We were able to hack into the secure network and obtain this information." The hollow screen changed and began to display pictures of dead assassinated people. "Some of these murders with these files can be directly linked to you the president and your respective operatives."
  Almon's attorney stood up. "Almon is this true!?"
  The broken man didn't respond.
  "It gets worse." Zephyr said to the attorney. "The ship had one hundred and twenty-six slaves on it and when we went to capture it this man." The hollow screen displayed the former captain of the mobile station. "Brutally murdered every last one of them."
  The hollow screen began to cycle through pictures of the mutilated slaves.
  Both David Kel and Zephyr looked away as it did.
  When it finally stopped displaying the pictures Zephyr said through clenched teeth. "That man..." She swallowed bitterly. "The man that did this was taken out of prison and set in command of the mobile station by Almon himself."

Almon's attorney collapsed his workspace and looked up towards Almon. "I didn't sign up for this type of madness." He picked up his workspace and addressed David Kel. "Your Honor, may I have your leave?"
  David Kel nodded towards him. "You may. If you like I can send with you a few bots for security."
  "That won't be necessary the angry mob out there is not for me." He turned walked down the long hallway and exited through the four doors of security into the gathering throng of people outside.
  "Your Honor I am done with the defendant at this time."
  David Kel nodded at her. "Does anyone else wish to cross examine the defendant?"
  Mr. Byrne the president's attorney stood up. "I do Your Honor."
  David Kel waved to him.
  The attorney walked up in front of the stand. "Was my client privy to your actions."
  Almon looked up at him lifelessly. "Yes."
  "Are you saying he knew every detail of your actions?"
  "Yes."
  "So he knew 'everything' were doing?"
  "Yes."
  The red lights flashed and the buzzer went off followed by Alf's voice saying. "There is a great deal of falsehood in the last statement."
  Mr. Byrne smirked at the red light "No further questions."
  "You can't do that that's manipulation of facts." Zephyr blurted.
  "Not at all. While Almon may indeed be guilty of the charges leveled against him, I aim to prove that my client is not guilty of anything other than neglecting to look deeper into his political partner's private life."
  "What?!" Zephyr shouted.
  "Zephyra." David Kel scolded harshly.
  "But he..." His glare cut her off. 
  The hologram of David Kel calmly turned to the hologram of Almon. "At this time we would normally allow your attorney to present a defense on your behalf. Sadly however your attorney has left the court of his own volition. I can see about procuring another if you so wish or you may present your own defense."
  "What's the use? My entire life has been paraded in front of the populace. Even if I was miraculously prove myself innocent at this point and I am set free someone would just assassinate me tomorrow." A flickering of defiance burned in the man. "I will say this though Winkler is just as guilty as I am if not even mor–"
  "Objection! The man has admitted to his own guilt and only wishes to blame his own wrongdoings of my client." 
  Almon shot to his feet and exploded. "Both of you are just sitting there with smug looks on your face thinking that your above the law well I thought that as well. Look at me now! I hope they drag out your deepest darkest secrets like they did mine!" The vice president stomped off out of view of the hollow camera and his hologram disappeared.
  The hologram of Winkler shifted uncomfortably but his attorneys face remained placid.
  "Sir, Do you wish me to enter his cell and bring him back into view?" Alf's voice asked.
  "No, not at this time." David Kel answered. "Let's continue."
  Zephyr nodded. "I would like to call defendant Winkler to the stand."
  The lifelike hologram of the president stood up and confidently walked over to the seat and sat down.
  "All right just like before I'm going to start with your many many normal crim–"

"Objection. As you yourself have stated before, these normal crimes you speak of do not violate the three great laws and are therefore out of your jurisdiction. You do not have the right nor authority to call my client to task for them. And as such you cannot display them in this court."
  Zephyr narrowed her eyes at him. "Um no, that type of insane reasoning is not going to fly here."
  "Your honor you yourself said some 300 years ago. And I quote 'The lionhearted do not involve themselves in politics of any nation or organization. Our only interest is in upholding the three great laws.' Displaying these supposed crimes against this nation laws is meddling in politics something you yourself said you would not do. Especially because they're involved with the highest order of our government. You and this court have no jurisdiction in these matters."
  Michael took off his hat looked at the screen where Alf's form was currently being displayed. "Is what he saying true?"
  "Sadly Sir I believe so."
  Stephanie opened her eyes. "But a lot of these things do sort of break the three great laws."
  "Yes and for that reason you can proceed if you wish to. However in many schools of thought in the lionhearted you would be over stepping your bounds and authority."
  Michael nodded. "Okay then we won't do it."
  "What why not?" Daniel blurted.
  "Because I don't feel right about uploading a lot of this horrible stuff to the net were even little kids are going to read it. I didn't feel right doing it for Almon and I certainly won't feel okay about doing it for this guy."
  Michael put back on his hat and in the lifelike hologram of David Kel said, "Sustained."
  A loud roar of disapproval came from the mass of people now surrounding the court building.
  Zephyr looked over her shoulder. "Bailiff." One of the droids being controlled by Alf stepped forward. "I think it would be wise to make sure that the crowd control on this facility is operational. Just in case some of the angry mob out there decides to break in and lynch mob Mr. Byrne here."
  Winkler's attorney flashed her a smug smile but didn't say anything.
  Zephyr returned her attention to Mr. Winkler and waved her hand at the hollow screen. "I believe it best for us just to cut straight to the chase. These files here directly connect you to many of the aforementioned murders."
  Mr. Winkler calmly scanned over the information being displayed on the hollow screen. After a bit he said, "Yes, I believe you have already displayed this information and it does indeed prove that my colleague Mr. Almon was directly responsible for the actions it states. However it mentions nothing of me in them and as such I do not see how I can be held responsible for his ill discretion."
  Zephyr turned to look at the hollow screen and seeing it at once realized that it was the information put together to prove that almond was guilty not the one they had put together for Mr. Winkler. She quickly waved her hand at it but nothing happened.
  She waved her hand at it again this time saying. "Change to evidence file 108." But still nothing happened.
  She looked at David Kel and Michael couldn't help but having him shrug.
  "One second." Zephyr said to the court.
  Stephanie took off at. "Steven what's going on?"
  Steven was wildly clicking and touching things on the screens in front of him. "A little busy here."
  Catherine jumped to her feet and ran over to look at the screens he was messing with. "This is not good. Someone has taken over the courtroom and they are now using our hack against us."

Daniel stood to his feet. "Can you do anything about it?"
  "I'm trying!" Steven angrily answered. "But I'm not just dealing with one person there's at least six if not ten or twelve."
  Stephanie pulled back on her hat and Zephyr snapped around. "Hacking our systems will not protect your client from justice."
  Mr. Byrne began to clap. "Oh, excellent ploy. I applied you." He stood up. "However it will not work here. If you think you can get away with not showing definitive proof and still convict my client by saying someone hacked your system I assure you, you are mistaken."
  Stephanie opened her eyes. "Is there anything we can do right now?"
  "Steven has his hands full right now but I'm trying to track and triangulate the hackers positions. From how fast they are responding to Stevens counters I'd say they have to be on the colony otherwise there would be some lag in their responses."
  Michael opened his eyes. "Good observation. Daniel get as many drones in the air on the colony I want to be able to respond the instant she locates them. And Stephanie don't let Mr. Byrne provoke you if you lose your calm he wins."
  Stephanie took a deep breath and nodded then closed her eyes to hear the attorney saying. "Your honor it appears the prosecution has stepped out for a bit."
  "No I'm still here."
  "Well then may I suggest that you proceed? Or is it that you cannot because you do not have any evidence to hold up these ridiculous charges you have against my client."
  Zephyr didn't answer him instead she turned back to Mr. Winkler. "Mr. President are you saying you did not have anything to do with these murderers at all?
  The president's eyes flicked over to the lie detector on the podium then he smiled. "I do not believe trying to connect me to someone else's crimes is normal court procedure."
  "I did not ask you for your opinions on my actions. I asked you a simple yes or no question. Did you or did you not have anything to do with these murderers?"
  "Objection. If my clients says no you will undoubtedly have someone activate that lie detector making it seem like he incriminated himself."
  "What!? You just use the lie detector to propagate your own twisted facts and now you're trying to say it is unreliable?"
  "It is underneath the lionhearted control and therefore anything coming from it cannot be ratified. However I believe I managed to catch you off guard with it and utilize it against this phony list of charges."
  Zephyr's face grew beat red but before she shouted something she took a deep breath and turned to David Kel. "Your Honor I would like a few minutes to relieve myself of some bodily fluids and anger in the local facilities."
  David Kel opened his mouth to answer but the attorney once again said. "Objection. She will undoubtedly use this time to come up with some falsified devious plan to incriminate my client."
  David Kel couldn't stop his face from displaying a bit of disgust as he looked at Mr. Byrne and said, "This court case has been going on for an hour and a half. I believe it is customary to have a recess at this point if asked for and as such I must say. 'Overruled'. This court will now recess for fifteen minutes."
  Stephanie threw her hat on the floor. "I can't stand that guy!" She said as he began to stomp off.
  "Where you going?" Daniel shouted after her.
  "To the bathroom. I wasn't lying when I said I had to go."
  **
  Stephanie came back onto the bridge two minutes later. "How's it going?"

Daniel looked up from the screens that Catherine was working on. "So-so. Steven still battling it out with the hackers and we managed to locate where there at."
  "Then why haven't we already launched in assault?"
  "This is why." Michael waved and what Catherine was looking at him. Up on the main view screen. 
  It displayed a twenty-three story building and at its base were six heavy combat robots and at least 100 men.
  "And those are just the enemy units we can see. The building itself is bound to have a lot more and sadly from what we can tell the hackers are at the very top meaning we would have to fight through all twenty-three floors and we don't have time for that."
  "What about air?"
  "The colony's roof is not high enough for the use of jets or a parachute and even if it was the anti-air they have installed on the roof would shoot you down as soon as you came in range. And if I try to take a drone in close enough to deploy droids it will be shot to shreds as well." Daniel answered.
  Catherine close to screens in front of her and just looked up at the main screen. "Didn't Steven once say the androids could fly?"
  Stephanie shook her head. "Only specialized units can and are androids were made for ground combat not air. Though I think I can get in."
  "How?" Daniel asked anxiously.
  "Take a drone in high enough to avoid their anti-air and just drop Zephyr in how else?"
  Steven didn't turn away from the screen he was working on. "Won't work the height you would have to drop from would break the android."
  "Not if Zephyr had a shield medallion on."
  "But you can't run both at... Ah you mean to keep Zephyr off until after you landed!"
  "Exactly. As soon as it makes impact we manually deactivate the medallion from here and then power up Zephyr."
  "Let's do it. I already have unit overhead and I'm opening the dimensional door now. You just have to put a medallion on Zephyr and push her through."
  **
  Malik Cox took his hand down from his ear. "Tell all units to be ready. my brother just informed me that the court has left for a recess and he thinks they're going to try something."
  "Yes sir. I'll inform them at once" A man replied. And put his own hand to his ear.
  Malik smiled as he looked at the eighteen top-notch hackers busy at work with their computers. "Soon he would know the concordance to where the lionhearted were hiding and he would have his revenge."
  A heavy boom and smashing sound erupted from the ceiling shaking it.
  Everyone stopped moving as dust fell from the roof.
  "Don't just stand there check it out!" Malik Cox shouted.
  The six men in the room dashed towards the stairs and shot up them with ferocious vitality.
  But a few seconds later their screams filed the air and one came flying back down the stairs with such force that he slid across the floor to Malik's feet.
  Zephyr appeared at the bottom of the stairs holding some type of glowing shield.
  Malik's face turned white as he stared at her with horror. "H..how."
  Zephyr's eyes darted towards him. "Malik, it's such a pleaser to see you again."
  Malik grabbed his gun with both hands and try to aim it at her but she came at him like lightning smashing her glowing shield into his face. He went flying backwards into a wall and all faded to blackness."

**
  Zephyr looked over towards the computers and the hackers lining the one wall. "If I were any of you I would step away from the computers"
  The hacker stopped what they're doing. Put their hands up and slowly got up from their computers.
  Zephyr pulled the Handy beam off her back and pulled the trigger. She raked the beam that came out across the computers turning each one into nothing but melted slag.
  Shouts could be heard coming from downstairs. Zephyr grabbed Malik by the collar and dragged his unconscious form back up the stairs and onto the roof where she quickly deployed a dimensional door and stepped through taking Malik with her.
  **
  David Kel's hologram reappeared in the courthouse shortly followed by Zephyr's hologram as well.
  Winkler's hologram was already sitting beside his attorney Mr. Byrne.
  "The recess is over and this court is now in session." David Kel said as an invisible gavel clacked
  Mr. Winkler looks smugly at Zephyr. "I'm guessing you want me to take the stand?"
  "No actually I don't. I'm having this man take the stand." She waved and a hologram of Malik appeared in the stand sitting in a seat. The entire right side of his face was a mess and he was obviously unconscious.
  Both Mr. Winkler and his attorney's eyes grew wide with shock and horror.
  "O I see you both do you know Mr. Malik Cox." Zephyr said with a giant smile on her face. "And I bet both of you also know where I just got him from to, as well."
  Neither of the men said anything.
  "No? Well I found him in an extremely well guarded building holding eighteen hackers at gunpoint forcing them to hack into this very courthouse making it so I couldn't display the necessary evidence. But honestly I think both of you knew that."
  Holographic water splashed on Malik washing some of the blood on his face off and waking him up.
  Malik groggily looked about and as soon as his eyes fell upon Mr. Byrne his face turned sheet white and he sat up straight.
  "Good morning Mr. Cox I'm glad you could join us. As you well known I found you doing everything in your power to impede justice. This fact coupled together with your past sins gives me more than enough right underneath the lionhearted law to execute you on the spot. I suggest you give me your full cooperation."
  Malik's eyes flickered for Mr. Byrne to Zephyr and back again. He licked his lips. "What do I get if I cooperate?"
  "Depending upon your cooperation I'm willing to offer up to three different locations on a prison planet where you can live out the rest your life in peace."
  "No dice. If you stick me in jail I am as good as dead anyway."
  "Not on our prison planet. It is an antediluvian planet outside of this galaxy."
  Malik's attention shot back to her. "That's not possible. No one can leave this galaxy and there are no antediluvian planets left."
  "We can and I assure you there is." 
  "Who are you guys? Are you aliens!?"
  "No were not aliens." Zephyr laughed.
  "But you're not completely human though either are you! No human can live as long as you guys have or move like you can!"
  "Mr. Cox I am the one asking the questions here. Will you cooperate or not?"
  "Maybe."
  Zephyr waved her hand and three pictures appeared on the hollow screen. "If you cooperate only marginally you will live here." She pointed at a Valley between two volcanoes that was more or less desert with scattered fauna. "If you cooperate better you can live here. As you can see it's a swamp and not very hospitable but definitely livable. If you give us your complete cooperation you can live here." Zephyr pointed at the last picture that displayed a tropical paradise on the beach.
  Malik's eyes went from the picture of the beach to Mr. Byrne then back again then they wandered off into the distance as he obviously scanned his holding cell. "I'll cooperate."
  Mr. Byrne clenched his fist and his face became red but he didn't say anything.
  "Good. What do you know about Mr. Winkler?"
  "Him and my older half-brother grew up together and I once watched him kill two people with his own hands when they walked in on something they shouldn't have seen."
  "Objection. This man is a known criminal that is being publicly bribed to incriminate my client!"
  "Mr. Byrne, honestly the jig is up. I have back full control over my evidence." Zephyr waved her hand and multiple hollow screens appeared displaying evidence against Winkler. "And I'm already uploading it to the jury. The people aren't idiots and the wild stunts you are trying to pull will not work on them."
  All the droids in the room came to life and they began to cover the exits. A giant hologram of Alf appeared in the middle of the courtroom.
  David Kel looked up at him. "Bailiff?"
  "Sir. The way Mr. Cox kept looking at Mr. Byrne made me suspicious and after a few scanned I found out that his DNA oddly matches parts of Mr. Byrne's. As such I believe Mr. Byrne is actually Haylik J Cox the older half-brother to Malik."
  The attorney shot to his feet and shouted. "This court case is a sham and I think it's time that it came to an end."
  The entire back wall behind the podium exploded and seconds later men dressed in black poured in. 
  The whole courtroom degraded into a battlefield as Alf's droids and the men in black open fired on each other.
  Ripping off the mix of plastic and hologramic screen that formed his masks Mr. Byrne who was really Haylik J Cox shouted. "Used the hologram system trace it back. Find where they are. Now!"
  In response to his order one of the men in black charge straight through David Kel's hologram and shoved something into the back of the podium which housed the operating system for the entire courtroom. All the holograms in the room faded and disappeared.
  Michael ripped off his hat. "Cut hologram broadcast now."
  "Already done." Steven answered back. "But it won't matter the court room has a force hold connect system which stores the last location of the holographic images to be sent, for security and quick reconnect purposes."
  Stephanie's face flooded with alarm. "Why didn't you tell us this before?" 
  "I did that's why we're broadcasting from the mobile station not here!"

 

RESULTS



              
  Catherine grabbed a hat and put it on. "Forget that! We can stop this right here right now we just have to take Cox. Get Zephyr and David Kel in there. Me and Daniel will try to stall them long enough so you can."
  Stephanie, Michael nodded and put back on the hats. Catherine closed her eyes and connected her consciousness to one of the droids Alf was currently controlling.
  The droid opened its eyes just in time to have its head ripped off by a railgun weapon. Catherine grimaced as the pain flooded her. That was stupid she had the machine stand up as she was taking control of it.
  She threw her awareness into another droid this time making sure to leave it in cover as she came into it.
  The droid looked around. "Alf where's Cox?" It's metallic voice tanged.
  Alf highlighted Cox in a gold outline in the droids view. He was already to the back wall and his men had formed a barrier around him. In seconds he be outside the building. "Alf we have to stop him!"
  "I've been shooting at him but he has some type of personal shield system and has survived three direct hits already."
  "Then guns are of no use. Throw me!" Said a metallic voice beside the droid she was controlling.
  The droid Daniel was controlling turned its back to her's and crouched. "Hurry! He's getting away."
  She reached her droid out grabbed him and launched him through the air.
  Daniels droid almost instantly drew the attention of all the men in black as it flew through the air but a flying target was hard to hit and it only lost its left arm and took a few hits the midsection before it landed fully operational.
  The droid landed right behind Cox and used its momentum to swing its right arm in a pow driving punch that smashed Cox in the back of the neck.
  A yellow shield shimmered around Cox as the metal fist made contact protecting him from what would've been a killing blow it however could not fully stop the inertia behind the hit.
  Cox hit the ornamental wooden floor so hard he literally bounced head over heels. But still his shield protected him and he was able to shake it off and try to stand up.
  Daniel realizing this through the remains of the droid he was controlling on top of him pinning him to the ground.
  The men around him instantly smashed the droids head in and started to pull it off Cox. 
  Daniel had stalled Cox for a few moments but Zephyr and David Kel were just starting to come through the dimensional door one of Alf's droids had deployed.
  "Throw me again!" Another droid beside Catherine's shouted.
  Catherine didn't hesitate this time and instantly grabbed the new droid Daniel was controlling and tossed him into the air towards Cox.
  This time however the men in Black were ready and the hum of a heavy frequency-based weapon filled the room.
  Daniels airborne droid exploded into shrapnel and Daniel let out a scream.
  Catherine opened her eyes to see Daniel collapsed on the floor. Alarm filled her "Are you okay?"
  "I'm fine." He breathed. "All the pain.. Emitters on it went off at once that's all."
  Catherine nodded and closed her eyes refocusing on the droid she was controlling.
  Cox was already back on his feet and running through the hole in the wall.

He turned sharply to the left and disappeared from view.
  Catherine ripped off her hat. "He's out of the building and he ran to the left!"
  Stephanie faintly nodded. "We'll get him."
  **
  David Kel and Zephyr were through the dimensional door into the roiling battle that was now the courtroom. They brought up their shields and link them together as they begin charging down towards the podium. 
  "Alf protect our flank." David Kel shouted as they ran.
  They slammed right into a role of men and the men went flying but neither Zephyr nor David Kel slowed as they ran straight for the back wall.
  They hit the back wall with such force and power that the solid metal that formed it ripped apart like a cheap tin can.
  David Kel and Zephyr came out right in front of Cox.
  He stared at them in shock. Zephyr seized the opportunity and broke the shield link as she leapt at him and swung out with the shield.
  The stunned Cox didn't have time to move and the shield smashed into his side and he went flying into a wall.
  But to both David Kel's and Zephyr surprise the shield around Cox held. He sprung to his feet as his men poured out of the building and started to shoot at them forcing them to crouched down and relink their shields to protect themselves.
  Without opening her eyes Stephanie shouted. "Steven what's up with his shield?"
  "I don't know! My hands are full trying to deal with that weird object they stabbed into the podium!"
  "I'll try to figure out! Alf send everything you have recorded on that shield to my counsel." Catherine stated. Instantly multiple screens appeared in front of her.
  David Kel and Zephyr shields started to dim and they were forced into retreating behind a building. 
  "They have too many heavy weapons, are shields will not hold against the onslaught and they are expertly covering Cox's retreat." The
  **
  The man's retreating to protect Cox had allowed Alf to push the droids forward. Daniel seen an opening and he smiled as he took control of one of the droids off to the side of the podium.
  The droid jumped out from behind its cover and dashed the few steps to the man that had the frequency-based weapon. In one swift movement Daniel's droid yanked the weapon from the man's hands then ripped it in half. 
  The man's eyes grew wide and he stared at the droid in horror as the droid grabbed the gun's core in its metal hand.
  WaaaLooom! The core cried in an ear deafening wail that ended in a drumming echo.
  Everything went white and Daniel quickly ripped his hat off.
  **
  David Kel peaked his head around the corner and watched in amazement as all the men in Black were sucked back into the courtroom then milliseconds later shot back out flying in all directions to slide to the ground unconscious.
  "What just happened?!" Zephyr breathed.
  "I believe Lord Maddog just lived up to his name." Alf answered his voice full of amusement.
  "What?"
  "No time to think about it right now! Cox is still getting away." David Kel shouted at her.
  She didn't have to be told twice and both of them darted around the corner and dashed off after Cox jumping over the fallen and scattered men as they went.

They caught up to Cox and David Kel grabbed him by the back of the head and slammed him down face forward into the ground.
  The man however simply bounced off the ground flipped head over heels and jump to his feet. The golden shimmer of his shield shining bright.
  The crowd that had gathered in front of the courtroom was so large now that had spilled over to the side of the building and Cox seeing them ran into the mist as more of his men came into view.
  "This is ridiculous." Michael complained.
  Zephyr jumped flinging herself forward like a rocket and came down on the men in black. She batted a man with her left arm as she smashed another with the shield in her right hand. "Catherine please tell me you have something on that shield."
  "I do but you're not going to like it. It's powered wirelessly and I believe it's directly tide into the grid. So either you have to hit him hard enough to break the shield in one go or take down the entire colony grid."
  David Kel dashed into the crowd that were now pointing and gaping at him as he followed Cox. "What's that give us for options?"
  "The Handy beam at 100% power aimed either at him or at one of the colonies main conduit."
  "But if I take out the conduit on this colony it will leave a lot of people without power and possibly end with a lot of deaths!"
  "Yes and if you hit Cox with it, with enough power to break through his shielding it will kill him."
  Zephyr finished disabling the men in black and followed after David Kel. "So it's either us him or the people?"
  "More or less."
  Cox broke through the other side of the crowd and grabbed a girl that was no more than eight years old ripping her off her feet and away from her mother. "If you keep following me I will kill this girl!" He shouted back.
  "Well then I choose him." David Kel answered as he reached back and grab Zephyr by the caller and threw her.
  Zephyr flew inches over the heads of the crowd and landed on the other side of him a few feet in front of Cox. She rolled and came up in an uppercut that smashed into Cox's chin before he could possibly react.
  He dropped the girl as he went flying into the air.
  David Kel jerked the Handy beam off his back, aimed and pulled the trigger all in one swift motion.
  A beam as bright as a star shot out and smashed into the flying target that was Cox.
  The beam lasted for less than half a second but it broke through the shield surrounding him and left the 12 inch in diameter hole in the middle of his chest.
  Haylik J Cox dropped to the ground dead.
  The crowd became deathly still.
  Zephyr gently picked up the little girl and handed her back to her mother. The mother smiled but couldn't bring herself to say anything.
  David Kel walked towards Zephyr and the crowd parted without making so much as a noise.
  Zephyr nodded at the crowd and her and David Kel picked up Cox's body walked around the corner of a nearby building and disappeared from view.
  **
  Fifteen minutes later Steven once again hit the button and his screens started to turn green signaling his hack was working.
  "You sure it's safe to be doing this shouldn't we be moving the mobile station or something?" Daniel asked
  "I am moving the mobile station. However I am rather sure it is not necessary seeing as your stunt completely obliterated the podium and all of its components making it rather impossible for anyone to use it to trace of us."

"O."
  **
  All the major news outlets in the sector Flickr black then showed David Kel standing were the podium in the courtroom used to be. This time however he was in the flesh not a hologram.
  The cameras zoomed out and he said, "I'm sorry for the interruption but as you can see." He waved at the disaster around him. "We were attacked. I do believe however that you all as the jury have received sufficient information to make a decision. As such the court will adjourn for the stated amount of time during which you the jury will be able to signify your conclusion using the contact information on the screen now."
  A man wearing a police uniform made his way through all three security doors into the courtroom. "Wait. Before you leave we would like to have statement on the man you just gunned down in front of thousands."
  Michael opened his eyes and looked at Alf and the giant lion nodded. "It is a fair request so I let him in."
  Michael closed his eyes and David Kel took a deep breath "His name was Haylik J Cox the real man in control of your government. He held Almon's and Winkler's lease and was responsible for a list of crimes as long as this court room is wide. His younger half-brother is providing us with a lot of the details which are already being forwarding to your records. We hope this and other information we are adding to your database will enable you to solve a lot more crimes and take down what remains of the criminal organizations in your sector. If you so choose to do that is."
  The officer looked at the ground for a few seconds then he stood up straight and met David Kel's eyes. "Thank you we will look into it."
  The man turned and walked out of the courtroom.
  "Court adjourned." David Kel announce formally.
  **
  "That's it times up. Toair's automated systems just shut down the voting what's the final count?" Daniel asked.
  Catherine looked up from her screen. "For president Winkler Approximately 46 billion votes guilty and 16 billion votes not guilty."
  Daniel whistled. "I didn't even realize there is that many people in this sector."
  "Actually Daniel there is around 83 billion people in this sector." Catherine told him.
  "What's the vote count for the vice president?" Michael asked.
  Catherine looked back down at the screen and shook her head disapprovingly. "Only about 1 million guilty and less than 100,000 not guilty."
  "I guess most people either forgot about him or thought it wasn't necessary to vote after he more or less admitted he was guilty." Steven said.
  "All right Steven are you ready to hack the networks again?" Stephanie asked.
  "No need there's hundreds of reporters with cameras already in the courtroom and I have a few drones in there with hollow projectors."
  Michael nodded and put on a hat
  **
  A lifelike hologram of David Kel appeared standing were the podium used to be.
  Thousands of lights and flashes started and David Kel had to raise his voice above their noise. "I am certain all of you have already seen the results of the jury verdict. As such this court must find and has found both vice president Almon and president Winkler guilty of the charges against them."
  David Kel looked down at the mass of reporters taking pictures and recording his statement. He swallowed. "To be honest I don't enjoy having to proclaim their sentence. If I could I would just send them to a prison planet where they can live out the rest the lives and not hurt anyone but the blood on their hands cries out for greater punishment. As such I sentence them to public execution effective immediately. 
  A hologram of both guilty parties holding cells appeared side-by-side. Almon sat in his cell staring down at his hands with tears in his eyes. President Winkler on the other hand was angrily walking back and forth clenching and unclenching his fist.
  Alf's voice spoke over one of the drones speakers "A vaporized substance like morphine is being pumped in to their cells now. It will slowly deaden their feelings then stop the bodily functions and they will lay down and fall asleep to never wake again."
  The mist was completely invisible its effect however was apparent. Both of the prisoners movements became slower and eventually Almon sat back and president Winkler sat against one of his cells walls and leaned his head forward.
  A few minutes later neither were moving anymore.
  David Kel nodded to the reporters than him and the two other holograms disappeared.
  **
  Michael took off his hat. "Alf you didn't really kill them did you?"
  "No sir they're just asleep like you asked."
  "Good then drop them and all the prisoners we have onto the prison planets wherever you see fit. Though I think Almon has repented some so give him a decent place to live."
  "Are you sure sir? In lionhearted law they deserve death."
  "I know but I already have one man's blood on my hands today. I don't wish to add to it."
  "Agreed." Stephanie stated firmly.
  "Understood."

 

THE UNEXPECTED 



              
  Michael lay tossing and turning in his bed when his door open and a black shadow appeared in the doorway.
  He jumped to his feet as the droid stepped into the room.
  "Sir."
  He took a deep breath of relief. "Yes Alf what is it? Why do you wake me at such an hour?"
  "I believe I've made a grave miscalculation. You and your family must come to the bridge immediately." The droid deployed a dimensional door and it opened to the bridge.
  Michael stepped through to the bridge and the droid weaved him into his seat. A few seconds later the dimensional door opened again and Catherine with Daniel walked in. Catherine was wearing a nightshirt and Daniel had just pulled on pants without bothering to put on a shirt. Or maybe he just didn't have time to put one on if the droid pushing them was any indication.
  Steven was the next one to come in his hair all a mess and his eyes droopy. 
  "What's going on Alf?" Daniel asked.
  "Just wait for Stephanie gets here it's better if I don't have to tell you twice." One of the droids answered.
  They waited for another three minutes before Stephanie finally came through the dimensional door. She was fully dressed and the droid she came with was missing an arm.
  "Still beaten up on poor defenseless training bots I see." Daniel teased.
  Stephanie glared at him she was obviously not happy about being woken up this late at night.
  Alf's lion form appeared on the main view screen. "I'm sorry for waking you all up but I believe time is of the essence."
  "What's wrong?" Michael asked.
  "When we were discussing taking the president and vice president I gave you my best calculation of what would happen afterwards. I told you that it would enable us to get at the real sources of the crime war."
  "Which it did we got Cox. Sadly we had to kill him to do it but we got him." Daniel said.
  "No he was just one player of the game. And as it turns out my speculations were gravely erred."
  "What do you mean?" Michael asked.
  "It's best if I show you."
  Alf disappeared and was replaced with some type of news report.
  A woman was standing in front of a picture of a powerless starway ring. "All the star ways in your sector are down! Every way out of the sector has been blockaded. We are demanding the lionhearted give themselves up to face justice and have placed a 40 billion bounty on their heads. Anyone having any information on their whereabouts will be wirelessly wired 1 million if they send the information to the contact information scrolling along the bottom of the screen." 
  The short message begin to repeat again and Alf let them watch it one more time before he turned it off.
  "Wow man someone's peed!" Daniel mused.
  "This message is being played over every network and that 'Someone' is the newly formed collaboration consisting of four out of six of the leading authorities in the sectors surrounding this sector. And from my observation I believe the other two authorities will join them by morning."
  Daniels face drained of color.
  "Their combined fleets have already entered the sector and are scouring the outer reaches as we speak."

Stephanie silently whispered. "The same thing happened to the lionhearted 300 years ago."
  The room became deathly still as the realization of what Alf was saying hit them.
  Steven was the first to shake himself. "How long do we have until there at our doorstep?"
  "Twelve hours at most but probably closer to six or seven. You need to get everything you want to save off your space station and we need to get out of here."
  "Wait can't we just put you back where you were with the asteroid surrounding you and act like just everyday miners." Catherine asked.
  "Sadly that is not an option one of the first things they did is retrieve the remains of the one Starfighter I was not able to micro self destruct because Daniel overloaded the dimensional door on it. The missiles obliterated most of it however I am without a doubt they will spend the astronomical amount of resources needed to track where the ores it's made out of come from."
  Steven put his hand to eyes. "And that ore comes from our mining station."
  "If you stay here they will torture you get everything you know then kill you. As such it will be much wiser to use your station as a decoy and let them destroy it thinking they got us."
  "Are you saying we have to abandon our home?" Stephanie cried.
  "I'm afraid so. There is no possible way we can fight the onslaught that is coming and the station itself moves to slow and is not maneuverable enough for us to get it to the lionhearted secret star away."
  **
  Mr. Henderson A Davenger sat in the Capt.'s seat of the capital commanding ship of the combined fleets.
  The instant the lionhearted had taken out the battleship he had gathered all the information on them he could and gone to his commanding officer telling them this could be a serious threat. He was laughed at and scorned.
  Now however his foresight and knowledge had gained him command over the combined fleets of eight ruling powers.
  "Sir we found another hacking relay of some sort."
  "Does it look like the same make as the others?"
  "Seems so Sir."
  "The materials they are made out of, does it as well match the Starfighters?"
  "We don't know for sure yet Sir but there's a high chance."
  "Looks like we have indeed found their supplier if not them themselves."
  "Do you wish to divert the fleets Sir?"
  Henderson put his finger to his chin as he thought about it. He had the combined fleets combing every inch of the sector in a systematic pattern as fast as possible. In fact the suspected mining space station was going to be searched in only about five hour. He could easily let things take their course but then again that was a long time especially when it came to someone as brilliant as the lionhearted. 
  However, if the mining station turned out to indeed be the lionhearted's base of operation he would need at least a fleet with him the instant they got in range. Taking that many units out of the search pattern would leave holes and possibly allow for the lionhearted to escape. He was not foolish enough to believe that some small blockade at the sector's exits could possibly stop them.
  There was also the very high chance that the mining station has been selling to them without knowing who they are or even where there at. Which would be very much like the lionhearted.

"No, I believe it is best for us to continue with our current course of action and not leave any room for error."
  **
  Daniel walked into the sanctuary on their station to see Stephanie sitting in one of the back rows. "Ah there you are. Alf says we only have one maybe two hours left and he wants us all off the station now just in case they have some way of interfering with the dimensional doors. Steven says the chance is slim that they do but it's better to be cautious than sorry."
  Stephanie barely turned to look back towards him but he could tell she was crying when she said, "This is my home the place that God gave dad we can't just leave it like this."
  Daniel sat down beside her. She was right of course this was also his home where he had grown up most of his life. And dad.. what would dad think if he knew the mess they got themselves into. Daniel hung his head and began to think about dad and mom.
  Unlike them dad and mom lived wild and exciting life's as missionaries to some of the most dangerous parts in the galaxy. They were honestly the most amazing people he knew. And they were so in touch with God they would never got themselves in such a mess as this. But.. But as he thought about some of the miraculous stories they sent home, he remembered that they hadn't always been so amazing.
  Without looking up Daniel said, "Do you remember the stories about what dad was like when he was younger?"
  Stephanie wiped at the tiers underneath her right eye and looked over at him. She stared at him for a few seconds then gave a slight nod.
  Their father when he was younger had been a druggie and a gangster. He was born with a speech impediment and immovable bones in his ears. Most people had seen him as a retard and a menace to society. By his nineteenth birthday he'd had, had enough of living and went to commit suicide but as he went to slit his wrist God's presence entered the room. Holy fear took a hold of him and he knew that if he killed himself he would split hell wide open. That night instead of committing suicide like he planned to do he turned his life over to God.
  And boy did his life change. Despite the heaviness in his heart Daniel couldn't help but smile when he thought about some of the stories his father had told him. In fact his father had actually written a book about the first several months of his walk with God called the Chronicles of Micah.
  The book told how God healed his speech impediment and took him from being a retarded junkie that had to sell drugs for his next fix to an on fire Jesus freak that changed the lives of everyone around him. The book had many amazing stories in. But it didn't cover half of his father's amazing life like how his father met his mother and knew instantly she was the one.
  Stephanie took a shuddering breath. "Why do you ask?"
  Daniel took his own heavy breath. "You said about God giving him this station and couldn't stop thinking about how it all happened."
  She nodded and raised her lionhearted communication medallion so Daniel could easily see the old hollow recordings it was projecting over top of it.
  It was snippets of the space station being built. He and Stephanie sat quietly as they watched the hologram play across the top of the medallion.
  Dad had built the space station that was to be a church with no money. It was a long complicated crazy story but God had seen him through it all. 
  And as the saying goes build it and they will come. And come they did the church grew and expanded until they had to add a school then the mining facilities to support the school. Next was the broadcast systems then the StarNet network. The list grew on and on until the small station his father had built with no money was shipping food, missionary supplies, relief and support and Bibles all around the galaxy."

The hollow snippets came to an end and Stephanie lowered the medallion. Slowly she raised her head and looked out over the empty chairs that were now covered in dust from disuse.
  All that had been years ago when they were still kids for their dad wasn't perfect no he blew it. He hired people God specifically told him not to and those people split the church more than once. During that time God warned him that his daughter, Daniel's youngest sister, was going to be hurt in an accident. God told both his mother and father but neither of them listened and she died.
  His father in his grieving let go of the churches management and the remaining authority turned on each other and devoured themselves and the flock like piranhas.
  When his father ask God why he let these things happen, God answered with a simple. "Because you were focused more on building your own kingdom then building my kingdom."
  His father realized this was in deed true and in his grief and pain, like it is so easy to do, he went from one ditch to another. He went from teaching that God is love and all you have to do is live a good life to telling the people that God hated them.
  As a result the rest of the church fell to shambles and shortly after their Fathers mother died and then his sister... 
  Many people thought he had lost his mind and his marriage crumbled around him. At one point mom had, had her bags packed. 
  Stephanie stood up. "What if all this is happening because we blew it, just like dad did?"
  Daniel didn't answer.
  "Did we really have the right to do what we've done?!"
  Daniel could only stare up at her.
  "I mean was it really okay for Michael to kill Cox! Aren't we playing God or at least usurping authority?"
  Daniel put his head into his hands. "I don't know, I don't know!"
  Stephanie flopped back down into the seat and began to cry again. "We're losing everything. Everything!"
  Daniel couldn't think of anything to say so he just sat there as Stephanie's words brought back to his remembrance how his dad many years ago told him that he had lost everything and was now losing their mother.
  The conversation was quite vivid in his memory. Watching his father the most amazing man that he had ever known fall to his knees and cry like a baby as he talked to them.
  But as he really thought about it that's the day when things begin to change. His dad had become a broken man and in doing so his father's heart had once again become pure before God and God in his mercy raised him up and restore his marriage and his mind. 
  Now dad and mom traveled the galaxy as missionaries to some of the most dangerous places in the universe changing people's lives and bringing hope where there was no hope.
  Daniel scooted closer to Stephanie and put his arm around her. "I might not know if our actions are correct or not but I do know what dad would say about the loss of the space station if he were here."
  She looked at him and he took a deep shaky breath. "The station is just a material object. It will pass away one day whether it be today or 1000 years from now. It is not worth your life or your immortal soul."
  "I know that!" Stephanie said looking away. "But I grew up here! It holds thousands if not hundreds of thousands of memories for me."
  Michael came in. "There you guys are Alf wants us off the station."
  "I know Daniel told me already." Stephanie said bitterly.
  Michael obviously could hear the pain in her voice because he walked over and quietly told Daniel that Alf needed him right now because he wanted to move the station into the gas cloud where they had retrieved him. And he needed Daniels piloting skills to do it.

Daniel nodded and got up. Michael sat in the seat he had been in and quietly began to talk to Stephanie.
  **
  "We will be arriving at the suspected mining station soon."
  Mr. Henderson stared at the viewport as the star way rings went by. "Thank you for the update. Is Derrick's fleet on time?"
  "Yes sir they should be coming in from the opposite side at the same time we arrive."
  Mr. Henderson nodded. He had carefully maneuvered the search pattern so that his fleet and Derrick's would arrive in the region of the suspected mining station at the exact same time, all the while making sure not to leave any holes. 
  The lionhearted were not to be trifled with and it completely baffled him how most of the commanders of the combined fleets still seem to think this was a laughing matter. Thankfully Derrick was not one of them and that is why he chose him and his fleet to be the other part of his pincher.
  **
  Catherine watched as Daniel finish piloting the space station into the exact middle of the heldrid asteroid field.
  She let some of the tension drained from her shoulders as she released control of the fake asteroids she had been using to protect the space station.
  Daniel stretched his fingers. "I'm guessing if we went through all the trouble to install a remote control system and move the space station like this we are planning to put up a fight as well?"
  Catherine nodded and Steven said, "yes we need them to believe they took us out or they could very well catch up to us before we make the lionhearted secret star way."
  "I thought there was one rather close to us?"
  "Well the one closest to us is only a medium-size one not big enough for our capital sized factory ship or the mobile station so we have to travel over 100,000 space units to get to one big enough."
  Dan took a deep buried breath. "Which means a decent amount of time." 
  Steven nodded. "After they complete their initial sweep of the sector if they don't believe they got us the combined fleets will split up and begin to search deep space."
  "And they might just get lucky and find us. That's not good. I'm guessing we're going to have to put up one heckuva fake fight to convince them. How are we going to do that when they outnumber us a thousand to one?"
  "Michael's already come up with an amazing strategy for that. And the units are in place. " Catherine answered. "I'm more worried about the black box on our space station."
  Steven nodded. "Me and Alf have been working on it since he got us up. But I just can't fully hack into the thing. I've only been able to scrub the bits that directly connect us to the lionhearted as well as any recorded bits of my technologies. But beyond that at this point all we can do is hope they believe the lionhearted hacked it and pasted what's there as a cover."
  "Will that that work?" Daniel asked alarmed.
  "Sort of I mean who would believe this story even if we told them. They should take one look at our miniscule lives and say 'Yep that's a cover'."
  "That sounds iffy to me."
  Steven shrugged. "It's the best we got."
  The dimensional door on the bridge opened and Michael walked in. "Not anymore."
  "Where's Stephanie? She's not still in the space station I hope." Daniel said worriedly.
  "No she's in zephyr's quarters putting away her stuff." Mike answered reassuringly.

Daniel nodded and Steven asked, "What do you mean not anymore?"
  Michael waved at the dimensional door "Look for yourselves."
  They all got up and peered through the dimensional door to the factory. Thirty-two droids had been dressed in lionhearted uniforms and had plastic masks on over their heads. The masked they were wearing looked rather lifelike and Daniel could recognize a few of the faces the droids were supposed to be mimicking.
  "I present to you the survivors of the lionhearted core."
  "Interesting." Catherine mused
  "Isn't though? These droids along with Zephyr and David Kel's android will act like they are manning the space station from here on out. And right before it blows Zephyr and David Kel are going to run to the black box and start scrubbing it. They won't fully scrub it of course. They will leave lots of grainy pictures at the very end displaying the crew fighting for their lives."
  "That will definitely make it rather convincing the rest of the stuff on the black box is a cover." Steven added. "Excellent strategy."
  Daniel stared at the dressed up droids. "But that means that David Kel's and Zephyr's android have to stay behind."
  Michael nodded. "It's for the best. We're not going to be doing anything more for a long time if anything at all. And if need be we can always rebuild them."
  **
  The timing was perfect and both his and Derrick's fleets arrived at the exact same time. As instructed they both immediately began to converge on where the space station was supposed to be completely ignoring the two small colonies in the region.
  Henderson patiently watched the radar waiting for the station to come in range but it never did.
  "Sir there's nothing here." Came Derrick's voice over the system.
  Henderson drew back and looked out the viewports at the asteroid fields in the area.
  A smile slowly spread across his face. "Oh they are here. In fact I'm now sure they are indeed our target as well."
  A hologram of Derrick appeared on the deck in front of him. "Care to explain?"
  "They moved their space station into one of the asteroid fields."
  "But that would be suicide the asteroid would tear any space station ap..art... For anyone but the lionhearted. I see"
  "Exactly. Get the fighters and deep space scanners out. I want every inch of these asteroid fields searched."
  "Yes sir." Derek's hologram said than turned and muted his voice as he began to shout orders to his fleet.
  Henderson beckoned over one of his officers. "In the meantime I want everything we can possibly get on that mining station. StarNet history, supplies and food orders, shipping manifest, visitors, who they work with and sell to, everything! Is that understood?"
  "Yes sir." The officer replied.
  **
  Fifteen minutes later the officer returned with a bruised and restrained man in tow.
  Henderson raised an eyebrow at him.
  "You said you wanted to know everyone that had dealings with the mining station. This man is one such. Sadly he and his men resisted the small contingent I sent to retrieve him."
  "Of course I did! You can't just barge into my place of work and demand that I give myself up for no reason whatsoever!" The man spat angrily.
  Henderson couldn't help but smile. If someone had just charged in and demanded he give himself up for no reason, he probably would've resisted as well. "I'm sorry, Mr.?"

"Marvin." The man replied tersely.
  "I'm sorry Marvin for my men's rudeness but I need to ask you a few questions about the mining station you buy your supplies from."
  "Why?"
  "Just answer the questions." The officer snapped.
  Marvin rolled his eyes. "I would but he hasn't asked any yet."
  The officer look like he wanted to snap the man's neck.
  Henderson waved for the officer to move back. "Just tell me what you know about them for starters."
  "Not much I just pick up a load of ore every Monday."
  "Do you know anything about the people that live on it?"
  "Only five people live on it."
  "Are you absolutely sure and how old are they?"
  "Yeah I'm sure they all help my men load every week. Well mostly they all help, one of them continuously tries to get out of it from what I hear. And I don't think any of them are over twenty-five. Why are you so curious about them? They are good kids I honestly don't think even one of them has ever broke a law."
  Derek's hologram said, "Sounds like a cover to me. Checking the shipping manifest not too long ago they received a rather expensive prize for winning the Galactic Empire tournament. I've looked it up and apparently they have won it six times in a row."
  "So?" Marvin said. "That doesn't make them criminals or whatever you guys are trying to say they are. Like I said there are good kids."
  Henderson waved towards Marvin. "Take him back to wherever you got him." As the officer dragged Marvin away Henderson turned to the hologram. "You think they were using this game to keep their edge?"
  "I do."
  "Reasonable games now days are rather lifelike.. I want you to analyze every game they ever played. I want to know their patterns, strategies and everything."
  "Already on i..." The hologram trailed off as he was obviously listening to one of his officers. "Oh you're going to want to see this."
  "Send it over."
  A hologram screen appeared besides Derrick's hologram and he said, "This is from the lionhearted Stealth fighter attack on the Alitien Capital."
  The hologram screen showed a starfighter flying right underneath another fighter using it as cover then pulling up sharply forcing the fighters logic drive to react with a snapping turn that rendered its pilot unconscious and drove it towards the attacking ships splitting them apart and enabling the starfighter to have a clear shot at one of the attackers."
  "This is a recorded game session from an online game verse someone on that mining station."
  The screen lit up again this time showing different spaceship fighters but the exact same maneuver took place on the screen.
  Henderson opened his mouth to remark on the obvious similarities when one of his officers shouted. "We just lost three recon ships in one of the asteroid fields."
  "Show me the field." He barked. 
  The heldrid asteroid field came up on one of the main viewports. Henderson looked it over. It was a gas cloud asteroid field meaning it was a rather dangerous place and the ships could have easily accidentally meant with a fatal accident but he knew better.
  "That's them signal the rest of the fleets tell them to come soon as possible. In the meantime both of our fleet will move in."
  Derrick saluted and his hologram was muted again as he began to shout orders to his fleet.
  Henderson walked to the commander seat and pushed a few buttons. 
  The ship went into command mode displaying a giant 4D hologram of the asteroid field in the middle of the bridge.
  The heldrid asteroid field covered over 200k space units in all directions and most of it was covered in the gas cloud.
  He waved his hands causing the hologram to turn and twist as he examined it.
  "Alright here's the plan." He began to place markers and movement lines. "We're going to surround them and come in from six different directions. These are the paths deployed all smaller units and have them begin to clear the asteroids out of the way for the larger ships."
  "Sir." The communication officer saluted.
  "Oh, one more thing tell them to be on the lookout for sentries disguised as asteroids."

 

DOWNFALL



              
  Henderson stood in the middle of the real-time 4D holographic display of asteroid field watching every minute detail. Both fleets were now fully inside the gas cloud, with his ship bringing up the rear.
  Another two fake asteroid came alive and one of his fighter units blinked out of existence and shortly after the fake asteroids were destroyed by his units.
  He had lost twenty-six fighter to the sentries so far, which all in all wasn't that bad. What annoyed him however was the fact that it was absolutely impossible to distinguish them from regular asteroids enabling them to continuously ambush the units he had pushing the larger asteroids out of the way, dramatically slowing their advance.
  He didn't have a clue what the lionhearted strategy might be but he knew they wouldn't let themselves go quietly. As such he needed to get in there and take them out as quickly and efficiently as possible before they had time to react.
  "Sir, our scanners are picking up a rather large amount of gravity fluctuations." One of his officers informed him.
  His eyes grew the size of saucers as realization of the lionhearted strategy hit him. "Pull all units out of the gas cloud now!"
  "Sir?"
  "Now!"
  His communication officer sent the message and he took manual control over ship throwing it in full reverse.
  In seconds the cloud around the ship began to thin as they left it and he began to relax but as he watched the 4D hologram all of other ships continued to advance. "Why aren't they pulling back?!"
  "Our message doesn't seem to be getting through." The officer answered.
  "Wh –" he was cut off by a message playing over the ships speakers.
  "You have entered lionhearted territory turn back now or face the consequences."
  The message repeated itself ominously over and over.
  "Sir whatever this message is it's blocking all of our communications."
  "Breakthrough it you have to tell our ships to get out of there!"
  There ship bucked backwards and Henderson fell to the floor as the entire forward viewscreen became white displaying hundreds of thousands of explosions as the gas cloud seemingly spontaneously exploded.
  He managed to pull himself to his feet as the last of explosions died away. He anxiously stared out the viewport and at the 4D hologram. The cloud was mostly gone and what was left of it was easily seen through. Surprisingly however it looked like most of his fleet was still intact.
  "Sit rep now!" Henderson shouted.
  As the words left his mouth the 4D hologram screamed warnings as it displayed thousands upon thousands of red dots.
  Life drain from his face as he watched fake asteroids scattered all through the asteroid field come to life and opened fire on the weakened ships. Most of the ship's shields had held against the explosions the gas had caused but they were at the breaking point and the endless streams of lasers pouring into them easily eroded what was left.
  Henderson stood there completely helpless as two whole fleets were obliterated.
  

  **
  Daniel's mouth hung wide open.
  "Your chin is about to touch the floor." Michael teased as they watched the destruction being wreaked upon the ships.

"Ho... How did you make the gas cloud explode?" 
  "Gravity." Steve answered. "When we first retrieved this ship it was covered by gravity bubble remember?"
  "Yeah."
  Catherine directed some of the fake asteroids to concentrate their fire on one of the ships that were still operational "At the time we thought the ship was emitting the gravity itself. In reality however there was thousands of tiny gravity generators placed in a perfect circle around it and we left them here when we left."
  "It is one of the ways the lionhearted developed to create safe havens." Alf informed them.
  "Yes, Alf told me about them when I suggested bringing the space station to middle of the gas field. And he just happened to have a few thousand more in one of the storage rooms on this ship."
  "And let me guess once you heard about them you came up with the brilliant ideal of scattering them throughout the cloud?"
  "Yep. As soon as the larger ships in the fleet entered the Cloud the little gravity generators clasped onto them and began to pull the cloud towards them forming concentrated pockets."
  "They never noticed because they just thought the cloud was getting thicker as they went in." Steven said
  "When in reality they were becoming giant balls of gas? Brilliant wish I'd thought of it."
  Michael smiled. "But you didn't and that's why I'm the strategist and Commander while you're the lowly pilot."
  Daniel snorted.
  **
  Mr. Henderson A Davenger dropped to the floor dead killed by Trin U Vilex more commonly known as Adolph's butcher.
  Vilex spat on the dead man's body. The fool's blunders had cost two fleets and nearly caused the remaining fleets to run back to their home sectors in terror.
  It had taken him a lot of maneuvering and quite a few deaths to force the remaining fleets to stay. Even now the tension was so thick that any second all-out war could break and the six remaining fleets would open fire on each other. He didn't mind the ideal too much but he also knew from the examples in front of him that if they didn't take out the lionhearted now there was a very good chance none of their governments would be intact by the end of next year including his.
  He stared out the viewport of the combined fleets command ship at the over 200 disabled ships floating helplessly in what had been the heldrid gas asteroid field.
  The lionhearted had been very precise with their attack only disabling every ship not destroying it leaving thousands upon thousands of stranded survivors.
  It was a brilliant plan that would force them to slowly retrieve the survivors leaving them open to whatever else the lionhearted had planned.
  He grunted, a plan he wasn't going to fall for. With the cloud out the way every once in a while it was possible to get a glimpse of the mining station smack dab in the middle of the field.
  "Tell the fleets to completely surround the heldrid asteroid field and opened fire with their long-range weapons. I want everything in their turn to dust."
  "But what about the survivors? If you do that you will kill them all!" One of the officers argued in alarm."
  Vilex took two giant steps and grabbed the officer by the neck. "Do it, or you'll end up like your previous commander." 
  He slowly loosened his grip and the officer broke away gasping for air. 
  "Yes.. Sir." He wheezed.

**
  Derrick's command ship propulsion engines had been completely eradicated along with his guns. By all rights his ship should've lost energy and power as well but that would've left him and his crew there to die. This was obviously not the lionhearted's goal, because he could easily tell from the radar that the fake asteroids which had just demolished two whole fleets had done so without hitting the bridges or cockpits of any of the space craft. 
  In fact all the ships he could see seem to still have power but just like his they were dead in the water.
  He pulled himself to his feet and rubbed his forehead where it had smashed against the side of his chair. "Ouch." He whispered. 
  "The rest of the other fleets have just arrived Sir."
  "Can you establish communication with any of them?"
  "No, none of them are responding."
  Still no response huh? He thought to himself. That could really only mean one thing. Whoever was in command of the combined fleets now had decided not to rescue them or take any more chances.
  It was a strategically sound decision. Not one he could've made himself and he certainly didn't know how to tell his crew.
  The weapons officer seen the look in his eyes and stood up. "They're going to level everything in this region aren't they?"
  He swallowed and nodded.
  Realization slowly spread across the bridge.
  "We're going to die killed by our own allies." One of the young men angrily hissed.
  "Those arch spawns! How could anyone even think of such a thing? There's thousands of us out here!"
  Derrick blocked out the rest that was being said as he watched the fleets come into position. Mentally counting down the time until the first round was fired.
  It took some time for the combined fleets to form up but when it finally did come it was an amazing sight as a solid wall of death launched away from all six fleets and smashed into the asteroid field.
  Miraculously none of the first volley hit their ship but he watched as a railslug punched a hole straight through one of the ships that had been underneath his command. 
  He bit down hard as he watched three men get sucked out into open space.
  Men on the bridge begins scream bloody murder and some of them began to cry but all he could do was watch as another volley smashed into the asteroid field and antimatter missile wiped out one of the ships that had been underneath his control.
  He stood up and walked the very front of the viewport so none of the men could see the tears in his own eyes. He was not ready to die but that didn't matter he was going to and he knew it. In a few hours there would be nothing left at all to this asteroid field.
  As he stared blankly out of the viewport something caught his eye. The asteroids they were all moving. Almost every last one of them had maneuvering Jets on them and they were moving.
  Moving to form a barrier around the wounded ships.
  He could hardly believe it as he watched hundreds of asteroids form a solid barrier in front of their ship cutting them off from view of the attacking fleet. 
  Another volley came from the six fleets and asteroids opened up revealing laser emplacements. And those lasers did their best to shoot down every projectile and missile coming towards them.
  His crew became deathly quiet as they watched the weapons that had just disabled them put themselves in the line of fire to protect them.
  "Look!" One of the crew cried pointing towards the middle asteroid field.
  Derrick swung his attention to were the man was pointing to see a lone mining station. It had once been impossible to see with all the asteroids in a way.
  Now however all those asteroids had moved to protect them and the other disabled ships.
  Another volley came from the six fleets. At such range it was impossible to be accurate but most of the volley was obviously aimed towards the mining station and it took two direct hits.
  "What are they doing they're leaving themselves wide open!"
  No one answered.
  Another volley and another three direct hits.
  "Their shields won't hold much longer like this!"
  Still no one could bring themselves to answer the man's cries.
  This time the volley came and went scoring six direct hits on the mining station.
  "No no no! They're the lionhearted they can't allow themselves to be killed this easy!"
  Another volley seemed to sake space itself and the mining station exploded in a crimson ball.
  The noisy man slid to the floor. "They allowed themselves to be killed!"
  Derrick swallowed hard and turned to the man. "They did it to protect us."
  The man didn't look up. "But we were their enemy."
  "And they were the lionhearted."
  


 

EPILOGUE



              
  Steven stood on the bridge as they exited the lionhearted secret star way.
  "Wow. Seeing this massive circle of star ways rings is even more impressive than I ever thought it would be!" He exclaimed.
  The others didn't respond and he looked back at them to see their eyes glazed over with pain and loss. His enthusiasm began to drain away but he shook himself. "Come on guys, I know it was where we lived most of our lives but it was just a building."
  Daniel's shoulders sagged. "I know I know. And I thought I'd be okay but watching it be destroyed like that just really hit me that it was truly gone everything we had is now gone Steven. Everything!"
  "No it's not! We still have each other. Mom and dad are still fine out there somewhere and we brought most of our personal items with us!" 
  Dan didn't answer and Catherine hugged him from the back.
  Stephanie walked forward to the view screen and gazed out unseeingly. "It was our home our fortress of solitude."
  "And our cage!" Steven announced. "Now we are free from it. We can go anywhere we want anywhere in the galaxy! Heck if we wanted to we could leave this galaxy."
  Silence fell.
  "Full view." Michael mumbled and the walls, floor and ceiling faded away as they seemingly became see-through. 
  Michael quietly began reading the sector names etched into the star way rings. After a few minutes of this he finally said, "You know there's something that we all forgot to think about."
  "What's that?" Catherine asked.
  "Food. We no longer have a source of food."
  "I've already taken steps to procure nourishment for you from the female prison planet." Alf said as the dimensional door Steven had set up on the bridge opened and sun poured in from the prison planet.
  They walked through to see a makeshift picnic table covered in hundreds of varieties of fruits and wild vegetables. 
  Stephanie took a deep breath and stretched her arms wide as she breathed in the beautiful smell on the air. "You know I always wanted to have my own garden on a real planet."
  "I'll have to set up a perimeter just in case we ever put any female prisoners on this planet but I do believe such a thing is indeed possible." One of the droid standing by the picnic table said in Alf's voice.
  Catherine walked over to the picnic table and picked up a dragon fruit. "Are we ever going to take prisoners again?"
  It was a simple enough question but it implied a lot and they all stopped moving and looked down at the ground.
  Stephanie was the first to speak. "I don't know if what we're doing or have done is right."
  "And look what it's cost us." Daniel said.
  "Freely you have received freely give." One of the droid said in David Kel's voice.
  They all looked up towards the droid.
  "Yes you all have lost your home and a lot of your time. Your life will never be the same again but look at all you have gained. You're giving of this to help others. To stop wickedness. Alf let me look over the records and even though I know I'm not real I fully believe everything you did was 'is' right. That alone is evident in the Godly fear you put in all the nations around your sector."
  Michael stared fixedly on the droid that David Kel's ghost consciousness was currently inhabiting. He took a deep breath and let out what was on his heart. "What you say is true but I killed a man. Yes he was a wicked man and deserved to die but I acted as his judge and executioner all on my own. I don't believe I had the right to do that. My hands are stained with his blood and if we continue this many more lives could easily be on mine and my families hands."

The droid nodded. "I understand and I have already broken lionhearted protocol long enough so I must go but before I do I'll leave you with the one saying that kept me going through it all."
  The droids shifted and its voice changed to a metallic tang as it said, "All the wicked need to succeed is for righteous men to do nothing."
  **
  Derrick along with all the other leaders of the combined fleets sat around a giant table were the black box to the mining station sat squarely in the middle projecting its images.
  It was obvious that everything before the battle was a cover but just like before they had then spent over half an hour arguing whether or not that was possible until finally one of the commanders stood to his feet and shouted, "This is the lionhearted were talking about. They lived for over 300 years in secret and they had amazing technology before that how can any of you doubt that they have the ability to access our black boxes."
  Thankfully that had put an abrupt end to the argument and now they were carefully analyzing the spotty and damaged battle section of the black box.
  As they watch it was apparent to Derrick that there was a somberness to the crew as they prepared and fought but nonetheless they were perfectly in sync each one knowing exactly what to do and how to do it with almost a mechanical precision. Their quick gestures and precise words were beyond well-trained and he could easily see how they had managed to wipe out two whole fleets. It was a perfect and flawlessly executed plan.
  But as he watched the seven fleets surround and begin to bombard the region his heart quivered remembering how he felt when he realized he was going to die.
  He fully expected there to be some type of argument on board the space station when the decision was made to use their units to protect the crippled spaceships instead of their own lives but all that had happened was Zephyr and David Kel looking at each other for a few seconds then nodding. Intrinsically the rest of the crew seemed to understand and they maneuvered their fake asteroids where they needed to go.
  Every part of him screamed for them to protect themselves as he watched the internal sensors of the mining station report hit after hit.
  The second to last volley David Kel and Zephyr got up and walked to where the black box was stored in begin to do something with it.
  Derrick expected them to do this but right before the mining station exploded Zephyr did something he couldn't have imagined.
  She pulled one of the external cameras directly attached to it so that it was looking right at her and said, "We forgive you."
  Then the mining station exploded and Derrick's stomach felt like it dropped out. Every part of him screamed in pain and hate of his own self. For what he had been a part of what he had done for what he had done to them. And for the unbelievable mercy and sacrifice they had shown.
  Vilex slammed his hand down on the table. "This is a fake!"
  Derrick couldn't stop himself but from responding. "Fake? How is that fake? They gave their lives to protect me and my man from you!"
  Vilex stood up knocking his chair to the floor. "The mining station showed they had over 200,000 of those fake asteroids they could have lined them in perfect circles around them and use the guns on them to stop anything from coming in. Using such a strategy they could have easily lasted for days if not months against our long-range barrage. And instead they let us kill them. This is definitely a fake!"
  The captain over one of the disabled battleships stood up and kicked his chair sending it flying backwards. "Their decision and actions will never make any sense to a murdering self pleasing arch spawn like you! But they were nothing like you, they were nothing like me..." The man's anger subsided and he looked down at the ground. "They were the lionhearted always giving of themselves always trying to make this galaxy better. And what we do?" His anger flared once again and he shouted "Kill them murdered every last one of them and still they forgive us. Every single one of us in this room deserves to die a horrible death for what we've done." The man turned and stomped out of the conference room.
  **
  They all sat and ate the wonderful fruit and uncooked wild vegetables in silence until at last Daniel stood up and proclaimed. "I'm continuing. I'm not going to let wicked man succeed while I sit idly by."
  Catherine stood up and smiled at him. "Then I'll join you."
  Michael took a deep breath and stood up as well. "And I." He reached out for Stephanie.
  She hesitated for a moment then took his hand and he helped her stand.
  Steven stretched his arm and put them behind his head. "Fine fine. But this time we need to build up a base before we do anything."
  "Agreed." Michael laughed in agreement.
  >>>

 

Second Book Teaser  



  

  Derrick sat staring down into his drink, his eyes wouldn't focus and his mind was a blur but still he could clearly see in his thoughts Zephyr staring kindly at him and saying, "we forgive you."
  He clenched his left hand until his fingernails bore into his skin. He lifted his drink to his mouth and swallowed it all in one gulp. He slammed the cup down. "Another."
  The bartender looked up at him. "Sir I think you hav. . ."
  "Another!" Derrick cut him off.
  The man slowly took his cup away and started to fill it. The door to the bar slammed open and Derrick groggily turned to see who would be making such a racket. He blinked a few times trying to get his eyes to uncross as a towering man walked through the doorway both of his shoulders almost touching the doorframes as he did.
  "I'm looking for Admiral Derrick Malachi." The tall stranger demanded in an oddly melodious voice.
  One of the other patrons pointed at him.
  The stranger walked the entire length of the room in five large strides. "Are you Derrick?"
  "I ams whoos wants to knooow?" 
  The men grabbed him by the scruff of his neck and pulled him to his feet. "I think you had too much to drink!"
  "Hee0y! whoo do..." 
  He was dragged away from the bar as if he weighed no more than an empty bottle. Derrick tried to swing at him but he must of swung at the wrong one because he didn't manage to hit anything.
  The towering figure humfed then forcefully hauled him out of the pub and tossed him into the back of his hovercraft. 
  The air was crisp and the moon of his home planet was high in the sky.  The brute climbed into the driver seat and started the hovercraft.
  Derek's mind focused enough to think, he shouldn't be able to do that.
  "Whoo yoou." He managed to say as the hovercraft took off.
  The man glanced back at him. "I came to see what type of man they died for."
  Some part of his sluggish brain registered what the man meant and Derrick froze.
  "They were like parents to me! And they died for a worthless drunk!"
  "Pa. . Parents?"
  The fellow turned around and looked him solidly in the eyes. "Yes. They took me in, and treated me like their own, when the entire universe wanted to lock me up in prison and throw away the key."
  A sickening feeling in the pit of his stomach slammed into Derrick as if someone had punched him. "Who are you?"
  "I'm Lord Maddog, David Kell and Zephyr were like family to me and they gave their life that you may live. You a drunk!"
  The fog surrounding his thinking evaporated. "Lord Maddog? The Lord Maddog? No! This can't be possible you died hundreds of years ago!"
  The craft skidded to a halt. "Why?! Why are you wasting the life my parents died to give you?!"
  The weight of Maddog's words hit him like a ton of bricks. Derrick stared into the man's furious, sad eyes then hung his head. "How can't I? Every time I close my eyes I see her. . . They're looking at me. And I. . . I'm the one responsible for her death. . . for his death for. . . all of their deaths."
  "So this is your answer? Drowning your life away in some intoxicating beverage? Squandering what they have given you? Not even trying to make amends for what you've done?"

Derrick couldn't answer.
  Lord Maddog glared angrily at him then whipped around and started to drive the hovercraft at a furious speed.
  Neither of them said anything else for the rest of the drive.
  Lord Maddog pulled up beside the place Derrick was staying and parked the hovercraft. He got out and started to walk away.
  "I want to. I just don't know how." Derrick stated.
  The imposing man turned around and threw a book on his lap. "Then read this. It helped me and it will help you."
  

  --- THE MILK WARS ---
  

  Michael walked into the living quarters followed by a tall and overly muscular man wearing Royal blue a cape and a crown. "Daniel who is this supposed to be?" 
  Daniel was sitting beside Catherine and pouring cereal into a bowl. "Who is who?"
  "Who is this?" Michael stated waving his hand at the kingly figure.
  Daniel shrugged.
  A giant hologram lion appeared beside Michael. "There is no record of this unit being created in my database. Only you or Steven are capable of such a thing," All lionhearted friend or Alf for short, the ships AI stated.
  Steven strolled into the room. "And I didn't do it."
  "Who is this Daniel?"
  Dan didn't answer.
  Stephanie stomped in. "I'll tell you who it is. It's Emperor Maddog, at least that's what this off the sensors hat I just found hid in the training room has programmed into it." She threw the hat-based controller onto the floor. "And he's already used this Emperor to run a few of his own missions."
  Catherine frowned disapprovingly at her husband. "Daniel really?"
   Daniel threw up his arms. "Hey in my defense I did tell you guys I believe the reason we were so easily defeated is because we didn't have a solid base. If we had a political power they wouldn't have moved against us like they did. Instead they would've been trapped in the normal bureaucratic bureaucracy."
  Stephanie slapped her hand against her forehead and her hand slid down over her eyes. "Oh yes, you did fifty plus times and we all agreed that was a horrible idea. Just like last week when you talking about using drones to napalm the Karmijuana fields on Elyséea five. You do remember how that turned out don't you?"
  "If Alf hadn't woken us up, hundreds would've died in your completely out-of-control fires." Steven stated exasperatingly.
  "Hey, that was a mistake." Daniel said defensively. "How was I supposed to know wind could cause fire to travel that fast? Besides it worked. After a brief spike, crime in that entire sector has now dropped to unheard-of levels."
  "Brief spike? Brief spike my butt! The resulting fight literally ended with the last remaining field being nuked!" Stephanie half screamed.
  "Yeah, but Alf's analysis insist that, thanks to the fire all the innocent people in the area had already been evacuated. Meaning no one but the criminals themselves got hurt. And because of the whole incident is not possible for them to grow drugs there anymore."
  Michael sighed. "Daniel what did you do with this. . . This Emperor of yours?"
  "Nothing really I just handed out some Bibles."
  Stephanie frowned at him. "What?"
  Daniel took a deep breath and sat back down. "As you know Steven has been keeping tabs on most of the officers that wiped out our station. Two days ago I was looking through the list and discovered that some of them have become alcoholics or turned to substance abuse. So I've been using Maddog to pay some of the most oppressed ones encouraging visits and leave Bibles with them when I. . I mean he leaves."

Michael narrowed his eyes. "Is that all you did? You didn't leave them offers to become part of your empire in any shape where form?"
  "No I didn't. They're down and out doing such a thing would only confuse them more not help them."
  Stephanie crossed her arms. "I don't believe you."
  Daniel shrugged. "I didn't have to. If they do turn their lives around. All I'd have to do in the future is briefly contact them and ask for a favor. And being the guy who helped them changed for the better they'd happily obliged."
  Catherine gaped at him. "Daniel!" 
  "Honest to God I didn't do that for that reason though!"
  The giant holographic lion turned his penetrating eyes on him. "Then why did you do it?"
   "I did it because well. . . I'll be honest a part of me hates them for destroying our home, but after seeing them like that I couldn't. I couldn't leave them be. I had to help! Okay!"
  "He's telling the truth." Alf stated.
  "Okay we believe you. But," Michael turned around and ripped the crown and the Cape off the android. "Alf can you please dispose of these." 
  One of the droids by the door took the things from Michael. "I will also have a standard uniform refitted to fit this exaggerated version of Maddog." The droid stated in Alf's voice.
  Daniel realizing he was off the hook got up and went to the hyperbaric cooling storage; IE 'the fridge' to get the milk.
  It was all gone, except for a tiny drop in the bottom of the gallon. "Hey who drank all the milk?"
  Michael shrugged, "It wasn't me there was some left after I had some yesterday."
  "Some left?" Steven said with a huff. "You had a big glass with your peanut butter, honey sandwich yesterday! You had way more than your share."
  "No I didn't! I only have it with my cereal and sandwich like I always do."
  Daniel stared at Steven. "You drank the last of it didn't you?"
  "Of course I did! If I didn't I wouldn't have got any of it! You and Michael are such milk hogs."
  "Milk hogs?" Michael blurted in shock.
  "Here we go again," Stephanie muttered and Catherine got up from the table. She went over to the far wall leaned against it, pulled out a tablet and started to play a puzzle game on it.
  "Yes milk hogs!" Steven exclaimed. "Daniel puts way too much milk in his cereal and you have 2 to 3 cups every time you have a peanut butter and honey sandwich. You guys are always drinking all of the milk."
  Daniel glared at Steven "Whatever! Just the other day I seen you with a sixteen ounce cup of milk. You didn't even have anything with it. And you frequently do that."
  "I have to or I won't get any!"
  "That's such a waste of milk! And that's a bunch of space trash too. You have plenty of milk. In fact you probably have more than Daniel or I do." Michael stated with absolute assurity.
  "I do not!"
  "Yes you do!" Daniel pronounced with fervor.
  Steven clenched his fist and his body shook. "I do not!" 
  Daniel clenched his own fist and sucked in air. "You do to!"
  "No! I don't!" Steven half scream back.
  "Yes you do Steven." Michael said calmly.
  Steven's eyes grew wide and he literally look like he was about to explode. "No I don't! Both of you are the milk hogs!"

"Oh, be quiet. All three of you are milk hogs." Stephanie butted in.
  All three of their eyes turned on her and Daniel exclaimed, "What do you mean we're milk hogs? Your Keifer consumes half a gallon every day!"
  Stephanie stood up and stamped her foot. "My Keifer is for all of us and it's healthy!"
  "What you mean for all of us? I hardly ever have any of it." Steven proclaimed.
  "Well that's your own choice. It's always in the fridge for anyone to have."
  "No it's not!" Daniel declared. "Most of the time it's all gone."
  "That's your imagination. Besides it takes a lot of work to strain the Keifer every morning." Stephanie asserted.
  Steven crossed his arms. "Then stop making it."
  Stephanie's eyes grew wide and fire sparked to life inside them.
  Alf realizing that argument showed no sign of subsiding, appeared between them. His giant lion hologram sat back on its hunches and slowly turned its head to look at all them as he said, "It may interest you that I just went through all of my security footage and according to my records on an average each one of you has approximately sixteen ounces of dairy products a day. Your overall consumption is exactly equal to each other's."
  "Oh." Daniel said.
  Steven looked back and forth at Daniel and Michael. "That can't be right! I know they have more than I do."
  "I assure you soul Knight your consumption is exactly the same." The lion stated with finality.
  The others fell into silence and Steven plopped himself into one of the seats.
  Stephanie leaned against the fridge "Well, it would seem that we need to think of a way to procure a source of milk."
  "How? It's not like we can get a cow. O, well we could steal one but that would be wrong." Daniel answered.
  "No were not doing that." Stephanie glanced at Mike. "Could we buy one?"
  Michael shook his head. "We are already strapped as it is and I don't dare sell more on Essport than what I am already or it will draw undue attention. Simulating model numbers and factory runs is slightly dangerous to begin with you know."
  "I guess." Stephanie looked at Alf. "Any luck with starting a fake company?"
  The giant lion shook his head. "All the governments I've gone over require you to have one of their officials inspect your factory before they allow you to legitimately sell product inside their sphere of control. I'm working on constructing a small factory with non-military hardware but it will take some time to complete. We could sell product on the black market though."
  This time Michael shook his head. "No, I don't even like the sound of that."
  Stephanie shrugged. "How about normal jobs?"
  "That would not be wise. Your faces and body profiles were in the black box. If you appear in public there is no doubt you will be taken in for questioning."
  "So we can't ever live normal lives?" Stephanie asked.
  "Not without complete surgical face and body overhauls. Which my facilities are not equipped for. You can use the androids if you need to make excursions however using one for common labor is not advised."
  Daniel stood straight up. "I got it we become bounty hunters."
  Michael rolled his eyes. "No Daniel."
  "No listen to me."
  "Daniel," Stephanie sighed.
  "Please hear me out."
  "Fine, but I can tell you the answer is no already."
  Daniel pulled out his medallion and a hologram of a news article flickered to life above it. There was a large picture of an extremely rough looking lady. "This is or rather was XRenia she was a well-known solo bounty hunter. One of those extreme loner types."
  Cat stopped playing with her tablet "What happened to her?" 
  "She flew into a sun."
  "What!" Stephanie gasped. 
  "She and a rival Hunter by the name of Bosk more or less played chicken with the sun and it decided to play back with a solar flare. Neither of them survived. Bosk's ship was vaporized but her's is still sort of intact floating  around said sun."
  Stephanie rolled her eyes. "Please tell me you don't expect me to actually believe that?" 
  Alf's hologram subtly changed hues as it enlarged Daniel's hologram switching it to a screen on the wall.  "As ridiculous as it sounds such practices are not all that rare its much like the ancient game of Russian roulette and is seen as a challenge of bravery. Some hunters even go as far as to spend thousands in outfitting their vessels with sun harvester armor." 
  Steph frowned. "Uhuh," she said then look back at Daniel. "So let me guess, you want to retrieve this sun baked ship and act like you're her?"
  "Why not? It's common for thought dead mercs to come back to life. Wither it's them or someone acting like them."
  Mike rubbed his chin as he looked at the screen. "I don't know Dan. Do we really want to kill for money?"
  "Maddog this is an excellent suggestion," the gaint lion said. "I am downloading her Bio profile and will construction of an android of her. I am also dispatching drones to the location her ship was last seen."
  "Really?" Dan said.
  "Yes. Whatever all of you decide on the matter of bounty hunting, it your choice, but having another legitimate way of interacting with the universe around us is essential."
  Steven sprung to his feet. "You said we all had equal amounts but I just went over the numbers in my head and there's a missing nine percentage. Meaning they are having more than me."
  Michael, Daniel and Stephanie all let out an exasperated sigh.
  "Correction. I never said that all five of you were having equal amounts I said you four were. Snoire has on an average twenty-four ounces a day."
  All of them turned their eyes on Catherine. She shrugged. "I like Keifer so what."
  

