
The Ascent -- Part One: Signs and Portents

Chapter 1
 
 I knew it was the wrong question before I asked it, knew Dr. Powers would never approve, and yet I had paid a small fortune for this opportunity. I wasn't going to leave with a simple yes or no.   Entering the chamber, I stepped carefully among the tangled mess of power cables, data cables and security cables that kept the ring of sensors secured to the decking and connected to a n-core q-bit processor somewhere in the space station. In the center of the spider web lurked a carbon-black tank, three-quarters full of a faintly green glowing hydro-gel. Suspended over the tank on hydraulics, wreathed in tangled creepers of fiber-optic cables, a lid hung poised as if ready to slam down on whatever threat emerged from within.   The wall on my left, relatively free of obstructions, flickered to life where someone had slapped up a coat of smartpaint. A young, nonthreatening, Eurasian female smiled reassuringly at me, her too symmetrical computer generated face marred by the occasional conduits and junction boxes over which it was displayed. "Greetings, Pilot Officer Phon. Welcome to the quantum-signature scanning room. We were able to access your records from the New Athens Academy and the Mars Defense Force so we will only need to ask you a few questions to update your information. If you would like the orientation briefing, say continue, if not, say skip." "Skip."  "Please remove your clothes and your netpiece. You'll find personal facilities behind you."   I stripped off the Mars Defense Force flight suit and hung it on a hook. The rest of my gear went on a shelf. I tugged the netpiece from where it hung over my left ear, magnetically snugged to the contact at the base of my skull, and laid it on top of my gear. The data feed, which had glittered on the inside of my corneas, connecting me to the news, culture and my network of friends and family disappeared. It somehow left me feeling alone and naked in a way I hadn't felt when I was merely alone and naked.   "The hydrogel in the tank is necessary to filter out environmental noise. It also serves as a contact for the sensors. It has been heated to your current body temperature, so please step into the tank when you are ready." I stepped inside and sat in the warm ooze. The AI continued its instructions. "Please attach the respirator and ear plugs and lie back in the tank."   I ripped the plastic mask from its velcro fastener on the underside of the lid and pulled the attached plastic tube until the valve clicked open. Removing the waxed plastic strip from the adhesive edge of the mask, I carefully sealed it around my face, took the two earplugs from their container in the lid, and inserted them.   This was my third visit to an oracle, my third attempt to pierce the veil of quantum probability. My first trip was as a student volunteer for a research project at the academy at New Athens. My second scan was part of a calibration test for the Martian Defense Force. This third scan would allow the oracle to more effectively triangulate my future, though I'm told the scans are even more effective if they're not quite so close together. At 2.3 million terra a scan, five times the average person's annual income, I wouldn't have had this scan made if it were not for the advice of my mentor, Dr. Powers, and the decision before me.   "Can you hear me?" the AI asked. I lay back in the goo. "Yes." The mask muffled my voice. The lid began descending. "Our records indicate you .28 on the claustrophobic scale. You may prefer to close your eyes. A mild sedative has been added to your air mixture for your comfort." The light shining through my closed eyelids faded to black and through the hydrogel I heard the thunk and hiss of the lid sealing the tank. I took a deep breath and relaxed my body, trying to will my heartbeat to slow down.  

"In a moment we will begin asking you a series of questions. These questions are necessary to interpret the results of your scan. It is important your answers be as complete and accurate as possible to ensure that your interpretation will be useful to you. Many of these questions will be highly personal in nature. Please do not be offended or concerned for your privacy. Be assured that all information you provide is protected by the strictest confidentiality laws and unbreakable encryption algorithms. Before we begin, however, we need to know the purpose of this visit. Take a moment to compose your question to the oracle, and please word it carefully. Speak when you are ready."   This was the moment I had worried over, my 2.3 million terra question. I had thought of nothing else on the shuttle from Luna to the space station at Lagrange Point Five and I was still unsure of exactly what to ask. The obvious question was whether I should join my friend Phil Porter on the Cack military expedition against The Unbounded Ones. However, if the answer was yes, I needed to know more and I could only afford the time and money for one question.   The one question that kept running through my mind was "what would my father think?" If I asked him, I know what he would say. He would say I was a big boy and I could make my own decisions. If he felt like talking, he might give me a lecture along the lines that if I hoped to take over the family business, I would have to make many important decisions myself.   He was always like that. Even when I nearly got kicked out of New Athens for a prank the administration did not find humorous, all I got was a lecture about duty, responsibility and "natural consequences," which meant he wasn't going to pull any strings to bail me out. He left me to fix things entirely on my own. Worse yet by far was the disappointment in his eyes. He was a hard man to anger, but an even harder man to please.   "I am considering a trip soon," I began uncertainly, "and I would like to know how I may take it and return most safely and profitably."   "Your question is, how you may most safely and profitably take the trip you are considering. Is this correct?" "Yes." I felt stupid. I knew the repeated question was more for their lawyers than my own clarification, but I couldn't help but imagine a slight note of incredulity in the AI's tone.   "Good!" the AI burbled in simulated enthusiasm. "Now let us begin updating the file on your life events since your last visit to the oracle."   The AI began asking a vast array of questions from the obvious list of hopes, dreams and fears to the obscurely trivial, such as what I ate for each meal. Quite a few questions I simply couldn't answer. But with each question I grew more relaxed as the hypnogenic gas took effect.  * * * "Scan Complete." I opened my eyes to see the lid had already been raised.   "Please dress and return to the waiting room. Cleaning facilities have been provided for your convenience."   A full shower on L5 was something of a luxury. Even so, I noted as I pulled myself from the goo, stepped inside the shower and turned it on that the water reclamation facilities could not handle more than a faint stream. I stood under the tepid trickle, washed, and had just begun to towel off when a flustered young anglo woman in a white lab coat barged into the room following a perfunctory knock. I hastily wrapped the towel around myself, a little disappointed that she didn't seem to notice I had no clothes.   "I apologize for the intrusion, but Dr. Swiftly has seen your profile and wishes to speak with you." I judged from her breathless manner that this was somewhat unusual. In fact it hardly seemed likely Dr. Swiftly would have had time to fully examine the results.  

"He will be joining you shortly." She disappeared, jerking the door closed behind her.   Puzzled, I pulled on my flight suit wondering what future event in my life could be so unusual that it would cause such a commotion. As I slipped on my netpiece, a sudden thought chilled me. What if something very bad was going to happen to me? Was I about to die in some horrible accident? How did they deliver such news?   Moments later a long wall panel slid opened and a large Crawdad entered the room. Their own names for themselves translated as The Gifted Ones, though no human linguist had yet tweezed out its precise implications. Dr. Swiftly looked anything but swift. He stretched nearly three and a half meters from end to end and stood just under two meters at the shoulder. A large segmented carapace in mottled maroon and greens, a broad stubby tail and large clawed forelimbs gave his race their human nickname. Weighing nearly a quarter-ton, the crawdads stood on two thick hind legs, had a pair of eyestalks which could be retracted beneath the forward edge of their carapace and used the tentacles around their mouths as their primary manipulators. To Solarian eyes they did not present an appearance of sentience. What they thought of the hominids of Earth, they did not volunteer.   The oracle's brochure translated Dr. Swiftly's name as "SwiftlyThrough-the-Tall-Grass-Like-the-Winds-Before-A-Winter-Storm." It also mentioned that the translation was but a fragment of his name and that it was inadequate to communicate the true idiomatic meaning.  The crawdad seemed to drop into a crouch before me, eyes out, large claws folded across each other. It rumbled, gurgled and hissed while a device attached to the smaller of his two claws translated, "Pilot Officer Kenneth Phon, seeing you delights my curious mind."   "I, also," I replied uncertainly.   The tentacles hanging from Dr. Swiftly's mouth, which had twitched busily, dropped and hung motionless. His eyes spread wide on their stalks as if trying to examine me from both sides. I had no idea if this was a good or bad reaction. After a moment, Dr. Swiftly spoke again, "I seek you startle not at my wonderment. Translation is frequently incomplete. Divergent herd expressions are alone in the field." I puzzled over his words, but all I got out of them was that he was having a hard time understanding me. "Please forgive my own inadequate speech. I intend only goodwill."   Dr. Swiftly's mouth tentacles wriggled upward and one eye drifted away lazily. "The pasture is open. Let us gather in my office. I have a spectacle for you to graze upon." I followed him into the next room and watched as he leaned against what I took to be a chair, though it had a long back tilted at a forty-five degree angle. Dr. Swiftly gurgled and hissed at a control panel and two graphs appeared on the monitor, one in red and one in blue. The serpentine shapes had fern-like fronds curling away on each side, clearly fractal patterns.   "The leftward kairogram," Dr. Swiftly began, referring to the red pattern, "is the course of He Who Looks Up's yesterdays and tomorrows."   He Who Looks Up was the name the aliens had given us humans, though with the discovery of life on other star systems and the colonization of other worlds beginning, we'd begun referring to ourselves as Solarians.   "And on the right?" I prompted.   Dr. Swiftly paused, swinging both eyes around to look steadily at me. "The oracles perambulate the herd with the Moiarchy's kairogram."   My skin prickled with an almost electrical shock of surprise. "The Moiarchy? The Cack Moiarchy? Those Who Dwell Within?" They were the single most powerful known race in the galaxy, controlling tens of thousands of light years of space. We Solarians had only narrowly avoided their hostile takeover when our frantic counter attacks forced their cost overruns to rise above any profitable return on conquering our system.   I looked at the red and blue ferns on the display and tried to guess what Dr. Swiftly was trying to point out. "The two are mirror images."   "Not all the way. Calves of the same mother, surely. The two gather, travel together a ways and diverge. Your kairogram was alone in the field. Lift up your eyes." He gurgled at the control panel and a thin yellow line appeared in the purple area where the two ferns overlapped. It appeared in segments like a thread sewing a seam between the two. But whereas the other two kairograms branched into numerous curling fronds, the yellow one's branches were few, small and far between. Instead of a fern, it looked more like a withered vine.   The short hairs on the back of my neck prickled again. "Are you saying the yellow line is my kairogram?"   Dr. Swiftly's eyes swayed and dipped uncertainly. "Yes."   I am no expert at reading kairograms, but even I could tell this looked bad. "It looks...stunted."   Dr. Swiftly's mouth tentacles bunched together, drew up, dropped and repeated the motion as if he were scooping up some invisible food into his mouth, though I sensed it was more likely some sort of crawdad facial gesture. "Stunted. Yes. A well-formed expression. Your tomorrows have been stunted." He gurgled at the controls and the monitor panned along a close-up of my kairogram. Tiny abortive futures stuck out like singed hairs. Only one path seemed to last for any length, though it split into two near the end of the scan.   "It sounds as if it might be better if I stayed home."   "Truly, predators stalk the darkness on all sides. But once begun, you dare not turn back on the path. Others follow behind."   "Others?"  Dr. Swiftly turned back to the monitor and watched the kairograms panning across the display beyond my timeline. The Cack and Solarian kairograms began to diverge, but while the Solarian future branched out in a flurry of probabilities, the Cack kairogram shrank and curled in on itself. He turned one eye toward me. "Soon your kind must join The Gifted Ones and Those Who Dwell Within at the center of God's will. Sol is rising and you are the step on which your species must tread in their ascent.

 

Chapter 2

By the end of the 21st century, most of mankind had retired the idea of a god to the shelf of quaint old ideas that no one really needed anymore. It is ironic, therefore, that the physicists and mathematicians of the early 22nd century were the ones to announce His Second Coming. The Crawdads and the Cacks, among others, revealed an impenetrable mathematical proof of a Supreme Being's existence in the very heart of quantum mechanics. It seemed that to prevent the universe from dissolving into an expanding waveform of probabilities, and to avoid self-referential nonsense, there must be an outside awareness to collapse the wave function-continually creating the universe we know. As Thomas Aquinas might have said, an unobserved observer. We were, after all, merely ideas in the mind of God.   While one might think the various established religions would have embraced this unexpected support from science, the majority approached it with great caution. The math said almost nothing about the nature of this observer, so the religious authorities waited suspiciously to see if this new belief system would become a friend or a foe.   The resurrection of God was only one of a number of surprises following mankind's first encounter with an alien species. After the shooting stopped, mathematicians came like Jesuit missionaries to our world to build a common basis for trade, which seemed to involve a lot of remedial math. It was this same math that allowed the oracles to predict the future interactions of particles by their quantum signatures.   "You should have asked whether or not to make the trip, not how best to go!" Only the deep vertical furrows in Dr. Powers' forehead prevented his bushy white eyebrows from touching. He had been my professor and academic advisor and all around mentor at the New Athens Academy on Mars, and I had learned to fear that expression whenever I declared a philosophical conclusion that I couldn't back up with solid reasoning.   I dialed back the resolution on my corneal displays and shrank down in my seat, trying to speak low enough that the shuttle's air recyclers would prevent my fellow passengers from hearing me. "But I only had one-." "I know, I know." Dr. Powers waved away my excuses. We had already circled around this argument. "At this point, it doesn't matter. You've asked the oracle's advice and now you must follow it."   Until I had consulted the oracle, my future, like Schrödinger's cat, had existed in any of several states. Once the oracle observed that future, it became as solid and nailed down as a frog in a dissection tray. "It would seem so," I muttered. "I don't like the sound of some of those projections, though. Win every battle, but lose the war...betrayal by friends, unexpected allies..." "I know, I know, but this isn't just any alien trading fleet. This is the Cack ruler's brother. The trade possibilities are enormous. Trans Luminal Systems could be the first company to move out system!" Dr. Powers just gave me a dark look. "I'm still examining the profile," I said. "I may yet find a way through this." "The oracles are typically more precise with simple yes or no questions." I held my tongue and nodded, ignoring the jab.   Dr. Powers sighed and shook his head. "Unfortunately, you don't have the time to fully analyze the profile. Your friend will be leaving soon with or without you." His expression softened. "I suppose you're as well equipped for this sort of adventure as anyone."   "Thanks to your teaching."  Dr. Powers gave a short sharp laugh like a bark. "I didn't pour four years of education into you so you could waste them on becoming a politician. Go. Just be careful-and send me a message now and then on how you're doing."

"I will." Dr. Powers ended the link. The IDNA logo and a constellation of control icons replaced his image. I sat up with a relieved sigh, determined to enjoy the rest of the trip to Tycho base. I had already responded to Phil's message of "Coming, Yes/No?" and left a recording for my father, leaving Dr. Powers-the most difficult task-for last. I flash messaged the crew at the TLS hanger to prep Argippos and instructed the ship to begin the pre-flight checklist. I tried to relax, but a growing restlessness force me to slot the data crystal and review the profile the oracle had prepared. I had to know what future events might already be impinging on my personal quantum signature.    * * * "All systems are ready," Argippos announced as I entered the ship. I slid onto the acceleration couch and brushed a hand across the glossy marble control surfaces. Shiny black displays lit up in a colorful array of numbers and graphs. I took a moment to enjoy the antique brass and wood accents which gave the cabin a baroque late 21st century look, and sniffed the air. It even had the fresh-out-of-the-wrapper smell.   A graduation gift from my father, the Argippos was only a prototype and the most advanced craft grown from the TLS nanotanks at Lagrange Point Five. The ship's Cybernetic Awareness, essential to its drive system and its most complicated component, took years to mature. Equipped with a Quantum Wave Effect Generator, the core component of the Heisenberg drive, the CA was necessary to visualize the craft's quantum jumps through space.   "Begin launch sequence," I said. I got up and stowed my gear while the CA communicated with launch control. The ship trundled out to the launch pad and I strapped myself down as the sequence finished. The reaction thrusters fired and Argippos quickly assumed a lunar orbit.   "Set a course for the transit station; maximum speed." "Flight plan prepared and filed with the transit authority," the CA said. "Proceed."  I didn't bother watching the external cameras. Unlike the vids, the stars don't blur across the screen. At an equivalent speed of twelve times the speed of light, the stars don't move at all, and since the H-drive doesn't physically move the ship through space, there's not even any red shift to add interest to an otherwise static display.   The transit station circled Sol between the Kuiper Belt and the Oort Cloud. At a distance of 100AU, it took the light from Sol nearly fourteen hours to reach the gate. The Argippos made it in about seventy-five minutes. On the way I scanned all the highest rated discussions on the converse about Shines Like the Sun, the Cack ruler's brother whom I was about to meet. Those Who Dwell Within, or as they're more commonly known, the Cacks, had been big news ever since their first attempt to forcibly include us in their economic sphere. We surprised them with our fierce determination to fight regardless of the cost. Then we dismayed them when we invited ourselves into their economic sphere anyway. They couldn't decide if it was an act of surrender on our part or a demand for surrender on theirs. Either way, they recognized us as the first species they'd encountered who understood the economics of warfare and the warfare of economics. I queried terabytes of information, but could find little more than fluff pieces on the "charismatic" Shines Like the Sun, his family, and his procession through human space. I did, however, manage to dig up some passing references to Sunshine's conflict with his former friend Bright Fortune. It was widely thought that Bright Fortune had accused Sunshine of plotting to overthrow his own brother Righteous Ruler. Sunshine, with the help of his mother, narrowly escaped a death sentence and then proceeded to take his revenge by seizing hundreds of systems once ruled by Bright Fortune. There was little discussion of their conflict's background and that little mostly consisted of speculation from outside observers.  

An hour and fifteen minutes later, the H-drive switched off and the acceleration warning chimed. The matter/antimatter engines fired and I felt something like gravity for the first time on my trip. "The transit station has requested navigational control," Argippos said. "Acknowledge and comply." I watched the station grow from the size of a small washer until only a few degrees of its arc filled my monitor as the station slotted me behind an outbound freighter hauling ice from the Oort cloud. From inside the ring of the spinning station, with only a faint ripple of distortion near the inner rim, the light of stars hundreds of light-years distant, shown as if they merely waited on the other side. In a way, I guess they did.   Never having traveled through a transit gate before, and only knowing how the drama-vids portrayed the experience, I braced myself for any of a dozen mind-altering, sensory numbing or nausea inducing experiences. The transit station cut the reaction drive as Argippos neared the gate and we drifted slowly through the massive ring, emerging hundreds of light-years away as smoothly as if she had drifted into a space dock. The moment of transition passed so quickly and so unremarkably that I hadn't really marked it and I determined on the next passage to identify the exact moment when I existed half in one solar system and half-hundreds of light-years away-in another.   The reaction engines cut in again as the station moved Argippos out of the path of incoming traffic and an obligatory "Welcome to Sardis Colony" message, complete with local history, customs and laws, arrived in my incoming message queue. "Set a course for Sardis IV and locate Phil's ship, the Torchbearer." "Flight plan prepared and filed," the CA replied. "Proceed." The reaction engines cut off and weightlessness returned as the H-drive switched on and we raced toward an alien star.   I punched up Sardis IV's traffic control's data stream and marveled at the armada of ships in orbit. Most were Solarian, the majority bearing Pentaminc Corp's logo, a circle of five "M"s. One large alien ship, appearing something like a knobby jelly fish, stood out from the rest. It was a Cack warship. "I've located the Torchbearer," Argippos announced. "Request a docking and proceed the moment you have clearance."   It didn't take long before Argippos accelerated toward one of the ships. It neared uncomfortably faster than I or any human pilot would prefer, but the Argippos and the Torchbearer's CAs smoothly inserted my ship into a docking cradle in the hanger deck and the docking port had attached itself to Argippos' side before I could unlatch myself and get my gear.   I drifted through the plastic tube connecting our ships and Phil appeared at the lock as I cycled through. He was a long skinny guy with short black hair. His bony face broke into a grin as I spied him through the airlock's window. We had met in flight school where he had been my instructor and, though he was ten years my senior, we just sort of hit it off. Even after the colonial war broke out and he got promoted to fleet, he kept in touch and I'm certain had a hand in my promotion to O4 toward the end of the war. (Well, that and a colonial freighter named W. Ashbless and a one-manned fast attack craft which was all I had to stopped an Earth battle ship from seizing the freighter. It was the only combat action I saw in the whole war.) Phil and I only lost touch after the war when he immigrated to the colonies in pursuit of fame and fortune.   The lock opened. "Permission to come aboard?" I asked. "Hey Zoomer!" Using my old call-sign, Phil swept me up in a one-armed hug, hanging onto an anchor point with his other hand. "Glad you could come!"

"Well Powers tried to stop me, but I never let good advice get in my way." I laughed.   Phil beckoned to a Spacer 1st Class. "Take his bag to the shuttle." Then he turned to me. "Sorry for the short notice, but we're on a tight schedule." "Are we going somewhere? I just got here." "We're shipping out on the Flower of Dirt." "What?" I snatched at an anchor point myself as I started to drift away.   Phil smirked back at me and palmed a neighboring hatch lock. Beyond it lay a small transport shuttle in a nearby docking cradle. "It seems many races' name for their home world translates to something like dirt. I suppose Flower of Earth would be just as accurate, though somewhat confusing." "We're jumping with the Cacks?" Phil pulled himself down the plastic tube to the transport. "It's Cack tradition for all nobility-meaning officers-to ship together, apart from the commoners. But then you're the Cack expert, you should know that." "I took a xenology minor, but-" "I hoped you packed warm-weather gear." "Why?" "They keep their ships near thirty-eight degrees Celsius." Phil entered the shuttle and returned the salute of a S1C attendant waiting at the hatch. "Tell the pilot to launch as soon as he's ready," he told the spacer. Phil secured himself in an acceleration couch and I followed his example. "At least I got you your own stateroom in executive row. You'll have some control over environmental there." "How did you manage that?" I asked. "Simple." Phil smirked. "You're my new XO."   I would have jumped off the acceleration couch if I hadn't been strapped on. "I'm just an observer on this mission. I can't be employed by your company! Do you have any idea what the political ramifications would be? Does your HR know?" Phil laughed. "Don't worry. You're a sub-contractor through a dummy corp. Everything's going through AP. We'll get the paperwork to you later." I took a deep breath. "If the business 'zines heard about this, the stock traders would go crazy." Phil made a skeptical sound. "Everyone knows you Fortune 100 types engage in all kinds of speculative little adventures." "Not with the Cacks though!" The docking clamps clanked open as they released the shuttle and we drifted silently toward the shuttle bay opening. It was too late to turn back. "What about my ship?"   "Don't worry. The techs on Torchbearer will keep it safe." Phil chuckled. "I've even detailed a couple of S1Cs to clean it for you on a regular basis. Besides, I don't think you want the Cacks getting their hands-or whatever-on it. A high tech piece of equipment like that, isn't it classified or something?" I grimaced. "Sort of. It's privately owned but no one outside TLS personnel are really supposed to touch it."   Phil leaned toward me, and in a low conspiratorial voice asked, "So, what's its relative C? The 'zines are guessing eight to ten." "Twelve." He whistled. "Twelve times the speed of light. Nice. That's even better than military hardware."   We both fell silent as the shuttle pulled away from the Torchbearer and headed toward the Flower of Dirt. The shuttle had actual windows-some sort of shatter-proof, self-repairing, harder-than-diamond carbon laminate-and we watched the alien warship grow larger and more alien as we neared.   After a moment, Phil said, "I hope you don't mind me using you as my strategy officer as well?"   I checked him for any sign he might be joking or had gone mad. "You realize I'm a pilot-officer, right? A Strat-O-a fleet strategic officer-is an O7 position." "O6 or O7. I put you in as an O6." "That's a two-step jump." "Not unheard of." "In war-time! "Look, Ken, I've seen your command school scores. You're more than capable of doing the job. You just lack a little confidence." "And seniority. What will your senior officers say? That the rich and politically connected kid bought his commission?" "That would pretty much be SOP if it were true-which it isn't. In fact you'll be one of only a handful with any combat experience at all." "How is that possible? With the colonial wars ended, I would have thought there would be tons of experienced officers available." Phil shook his head as he stared out the window, watching the pilot bring the shuttle around to the back of the Cack warship. We slid in among its strange rearward projections like a fish asking to be caught in a jellyfish' tentacles. "All the veterans either went into business or homesteaded a colony. Anyone spacing with a mercenary force these days is a neo." Our shuttle slid into the gaping maw of the Cack shuttle bay. A sick feeling swept over me as it swallowed us up. "Are you saying that we're about to boost into a hot zone with a bunch of vac-suckers?" Phil laughed. "No, I'm just talking about the fleet officers who think they can make their fame and fortunes in space. The ship's commanders and their crew are all real-time." "That still doesn't make me feel any better." "Don't worry. Sunshine's officers will be in charge of operations in system. Our fleet officers will mostly just stand around giving media interviews. Besides, it's not as if this were a major conflict. We're just going to show up, rattle a few sabers, and interdict local traffic through the gate. Worst case scenario: we'll hit a few planetary targets from space. After the initial fuss it'll actually be a bore. You'll see."

 

Chapter 3

My minor in Xenology didn't quite prepare me for the sight of a Cack in the flesh. Those Who Dwell Within, sometimes called the Indwellers, stand two and one-half meters tall and look like a cross between a bipedal praying mantis and a walking saguaro cactus—from which they get their nickname. A green, chitenous, pseudo-exoskeleton covers their bodies in long vertical strips, joined by cartilaginous tissue through which sensory hairs protrude like spines. The one that crawled toward us on its four arms as we pulled our way out of the connecting tube into the Cack ship, triggered all sorts of fight-or-flight responses which I trembled to suppress. A blast of hot dry air drew beads of sweat across my forehead and evaporated them almost as quickly. The indweller who greeted us hooked its feet under two handholds, anchoring itself to the wall, and chittered and whistled and clacked its mandibles at us. The translating device attached to its shell below its oval-shaped head said, "Forgive this servant being Circling Winds. This servant seeks the lords of He Who Looks Up." "We are they." Phil said. The translator chittered its response and the Cack's leaf-like ears flapping as it listened, examining us with its bulbous black eyes.  Somehow, despite the awkwardness of microgravity, it pulled its four arms to the passageway wall, serving as its floor, and bobbed "up" and "down" repeatedly as if bowing at the waist. It moved from side to side in quick insect-like jerks as it bobbed and clacked its mandibles, clinging to the wall like some large, armored, green spider. I was glad I had not even been born when we had fought the Cacks. "Follow this servant leading to the chambers awaiting the lords of He Who Looks Up." Casting me a glance and a shrug, Phil replied to the crouching Circling Winds, "We will." Barely waiting to hear the translation, Circling Winds turned and leaped away like an arrow. He paused to glance back at us as we drifted along behind, then rocketed away down the dim passage and into a cylindrical room with what looked like acceleration couches along one wall. Two Cack workers and a crawdad, each with tools attached to belts around their torsos or appendages, already lay strapped in face down. Our guide joined them on an empty couch and turned to us. "Secure yourselves against the growing acceleration to come." The acceleration couches were not padded; though they were covered in some sort of plasticized surface which imparted a little give. Phil and I lay back against the couches and fiddled with the straps until we got them adjusted. Then we waited and listened to the Cack's untranslated conversation with a Cack operator in another room. Transparent doors closed, sealing each end of the room, and a warning drum sounded. I braced myself and the room began to spin. The acceleration took less than a minute, and then in a strange trick of perception, it seemed the corridor outside the clear doors spun while the room remained stationary. I had only just begun to get used to the "pull" of the centripetal force when the room lurched and began to move "down." It was almost too much for my inner ear to take and I closed my eyes and concentrated on repressing my rising nausea. Eventually the elevator came to a stop, an all-clear rhythm drummed from the room's sound system. The other occupants freed themselves from their restraints and left. Our guide waited just long enough for us to stagger out into a corridor running along the outside edge of the ship's spinning habitat section. We followed Circling Winds to a door where it stopped and whistled and chittered. The door opened into a cooler and brighter room and Circling Winds stood aside. We entered a common room with a half-dozen smaller personal chambers leading off from it. "You will find the place containing your needs of sustainment. The tool-slaves are taught your speech, though conquering understanding must occur."

"I'm sure we'll manage," Phil said. "Shines Like the Sun will call you when the Lords of He Who Looks Up are complete. Waiting until then, you may shape your own time." Circling Winds left and I surveyed the room, noting a lack of furniture. Long low shelves extended from the walls and smooth glazed ceramic covered every surface. Even in the personal chambers, not a single cushion or pillow could be found. I examined a long, shallow, dish-shaped depression in an alcove recessed into the wall, fearing it was meant to be my bed, then returned to the common room. Our netpieces would not interface with the Cack network so Phil had found a com panel and was talking to sub-commander Harlow back on the Torchbearer when I had finished my inspection. "Yes, sir. The Flower gave the command to break orbit as soon as your shuttle docked." Harlow was a thin little man with short bristly black hair just long enough to keep him from being called bald but short enough to not draw too much attention to a hairline already in full retreat. "They ordered us to follow and told us we could confirm the order with you after you settled in there." "Still, it would have been nice to have gotten some advance notice," I said, joining Phil at the screen. Phil shot me a warning look, and then addressed Harlow. "Continue to obey any lawful order coming from Shines Like the Sun's C&C unless it is directly countermanded by myself." "Yes, sir." "That will be all for now." "Acknowledged. Torchbearer clear." Phil stared at the blank screen thoughtfully scratching at the point of his chin. After a moment of silence, he asked. "Did you sense anything odd in the manner we were received?" "You mean, having a servant hurry us off to our rooms without even an officer to greet us? It does seem odd. I had always thought the Cacks were big on ceremony." The silence of my netpiece suddenly became oppressive. I walked over to a com panel and punched up the Cack media networks, seeking any news of what was going on outside the ship but, judging from the awkward translations, Cack media wasn't even talking about Sunshine. I searched for any Solarian feed, even one from our own ships, but except for the command channels, the Cack military network didn't interface with ours. I closed the feeds in disgust and put the com panel on standby. "I hope they don't expect us to conduct a war from here." Phil stared off thoughtfully. "No. The nobles travel together, but they rejoin their flagships before the fighting starts." "That's assuming he's interested in us and not just our ships." Phil snapped a frown at me. I could see him thinking the same thing. The Cacks wouldn't be able to crew our ships, but they didn't need us to command them and we'd make nice hostages if that became necessary. "Surely they realize that it is our discipline and our combat doctrine and not our technology that makes us effective," I said. "They'd never be able to maintain that without the fleet officers." Phil smiled and shook his head ruefully. "It'll never come to that. The contract was fairly open-ended to allow us to respond to changes in circumstances. As long as they keep paying us, they effectively own us." * * * The fleet traveled considerably slower than my ship Argippos. Just lining up Phil's two-hundred ships of the combined Solarian/Pentaminc fleet and Sunshine's escort, took hours to transit through the gate. Once through, we stopped at a little colony called Biggs to service and re-supply our ships. The Quantum Wave Effect Generator that made the H-drive possible had the unfortunate side-effect of occasionally degrading important ship components. It worked by harmonizing all the ship's particles into a single waveform, thus causing the ship to become subject to the theory of indeterminacy. The Cybernetic Awareness would then collapse the waveform in another location, causing the ship to instantly jump there. Because stray particle interactions could potentially collapse the wave-form prematurely or incompletely, the jumps were limited to the microscopic scale. But as the jumps happened instantaneously, the only limit to the effective "speed" of the H-drive was how rapidly the CA could repeat the process. One could even say the H-drive allowed the ship to travel at the speed of thought. In the case of heavy warships, that amounted from four to six times the speed of light, with merchant ships, tenders, and support craft traveling about half that speed.

The SI-Transit Security Force, better known as Innman's Pilgrims, was already in orbit around Biggs when our fleet arrived. I knew Fleet Commander Innman held the contract with Sunshine to provide security for all the transit stations in Solarian occupied space. I wondered, as we jockeyed for position in high orbit with four hundred ships, if he had left any behind. Over the next three days, hundreds more ships poured into the system. First came Fleet Commander Solomon with one hundred ships of the FarStar Trading Alliance's security force, then Fleet Commander Moony swept in with one hundred fifty shiny new ships of Universal Security Systems, followed over the course of several days by one hundred ten battle-scarred ships of The Patriotic Force of the Free Government of the Thousand, commanded by Fleet Commanders Arden and Ormond who had been laying siege to their own planet. I had expected the Cacks to place the officers in adjoining suites so we could discuss how to integrate the fleets, but the Cacks had us scattered all over the spinning habitat ring. Remembering my role as Phil's Executive Officer or XO, I tried to work with the other sub-commanders to schedule net meetings for the fleet commanders, but everyone was preoccupied with personal issues and seemed content to let the Cacks handle fleet operations while waiting for Sunshine to call his meeting of the officers. "Each fleet is individually contracted with Shines Like the Sun and retains separate command structures," I complained to Phil. "Many are owned by rival corporations. You can't expect them to ignore that." Phil had had some portable furniture brought over and leaned back in a soft chair catching up on some off-line media he had stored. "There are tons of legal hurdles involved here." "Yes, I know that, but..." I paused searching for the nameless thing that had been bugging me. "It's their casual attitude. If we can't coordinate our actions, many of these ships will just be wasted. With a fleet this size, Sunshine obviously has something major in mind..." I suddenly realized what had bothered me. "How advanced would you say these Unbounded Ones are?" "I don't know. About the same as Earth, I suppose. They were discovered by the Cacks early in their development and don't seem to have developed the H-drive or tachyon-cascade reactors." "How many ships do you think it would take to pacify them?" Phil slowly put down his data pad and gave me a piercing look. "What do you think is going on?" I punched up an orbital display with the ship's labels turned off, but color coded for each fleet. Nearly one thousand ships, most of them heavy cruisers, sat in orbit around Biggs. "Perhaps this isn't pacification. Could it be extermination?" Phil got out of his chair and frowned at the swirling display of ships. "No. Genocide is even easier than pacification. A few large asteroids from orbit and poof! No more Unbounded. They only inhabit a handful of planets. The Solarian fleet alone could have blockaded them all. This is beyond overkill." * * * The fleet transited to the next system, a Cack outpost whose name translated as simply "Dark." A handful of small, rocky, lifeless worlds orbited a brown dwarf star. One of them had served as a military base before repeated renovations and re-purposings had left it something of a personal home and regional office for Sunshine. We had barely organized the fleet into their parking orbits and scheduled leaves and transport shuttles when Fleet Commander Sherman appeared with one hundred eighty ships of the Consolidated Colonial Space Force. That was when Shines Like the Sun summoned the fleet commanders to his flagship, the Flower of Dirt. Sunshine looked like a tropical bird in his ceremonial garb. He stood in the center of the room on a dais wearing a robe of elbow-length plastic strips in bright red, orange and lime-yellows. The plastic strips bobbed and trembled around him as he greeted his friends and fellow Cacks of the nobility. We Solarians were escorted into the room by Cack guards armed with short-hafted, long-bladed halberds. I assumed the weapons were for ceremonial purposes for each also wore large particle emission weapons hanging from straps across their shoulders. A dozen more, armed only with energy weapons, stood in an upper gallery ringing the room.

One by one, the fleet commanders approached Sunshine and got down on both knees and pledged their loyalty. On his turn, I watched Phil step forward and kneel. "I, Phil Porter, a loyal and trustworthy member of my hive, before the Great Maker and these witnesses, do foreswear all allegiance to every other hive and pledge eternal friendship and obligation to Shines Like the Sun and his hive. If I should fail in the least to redeem my pledge, may the Maker forget my name when he calls forth his re-creation. Standing next in line, I watched the proceedings in anxious fascination and worried about approaching Sunshine without having been briefed on the protocols.  Still I found his presence captivating. The usual non-verbal cues, the facial expressions and body language, were either absent or all wrong. I wondered, as I waited, what the Cacks thought of the twitching puckered faces of the Solarians. We must have seemed soft and vaguely gelatinous to him. Shine Like the Sun clacked and whistled his reply. A human interpreter stood nearby listening to a translation device and paraphrasing the response in standardized international english. "I, being Shines Like the Sun, from whom my hive proceeds, before the Great Maker and these witnesses, receive your pledge of loyalty, making friends of your friends and enemies of your enemies. If failing in this I should not honor this obligation, may the Great Maker forget my name on calling for his re-creation. A member of Sunshine's entourage announced, "Rise and welcome be." Phil rose and stood aside. Throwing caution aside, I strode up next and knelt down. "I, Kenneth Phon, a loyal—" "No need to pledge your honor," Sunshine said. "Your superior's pledging is yours as your failures are his. Accepting his pledging, I accept all from him." I shut up and bowed my head, hoping they understood the gesture, but mostly to hide my burning face. Sunshine leaned forward and his ears flapped faster. I looked up and, despite the dim light, saw myself reflected in his large black eyes. "Seeing you here is my pleasing. I am hoping you to choose to travel with us on this task of going forth." "I would be honored to do so." Sunshine clacked his mandibles. "It is goodness. Ensuring your swift return home I will when The Unbounded Ones are resolved." "I thank you." A moment of awkward silence followed after which Sunshine's attendant announced, "Guest, rise and welcome be." I scurried off to a reception area, avoiding the glances of my fellow Solarians. Phil greeted me with a wry smile and handed me a cup of strangely flavored water. "Completely frictionless."  I grimaced and sipped the water. "You don't have to tell me I made of fool of myself." "No, it was a bold gamble which paid off spectacularly." "You're joking." "Only half. You succeeded in gaining more recognition than Sunshine's own commanders. I expect you'll be re-appraised by his court now." I surveyed the cluster of Cacks gathered around Sunshine, then cast a glance at the Solarians chatting nearby. I noted a number of looks cast my way as they spoke. "As what?" Phil smiled knowingly. "We'll see when they start offering favors." Phil paraded me through the room, introducing me to each of our fellow fleet commanders. Arden and Ormond complained endlessly of the difficulties of trying to obtain military objectives while functioning as the base of operations for a government in exile. They seemed to alternate between veiled pleas for sympathy and requests for more tangible support. Moony was even less pleasant. "Watch this one," Phil whispered. "He's a sociopathic social climber. If he's nice to you, it only means he's trying to take advantage of you before he knifes you in the back." "Phil Porter and Kenneth Phon," Moony said with a faint sneer when Phil introduced me. "I didn't expect your kind out here when there's fighting to be done." "Our kind? Excuse me?" I asked, stunned. The fact that Phil was of European descent while my family originated in the Far East only confused me. "Martians," he said. "You're both from Mars originally, no?" I could see Phil swell with indignation. "If you're suffering from the ignorant belief that Martians are cowards, then I'm afraid you're quite mistaken." "Oh? And just what action did you two see during the wars?" I was debating whether to mention the incident with the W. Ashbless when Phil jumped in. "We were defending our colony, the same as you." Moony looked at Phil critically. "I don't remember any fighting on Mars." Phil stepped up closer to the older heavier man. "Mars is a lot closer to Earth than Gooberstone or wherever you're from. Perhaps you resent us for not fighting your war for you." Though no one looked at us, the surrounding conversations died out. Moony's face grew stony as he lost his sneer. I could feel the tension mounting as they glared at each other. "Speaking of action, what brings Universal Security here?" I nearly blurted, hoping to change the subject. Moony gave me a puzzled look as if wondering why I was speaking. I plunged onward. "I don't see how The Unbounded Ones rate the extra fire power." The condescending sneer returned to Moony's face. He nodded toward Arden and Ormond. "You don't seriously think those two would have left their precious world for anything as trivial as the Unbounded do you?" "I was having difficulty explaining them." "If you two weren't so ignorant, you'd know Shines Like the Sun's friend Bright Fortune governs several nearby systems. You'd also know Bright Fortune nearly got Shines Like the Sun executed for treason." Moony sipped his drink smugly and let that info sink in. I had known all that, though I hadn't realized we were so close to Bright Fortune's systems. "I expect we're headed toward a little civil war when this charade is over. Moony smiled. "At least we'll finally see if you Martian's can fight."

 

Chapter 4

Ship Commander Tereshkova only appeared a decade older than me. She also appeared very upset. Given her rank and standard anti-aging treatments, she was probably twice my age. There was no mistaking, however, the scowl she wore or the angry tremble in her voice. 
 "I'm sorry," I said for the nth time, reminding myself that I actually out-ranked her and trying not to feel intimidated, "but the contract stipulates you only get paid when we get paid. Technically, we're only acting as a-" 
 "Do you have any idea how close to the margin we owner-operators operate? I have loan payments due and I've already defaulted on nearly a quarter of my crew contracts. Any one of them could file a complaint and I could end up with a lien on my ship and the cost of chartering transport back to Sol!" 
 "Shines Like the Sun did give you a generous bonus-" 
 "Only because the ships needed to refit and re-supply! We had to spend that money just to take the job. Besides, you still owe us our boost bonus. We were supposed to have that a week ago." 
 "Shines Like the Sun is very embarrassed about this. He's promised us an extra bonus for waiting." 
 "Embarrassed? He's the Cack ruler's brother. He owns whole star systems!" 
 "Which is how you can know he will make good on his promises. He's only run into a temporary cash-flow problem." 
 Tereshkova's eyes flashed as she glared into the video pickup. "I'm the one with the cash flow problem and if I don't get some cash flowing in here, you are going to lose a battle cruiser-and that will just be the beginning of your problems!" 
 She killed the link leaving me with either a veiled threat or a dire prediction. Tired of apologizing for our employer, I ignored the flashing message requests from the other Ship Commanders and pulled up a view of our one-thousand-plus ship fleet passing single file through the transit station. I knew she wasn't the only one ready to leave. I had spent the whole morning logging similar messages from other SCs. 
 As we transited to another system in a careful circumnavigation of Unbounded occupied space, a swarm of merchant craft flashed the fleet with messages offering equipment and services at "low, low prices." They paced the fleet like hungry jackals, but not one of our ships signaled a request to break rank. None of our ships could afford to and I knew that only fed their anger. 
 If we were being hammered with complaints, I could only imagine how badly Sunshine's people were catching it. So it was no surprise when the Cacks scheduled a fleet-wide conference in v-space. We all logged into a virtual audience chamber as spectators to watch Sunshine address the fleet in his shiny plastic plumage. As Sunshine spoke, a machine-assisted human translator provided a second audio feed. 
 "My dear friends, I thank you for your patience and your trust. My father, the Ruler, once told me before he died, that of all the wealth one can accumulate, the best is friendship. It seems, now, that we are in this situation because of my embarrassing wealth of friends. 
 "When I first began this expedition, I intended to both deal with a personal problem and do a favor for my friends. Finding myself with more friends than I expected-or deserved-offering to assist me, I could not say no.


 "I have not forgotten your difficulties and, having lain awake at night worrying about you, I believe I have found a solution. Negotiating on your behalf, I have secured a contract with Doggedly, a nearby regional manager who is having difficulties with a race outside the economic zone preying on his traders. In exchange for destroying their space-faring abilities, he has agreed to not only cover your boost bonus, but to make your next three contract payments. Furthermore, you may take possession of any ship or other off-plant assets you can carry off." 
 Puzzled, I looked to Phil, forgetting we were in spectator mode and that none of our avatars were present in v-space. The chat message cues for both the officers and enlisted scrolled excitedly with chatter. It seemed all past grievances were already forgotten as everyone speculated on their coming wealth. I called up the scanty briefing info on our future opponents, wondering just who we were about to fight. 
 * * * 
 Back on the Torchbearer I raced to fleet Command and Control, trying not to hit any passersby with the pressure suit helmet swinging from my hand as I caromed off the walls. Ship's Commander Brennon had called for battle stations as the Torchbearer neared the transit station and the ship shuddered slightly as the spinning habitat module braked, was retracted, and locked against the ship's hull. This was a standard part of battle preparations, since relatively minor damage to a spinning habitat module could tear up the whole ship. As I hurried weightlessly through the narrow twisted passages toward the C&C, dodging exposed ducts and conduit, I felt as if I were weaving through the bowels of a giant machine whose builders had considered their human occupants only as an afterthought. After the Flower of Dirt, the Torchbearer seemed small, cramped and vaguely primitive. 
 Inside the C&C, I slipped into a pod-shaped crash-chamber, attached my helmet, strapped myself down and booted up the information system programs. Sub-Commander Harlow gave a nod from the crash-chamber across from me. The small room near the bridge at the heart of the ship contained three other crash-chambers, all five of the oblong spheroids being arranged in a circle facing a backup holographic table. In moments Phil rushed in with fleet officers Chris Knight and Cathrine Kacsmaryk and strapped in. 
 Chris Knight was an athletic blond man who appeared to be about my age, though he was at least two decades older. He had earned a reputation as a hotshot pilot in the colonies during the war. Cathrine Kacsmaryk was a pretty young brunette who appeared, if anything, younger than me. Phil had warned me, before he introduced us, that she was a tactical genius from the war college on New Sparta. The Pentaminc Corp. had paid a lot of money to hire her and then had wasted her in logistics. Phil considered it quite a coup to have gotten her reassigned to the fleet when this contract came up. 
 "Status report, all wings," Phil ordered. 
 I already had my com panel up and punched the status request icon. In seconds, the ship icons began lighting up green. I scanned the list to ensure no qualifying comments were attached. 
 "Alpha wing ready," Harlow said. 
 "Beta wing ready," Knight said. 
 "Delta wing reports ready," Kacsmaryk said. 


"Gamma wing all shows green," I said. 
 "I want two scout ships from each wing, each with a standard compliment of recon drones, to insert themselves into the transit queue before us," Phil said. "They are to proceed as soon as they transit." 
 I flashed messaged the tac-officers of the two most senior ships' commanders and relayed the orders. Phil had already told us the Cacks did not expect any serious resistance to our attack and so the scouts would be looking for prizes as much as threats. Still, he didn't want any ships taking damage because the scouts overlooked a gunship while targeting a rich freighter. 
 "Instruct our wings to execute procedure Alpha Four as soon as we transit," Phil said. 
 I relayed the orders for our ships to secure the area around the transit station. The other fleet commanders had allowed us to go first in the transit queue because that job would allow them to start chasing down targets while we played catch-up. But by getting our scouts out front, Phil had said he hoped to find richer targets deeper in system in the time it took us to catch up to the others. 
 The scout craft and their accompanying drones transited to the next system. The second the station released their navigational control, they disappeared, zooming off towards the system's primary at ten times the speed of light. The Torchbearer's acceleration warning chimed and we moved forward through the ring of the transit station. Once on the other side, the warning chimed again and the ship pulled away at three Gs. I followed the fleets' movements on my display as each ship sped away in a different direction, circling the station in outward growing spirals. Even at an accelerated pace, it took our fleet nearly ten minutes to transit and most of the rest of an hour for the last ship of the Patriotic Force of the Free Government of the Thousand to arrive. 
 "Transmit the rally coordinates from my panel to all ships," Phil said. "Proceed as soon as the last ship is released from station control." 
 I forwarded the message while glancing up at the system plot of the coordinates. They were deep in the system. "Er, shouldn't we form up and re-seed the EPR transceivers before we launch the attack?" I asked. 
 "That would be the approved method," Phil said. "But it appears the other FCs have decided otherwise." 
 I called up the other fleets' plots. Their ships had already spread out and were seizing, freighters, mineral ore processing vehicles, and anything that moved. As I watched, one of Moony's ships captured a passenger transport that had the potential of being worth ten times the value of the ship that captured it. 
 "Very good." I shrugged and sent his instructions. My board flickered with my ships' replies. "All ships have acknowledged." 
 "Proceed." 
 The Torchbearer leaped forward at nearly six times the speed of light, yet it would take a couple of hours before we reached the rendezvous point. During that time, with the exception of our gravimetric sensors, we would fly deaf and blind. If all went well, we would leap-frog the other fleets and begin attacking the targets our scouts had found for us. Until then, we took turns spelling each other for short breaks.


 As we approached the rendezvous point, I saw a waiting scout ship on the gravitics. As soon as the QWEGs shut down and the fleet flashed into existence, the scout ship broadcast the data it and the other scouts had collected, and my board lit up with data profiles. The targeting computers began selecting likely hostiles, but other than some short-range fighters near what looked like the system's primary habitable planet, few threats appeared. I sorted through the targets and began reassigning threat values based on their economic values and the SCs began flagging their targets and flying off to seize them as soon as I upgraded each one. 
 We had obviously abandoned any thought of fleet level tactics, so after taking a couple of minutes to sort through the identified targets, my job mostly consisted of monitoring the situation and evaluating any new threats that emerged. Every few minutes a coded laser transmission would reach us from a more distant scout ship, but the value of the targets identified dropped off significantly. 
 "I'm getting interference from the other fleets," Knight snarled. "They keep intercepting my targets." 
 "At least your SCs are pursuing their assigned targets," Kacsmaryk said. "Mine are ignoring their selected targets and going after whichever one they think is most valuable." 
 "Are you actually assigning individual targets to each ship?" I blurted out, surprised. 
 Cathrine lifted her head and tossed me a confused look. "Of course. Their way is too inefficient and allows potential hostiles through." 
 "Don't worry about enforcing strict target assignment," Phil said. "We'll be developing some protocols as we go. Consider this a practice test to see what we need to work on." 
 Cathrine turned her attention back to her panel and muttered, "There's no such thing as a practice test." 
 Updating my board, I noticed one of our ships had targeted one of Solomon's ships and my breath caught in my throat. I slapped the icon to directly flash message Commander Thomas of the Saberhagen as his ship moved in to attack. "Saberhagen, this is C&C. Break off your attack. You're targeting the wrong vessel." 
 Five long silent seconds followed during which my heart hammered out a dozen rib shaking beats, Commander Thomas' irritated voice replied. 
 "No, C&C, I have the right target." 
 "You are targeting a friendly vessel. I repeat, you are targeting a friendly vessel. Break off immediately." I quickly scanned my panel for potential targets in his area, thinking he had been in pursuit of another ship and accidentally acquired one of Solomon's when it had crossed his path in the chaos of battle. 
 "This is not a friendly ship. I warned him once already, and he keeps boarding and seizing ships I've already flagged." 
 I sat stunned. Visions of our fleet turning on itself in a fight over limited targets filled me with a sick feeling of impending disaster. I found a nearby target, a small unmanned craft, and bumped up its threat rating by two categories. "Saberhagen, you have a new target, zeta-one-eight. Please acknowledge and comply." I held my breath, watching Saberhagen approach its target, then scanned our nearby ships. None were close enough to intercept the Saberhagen before it got into attack range. 
 "Acknowledged," came the disgusted voice. "Targeting zeta-one-eight." 
 I exhaled, feeling a little dizzy and watched his ship change course. As I ran a hand across a damp forehead, I looked at the other officers crouched in their crash-chambers and took a deep breath. Since none of our ships seemed to be on the point of murdering an ally, I switched over to Commander Brennan's com channel to try and get a feel for what was going on. 
 "This is the Torchbearer to unidentified freighter. Shut down your engines and prepare to be boarded. Comply and your crew will be safely released, resist and you will be treated as combatants and your crew will not survive." 
 I continued listening in on Commander Brennan's com traffic as I watched the orgy of looting from my monitors. In the initial rush, some of the lower value targets were simply tagged with marker buoys loaded with nano-viruses. Unable to resist military-grade infections, those ships would already be under our control by the time we returned to them. 
 The freighter complied and shut down its engines. Commander Brennon launched a breaching pod filled with armored troopers and a young officer to take charge of it, then turned Torchbearer away to the next target before the pod had even attached itself to the freighter. The Torchbearer started heading toward an orbiting space station. 
 "He's not going to try and claim that station, is he?" I asked.  
 Phil poked his head above the rim of his crash chamber. "Our client doesn't want to leave any space assets behind. I'm sure we'll grab anything of value we can transport and destroy the thing." 
 I watched a handful of small craft flee the station and make for the planet surface. "What about ground-based space assets?" 
 Phil frowned down at his monitors. "I hope not. Most consider planetary bombardment a war crime. That's crossing a moral line I'd rather not cross."

 

Chapter 5

Our ships gathered in orbit about a planet whose name we never bothered to learn. We had to stay in high orbit to avoid the expanding cloud of debris which had once been a space station. As we waited for our raiding ships to return from the far corners of the star system, the planetary officials below offered us all the wealth they could scrape up with frantic pleas to not bombard them. We had no intention of attacking the planet, but we still accepted their tribute. Back on Flower of Dirt, the Fleet Commanders found a room in which to hold a conference on inter-fleet cooperation. The after-action reports showed that, despite a lack of planning, the ships within each fleet coordinated their actions fairly well. Ships of different fleets, however, sometimes chased the same target and more than once nearly attacked each other. The situation in the space station had been even worse. Moony's troops, caught in a dispute over supplies with Arden and Ormond's troops actually fired upon them. Only the arrival of Phil's troops under Force Leader Kouvaras's leadership had prevented numerous deaths. "What this all means," Commander Sherman summed up, "is that we need to integrate our command and control structure across all the fleets." Sherman was a late-middle-aged man with short iron-gray hair and a face that looked as if it had been carved out of meteoric iron by a bored technician with an industrial laser. He loved the art of war and was said to only smile just before he ordered an attack. He had fought in a number of bug wars before the colonies declared their independence and put him in charge of their defense. After retiring with full honors, he convinced the government of New Sparta that the growing problem of piracy needed his personal attention until he ended up fleeing a warrant for his arrest amid accusations of brutality and murder. "With you in charge of it all, no doubt." Moony munched on a cracker with some sort of Cack food smeared across it as he leaned back in his chair and propped his feet on the table. Sherman's face hardened. "I am the most experienced and the most senior officer here. But we can vote on that later. At the very least we should coordinate the C&Cs so we can tell the difference between friend and foe." Moony ignored Sherman's piercing look and smeared more of the fishy smelling spread on another cracker. "What about Innman here? He's got more history with Sunshine—even escorted the bug to his home world." "I said we will discuss that later." Commander Solomon leaned over to Phil and muttered. "I hate to say it, but Moony's got a point." Phil shrugged. "Well, however you structure the organization, you can leave me out." Moony flicked a crumb at Sherman. "Universal Security has been detailed to take Doggedly's wife home." "Wife?" I leaned over to Phil. "What does she have to do with anything?" Solomon leaned over from Phil's other side to look at me. "Doggedly sent her to negotiate the contract with Shines Like the Sun. She also brought the credits to pay us." "Most likely a payoff to keep us from invading." Arden gave Ormond a dark look. Several commanders exchanged nervous glances. We'd all heard rumors that Sunshine had bigger plans in mind. The system we had attacked was on the edge of Bright Fortune's territory. We had circled around Unbounded space and had paused between those two territories and the territory of That Which Overturns, the latter of which led towards the Cack home world. Everyone from the fleet commanders to the lowest ranked spacer was quietly trying to guess which way we would move. "I've heard Bright Fortune has fled his system with nearly his entire fleet," Sherman rumbled. "Do you think Shines Like the Sun will finally try to get his revenge?" Innman asked. Ormond sipped his drink then said, "Bright Fortune is claiming Shines Like the Sun has designs on the Moiarchy."

"Which may just be to cover his own cowardice." Sherman scowled. "It could also be an attempt to gain reinforcements." I called up a display of the transit system on the table before us. Except for a system called Beautiful Swiftly on the border between The Unbounded Ones and That Which Overturns, any other move would require us to commit to fighting someone. Why would Sunshine send Moony's fleet away now, I wondered. If we were to attack That Which Overturns, wouldn't we want all the ships together? Wouldn't we want Doggedly's wife as a hostage, if nothing else? "But who would believe him?" I asked. The commanders all frowned at me. "Even as big as we are, we couldn't take on the entire Moiarchy." Sherman gave me a surprised and disgusted look as if he could neither believe I was capable of speech or of such stupidity. I looked around and noted similar looks from the other commanders. I also noted that aside from Moony who had brought sub-commander Newman to serve as something like a butler, none of them had brought their subs. "If all the forces of the Moiarchy were collected in one place, that would be true," Sherman replied with condescending politeness. "But the Moiarchy is large and it ships are spread out. A force our size could easily swoop in and claim the Cack home world before they could gather to stop us. In most cases such a force could never hope to hold it long, but Shines Like the Sun is second only to his brother in the number of inherited shares of the Moiarchy. He only has to kill Righteous Ruler and he will inherit a controlling interest." The commanders exchanged silent questioning looks as they wondered if he'd really do it. "You know, he's sleeping with her." Moony leaned back in his chair, leering. "Who?" Solomon scowled at him. "Sunshine and Doggedly's wife. He's sleeping with her." "And that has what to do with...what?" Sherman demanded. "Doggedly had to know it would happen. In fact I think Doggedly sent her with that purpose in mind." "Assuming all of this is more than mere salacious rumor." Innman sighed. "What do you think this means?" "It means he's scared and desperate to survive. He doesn't want to side with Sunshine outright. If he would do that, he wouldn't have had to send his wife. But he also doesn't want Sunshine to kill him. He's trying to negotiate some sort of deal to ensure his survival however this plays out." "So, you believe Shines Like the Sun is definitely going to attack the Moiarchy?" Phil asked. "I'm saying Doggedly believes that and Shining Fortune believes that, so you'd best be prepared for your part in this civil war. * * * An alerting tone sounded and every display and smart surface of Flower of Dirt lit up with Shines Like the Sun's royal ideogram. The whistling and clicking voice of the announcer echoed from the ship's sound system followed by a machine-translated repetition. "Requesting your awareness to the transaction of justice." A pair of images, close-ups of Cack faces, appeared on the displays. There may have been subtle differences in their geometries but they were as good as identical to my eyes. "Most Fortunate and his assistant have been tested and are concluded to have conducted planning harmful to Shines Like the Sun and his directives. Correcting action has been applied to his assistant. Being of the royal brood, Most Fortunate has requested traditional punishment of royals. Merciful Shines Like the Sun has agreed."

The display switched to a live video feed of a Cack standing in a featureless chamber wearing plastic plumage only slightly less ornate than Sunshine's own. Six other Cacks stepped up to the victim, helped him to the ground, each grasping a limb and holding it tight to immobilize him. A seventh stepped into range of the camera pickup holding what I thought had been a purely ceremonial halberd. After quickly measuring the distance to the victim's neck with the halberd, the executioner smoothly chopped off Most Fortunate's head. The blood had a decidedly orange cast, though only a little oozed from the headless torso which thrashed violently. The six attendants struggled to restrain the body and I got the distinct impression that, had they let go, the corpse would have crashed about the small room for nearly a full minute before collapsing into a twitching pile of convulsing limbs. "Reconciling honor and justice, your ruling officers have provided this occasion to advancing group enthusiasm and diligence." Shocked, I turned to Phil who, except for the raised eyebrows, had a face frozen into expressionlessness. "It appears all is not well in Shines Like the Sun's inner circle," he said. "You don't think the nobles heard some news that upset them, do you?" Phil didn't answer. He didn't have to. After the execution, Sunshine sent us back to our ships and told us to prepare to transit. Though he didn't expect us to have to fight, we were to prepare for that possibility. Moony left to return Doggedly's wife and the fleets put Bright Fortune's territory behind, transiting to Beautiful Swiftly. From there we only had two potential targets and no one believed The Unbounded Ones were the enemy they would ultimately choose. I can't believe we're doing this, I kept thinking as we rode the shuttle back to the Torchbearer . If we attacked the Moiarchy, the greatest military force in the known universe, and failed...the Solar System would be doomed. Those Who Dwell Within had only stopped their attack on us because of cost overruns. We weren't worth further expenditures to conquer. This attack would prove the Solarians were dangerous. The Earth, Mars, the colonies, no human settlement would survive their retaliation. "Is it true, Sir?" a young spacer asked as we left the shuttle. "Are we attacking the Moiarchy?" Phil returned her salute. "Shines Like the Sun hasn't said that we are, but don't worry. The other fleet commanders and I won't let us get in over our heads." "Thank you, sir," she said though her worried gaze followed us as we floated down the passageway. I returned to my quarters/office where I sorted through a bunch of messages that, subtly or not, all asked the same question. I had only been there a few minutes before Phil flashed-messaged me. He wanted me to go get Force Leader Kouvaras and bring him to the Executive Conference Room. I could tell by his terse message that something was seriously wrong and I tried to imagine what would require Kouvaras' attention. The onboard troopers only had two jobs, repel boarders or board enemy ships. I found Kouvaras conducting a surprise inspection of the weapons' lockers. Since Phil had not messaged Kouvaras, I assumed he wanted this meeting to be discreet. I waited at the door, watching him meticulously inspect the security sensors and the duty logs while a weapons master and two T1C's hovered nervously nearby. He observed me out of the corner of his eye, but didn't acknowledge my presence. If it had only been routine ship's business I would have interrupted him and left, but as I waited there silently, he wrapped his inspection up quickly, pronounced everything satisfactory, then floated over to me. "May I help you, sir?" "If you have a moment, Commander Porter would like to see you in the ECR, right now." His right eyebrow twitched upwards two millimeters. "Very good, sir." He didn't say anything, just followed me to the conference room which was in the spinning habitat portion of the ship. "Come in, both of you," Phil said as Kouvaras slid the door open. The conference room was about the size of a normal berth, barely big enough to fit a smart table and still have room for people to sit around it. Next to Phil, at the far side of the table, sat a furious Commander Sherman. Flushed in a deep angry red, his face was clenched as if holding back the volcano of his rage. I closed the door behind me. Kouvaras and I slipped into our seats. No one said anything for a moment. Then, with a sharp intake of breath, Sherman spoke in a surprisingly calm voice. "Gentlemen, I'm afraid the mutiny has begun."  * * * I hope you are enjoying this story.  If so, please vote early and often. :) I would also love to hear your thoughts about the story, so feel free to leave comments, The best thing you could do for me, however, would be to tell others about this story so that we can share it with more people. Thanks for reading! J. A. Partridge

 

Chapter 6

"Has anyone used the word mutiny yet?" Phil asked. 
 "No," Sherman growled. "The crew is blaming everything on technical problems, but what else do you call it?" 
 "Both the right-side airlock and the hanger deck?" Phil asked with a note of incredulity. 
 "The service techs have partially dismantled the lock. They claim a routine inspection revealed a part that needed replacing. A spare couldn't be found and they are supposedly fabricating one now." 
 "And the hanger?" Phil asked. 
 "The one spacer who would talk to me said the deck master was redistributing some equipment when their restraints broke. They say they can't open the hanger until everything is secure and they fear the docking mechanism has been damaged." 
 "I assume we're talking about Sherman's flagship, The Battle of Kuzikos," I said during a thoughtful lull in the conversation. 
 Phil nodded grimly and I fought a perverse urge to chuckle at the mental image of the fleet commander locked out of his own ship. No matter how his crew dressed it up, this was mutiny. The only question was how far the mutiny stretched. Kouvaras shared their grim expression and I wondered how the situation involved the two of us. 
 "Have you been able to communicate with any of your command officers?" I asked Sherman. 
 "No. Most were on leave or with me on Flower of Dirt. Only my XO remained behind and he seems to be indisposed. I have no idea if it is against his will or not." 
 Phil leaned over the table, fixing me with a somber stare. "That's why we've called you here. Commander Sherman would like to know what's going on, but he doesn't want to involve anyone in his fleet." 
 "I want you and Force Leader Kouvaras to take a squad over there in a breaching pod and talk to them," Sherman said. 
 "I appreciate your trust in us," I began, my mind spinning as I tried to figure out what I was getting dragged into. "But I don't see how they will listen to me any more than you, sir." 
 "I don't expect them to listen to you. I expect them to listen to Kouvaras' men in the boarding craft with you." 
 Obviously I was only going along as the token officer. "That's the thing, sir. If this comes down to an attempt to retake the ship, I'm going to need more than one squad. They must have a whole company of troopers. I'm not sure how much of a threat Commander Kouvaras' men will be." 
 "With all due respect," Force Leader Kouvaras interrupted. "I believe Sub-Commander Phon is mistaken. My squad can get you onboard that ship and if it comes to fighting, we can take the hanger deck and hold it until reinforcements arrive." 
 Sherman gave a curt nod of satisfaction. "Their stalling tells me that they're not yet committed to open mutiny, or at least not united in it. I'm sure in their minds Sunshine has violated their contracts by changing the objective and they are not obligated to follow him or any commanders who persist in an unauthorized action. If you can get me in there, I'm sure I can turn this thing around."


 Ten minutes later, I sat strapped into a breaching pod with Force Leader Kouvaras, Squad Leader Marcello and eight of Sol's finest star troopers. They each wore Multi-Environmental Combat Armor, the lighter space-going version of dirt-side powered combat armor, and had a fully charged assault mag-gun in the dock at their right elbow. Not being rated for combat armor, I only had a standard pressure suit and a small side arm. Some of us stared at a holographically projected sphere in the center of the pod which showed a map of our approach to Sherman's flag-ship, The Battle of Kuzikos. Others stared up at the low ceiling that would, should boarding be necessary, open up into the other ship. 
 "Ok, people, this is our POA." Kouvaras tapped at a data panel and the holographic project displayed a wire-frame schematic of Sherman's ship. "If the little pigs don't open up, we're going to play the big bad wolf and blow open the house here." 
 The troopers' chuckles sounded like the rasp of mag-gun power cells being shoved into place. 
 A target appeared on the side of the ship, midway between the hanger deck in the bow and the right-side dock. The image magnified, zooming in to show a room and passage beyond. 
 "We'll make insertion here in what appears to be a medical supply room," Kouvaras continued. 
 "How convenient," trooper Redburn muttered. 
 Kouvaras ignored the comment and the chuckles which followed. "Beyond that room, a passage runs the length of the right side. As soon as we enter, Marcello will take Fuche and Cruze and secure the right-side dock. Your mission is to see if it's functional, or at least fixable. Edwards, you'll stay in here with the CO. Remember this is our only ticket out if the plan gets FUBARed." 
 Edwards glared at me as if his assignment were my fault. 
 "The rest of you," Kouvaras continued, "will come with me to the hanger to see if we can get the front door open. Our goal is to help the locals get the commander in. If both the hanger and the lock are out, he'll dock with us and come in through the pod." 
 Kouvaras paused until he had everyone's eyes turned to him. "We have authority to use deadly force, but only if absolutely necessary. We don't want to fight the whole ship and a lot of bloodshed may ruin the FC's plans. Our area of operations will be in the null-G portions and we are specifically ordered to stay out of the habitat modules. This should keep collateral damage down and the zero-G will work to our advantage. Any questions?" 
 "What kind of resistance can we expect?" trooper Breiner asked. 
 "This hasn't become open mutiny yet, but they do have a full complement of troopers." Kouvaras made a face. "I don't know about spacers, but I'd like to believe troopers do not mutiny. Still, we must be prepared for the possibility of strong resistance. Any more questions? No?" Kouvaras gave me a nod, "Sir?" 
 Taking the cue to mean he was giving me a chance to play officer, I turned to Marcello. "Have they responded to any of our pings?" 
 "No, sir. No response of any kind." 


"Very well, let's give them something they can't ignore. Cruze?" 
 "Yes, sir." 
 "Bring us around to their bow. Put us ten meters off from their main communication antennas." 
 The pod swung away at a couple of Gs then jerked to a halt. 
 "We're there, sir," Cruze announced. 
 "Switch on the docking radar." 
 Edwards, being a com guy, hissed in anticipated sympathy. 
 I let that blast their com system for a minute, cutting them off from the fleet and terrifying their communication techs. "Ok, switch it off and ping them again." 
 A minute later Edwards said, "What do you know, we've got a reply." 
 "Route it here." I swung up a data panel and opened the connection. A sweaty young spacer-first-class looked back at me, his large Adam's-apple bobbing up and down. 
 "This is Fleet Sub-Commander Kenneth Phon of the Torchbearer. We understand you are having difficulties with your hanger deck and are here to help." 
 "Th-thank you, sir. Y-your offer is much ap-preciated, but we are handling the s-situation here." 
 "I have some men here trained to get into ships the hard way and, as I understand it, your fleet commander is getting impatient." 
 The spacer's eyes widened and he practically vibrated with fear. "One m-moment p-please while I c-consult my s-superior." The screen went blank. 
 We waited a minute, then two. 
 "Is that it?" Redburn asked. 
 "Perhaps they're hoping we'll just go away," trooper Cassidy suggested. 
 "Edwards, do we still have signal?" Kouvaras asked. 
 The trooper checked his board. "The channel is still open." 
 "Kill the microphones." 
 "They're off, boss." 
 Kouvaras turned to me. "I think, sir, we have our answer." 
 I nodded. "Agreed. Let's give them a one more minute, then go with plan B." 
 "Ok, troopers. Secure yourselves for high-G acceleration. Cruze, program your course." 
 "Course ready, boss." 
 Another minute passed with no reply from The Battle of Kuzikos.


 Kouvaras gave me a slight lift of his head. I took the hint. "Cruze, fire thrusters." 
 For a little ball whose only purpose is to cross the small space between two nearby ships, the breaching pod could really scoot. I swear we must have pulled nine Gs. One second we were nose to nose with The Battle of Kuzikos, the next we were a quarter of the ship's length away and our grapples were drilling through its outer ablative shell and bonding to the inner hull while the docking harness, with its diamond-hard carbon-tooth saws, did the same. 
 "We're through. Pressure is equalizing," Marcello announced. 
 "Go!" Kouvaras shouted. 
 The troopers exploded from their acceleration benches, snatching their assault weapons as they sprang towards the access hatch. I couldn't believe they didn't crash into each other at the door, yet they sprang through in well-practiced drill to fan out into the room beyond. Edwards tensed as if to leap, caught himself, then glared at me. I turned guiltily back to the monitor to access the troopers' telemetry. I pulled up two views, Marcello's camera as he led the group to the right-side lock and Kouvaras' camera who led the group to the hanger deck. I watched Marcello's group reach the airlock and saw the dismantled mechanism through his camera pickup. 
 "Marcello here. The back door is closed." 
 "Is it fixable?" Kouvaras asked. I watched him approach the door to the hanger deck. I could see the green light indicating full air pressure in the hanger. 
 "No," came Marcello's reply. "It's been partially dismantled. I think some parts are missing." 
 "Sabotage?" 
 "Can't tell, but we're not getting this door open anytime soon—uh, oh. Looks like trouble." His camera spun around to show an angry group of spacers floating down the passageway with knives and makeshift clubs. 
 "Looks like we've got troubles of our own," Edwards said. He turned a display toward me showing a second group of spacers coming down the hall to the storage closet and our breaching pod. They spied the sentry camera Redburn had left on the passage wall and smashed it. The screen went black. "Company coming. What shall we do?" 
 "What is it?" Kouvaras asked Marcello. 
 I couldn't help but turn back to Marcello's telemetry monitor while I racked my brains for an appropriate response to Edwards. 
 "The natives are restless," Marcello's calm voice replied, "and they're headed this way." 
 "Ok, fall back to the pod and hold your position there," Kouvaras ordered. "Can you get the lights on?" he asked Redburn as they stumbled through the dark hanger deck. 
 "Uh, that's the thing," Marcello replied. "We'll have to go through them to get to the pod." 
 "Do what you can, just try not to hurt anyone," Kouvaras said. 
 Marcello's camera swept back and forth across the mob as it drew nearer. "Gee, thanks."


 "I've taken out the door controls and jammed the mechanism," Edwards said coming back into the pod from the storeroom. 
 I kicked myself for dropping the ball. I was not doing a very good job managing the situation. 
 "But it's not going to hold them for more than a minute," Edwards continued. 
 I looked at the chamber door. From my vantage point, framed as it was by the armored opening of the breaching pod, the chamber door seemed a feeble thing. "Why don't we just button up and wait for the others to get back? I doubt there's much they could do to us in here." 
 Edwards shrugged and sealed the pod door. 
 I turned back to Marcello's monitors and saw a jumble of screaming faces. Thankfully, I hadn't heard any weapons' fire yet. Kouvaras' screen was still dark. As I watched, light flashed off a floating crate followed by the crunch of impact and Kouvaras' cursing. 
 "Get that thing tied down!" He shook his head, sending the camera view zigzagging all over. "Redburn, get those lights on now!" 
 "They're through," Edwards announced as he watched our own attackers through the polarized window of the pod door. "Didn't take half as long as I thought—oh, that's why." He turned to me. "Looks like they've brought along a plasma cutter." 
 I flew to the door and took his place at the window. A half-dozen spacers drifted in. The big guy in the lead held a cutter, which he promptly raised and aimed at our door. "That thing can't get through can it?" I asked. 
 "Not unless they have the patience of a robot. Not enough power." Edwards looked out of the window over my shoulder. "Of course if he keeps playing it on the seal like that, he could depressurize the whole ship." 
 I watched the spacer waving the cutter across the door, obviously unused to operating such a device. Behind me, I heard Redburn's voice over the tiny data panel speaker. 
 "That's better, at least we can see now." 
 "No, it's not," a female voice, I think it was Breiner, said. "They've jammed and braced the hanger door closed." 
 "Definite sabotage," Kouvaras said. "Troopers, fall back. We're going to have to bring the fleet commander through the pod. Cassidy? Where did Cassidy go?" 
 "Maybe you didn't hear me, sir." Edwards turned his big square face towards mine. "We have to stop them now. That seal cannot take any more of this." 
 "OK, OK." Thinking furiously, I tried to come up with a way to stop an angry mob armed with a plasma cutter. Any strategy I attempted would be no more than a gamble, but the time had clearly come to roll the dice. "Let's try surprise. You hide by the bulkhead and come out slowly after I open the door. Show them your gun, but don't act like you're going to come out blazing, OK?" 
 Edwards shrugged but crouched against the wall near the door with a vaguely disgusted scowl. 
 I took a deep breath and un-polarized the view port. I had to tap on the glass to get the leader's attention. He froze in evident surprise that someone should be inside the pod. I made a shooing gesture with my hand to indicate I was opening the door. With a puzzled frown, the big guy switched off the cutter and pushed back, grabbing the edge of a storage locker. 
 I opened the door and moved into the room, anchoring my foot under a curl of the inner hull plate, which had been cut and folded back to make our entrance. Thanks to my zero-G training in the MDF, I was able to grab mister plasma cutter's shirt front and shove my pistol under his nose without coming unanchored and sending the pair of us spinning into the mob. "Alright, what's all this about?" I demanded. 
 I felt Edwards' presence looming somewhere behind me. The big spacer staring cross-eyed at my gun cast a quick nervous glance over my shoulder. The rest of the mob drifted back a few feet as if a breeze had blown through the room. 
 "Uh, we, uh...want to get off the ship." 
 "Off? Why? Are you deserters?" 
 "Deserters? No! Our contracts are up, but they won't let us off. They're holding us against our will!" The other spacers, their expressions more suspicious than angry, made vague noises of agreement. 
 "And you thought we'd have left the pod unguarded so you could steal it and run off to one of the market ships?" 
 His guilty smirk confirmed it. 
 "Fleet Commander Sherman will be here in a few minutes and he'll sort all this out," I said. "Until he arrives, go back to your quarters." 
 His eyes gave him away. He glanced down as the cutter snapped on. I felt his mass shift as he tried to lift it while anchored to nothing more than my fist in his shirt. 
 I pulled the trigger. Dozens of magnetically accelerated needle-sized flechettes passed through his head and buried themselves in the bulkhead beyond. A cloud of brain, bone, hair and blood sprayed outward in a pink mist. Tiny crimson droplets swirled outward, peppering everyone. The corpse drifted backwards, heels over cratered head into the center of the room. 
 The spacers floated in shock for a moment, then scrambled for the door. They met Force Leader Kouvaras' armored form as he entered the ruined door. He cracked his helmet's face shield open so he could yell, his weapon at the ready. "What's going on here?" 
 I slowly lowered my sidearm. 
 Edwards scooped up the plasma cutter and switched it off. "Just a discussion that got a little messy. Nothing serious." 
 "That's not what—I—." I stumbled through jumbled thoughts, unable to even describe what happen, much less explain it. Had I just murdered that spacer, or were my action justified? Had I been too aggressive trying to make him back down? Could I have done something differently to prevent the situation from escalating? 
 Kouvaras held up a hand, cutting me off. "I'm not your superior. You don't have to explain anything to me." 
 I didn't find his response comforting. 
 "Edwards, has the fleet commander docked yet?" 
 Sherman's imminent arrival only made it worse. 
 Edwards stared upwards as he checked his netpiece. "He's on approach now. He'll be docking in a minute." 
 "Good. Let's get this rabble secured." Kouvaras swung his weapon, indicated the subdued spacers. 
 They left in a swirl of red dots, the stench of blood thick in the air. Only I seemed to notice.

 

Chapter 7


 We were fortunate the troopers did not join in the mutiny. They seemed to have the attitude that since the spacers had gotten everyone into the problem they would let the spacers deal with it. Until someone paid them and pointed them at an enemy, they didn't care. It didn't matter to them who that enemy was. Sherman canceled all leaves and restricted everyone to their ships. Being stuck on The Battle of Kuzikos for the moment, Sherman assigned me to work with his new XO, a Fleet Sub-Commander Blaze. Together with Sherman and his other fleet officers, we contacted his ship commanders and their security officers and tried to put together a picture of the current state of the fleet. Many crew members were demanding to be released, both from the ships and their contracts. Most owner-operator ship commanders were also prepared to walk away from the contract which they felt had already been broken. They claimed their insurance didn't cover illegal acts like trying to overthrow the Moiarchy, furthermore most of the policies were under-written by Cack companies. I contacted Phil and our fleet was in a similar position. There had been some suspicious activity among the crews, but no overt acts of mutiny.  Requesting that all disciplinary procedures be suspended, Sherman called for a fleet-wide conference. News of the mutiny had spread throughout the other fleets so all work ground to a halt as the crews of the other fleets logged into the virtual conference room as spectators. I sat in a pod in Sherman's C&C and logged into v-space. I opened the major chat channels and set the output to text so I could monitor the response while I watched Sherman's speech. Even Sherman's avatar looked tired and depressed as he stared down at the "floor", waiting silently while the active user count climbed. The chat channels were strangely quiet and the message logs halted as everyone waited to hear what he would say. At last, he looked up at the audience and spoke. "I cannot tell you how disappointed I am at the way this expedition has turned out. You should know that when New Sparta exiled me, Shines Like the Sun took me in, offered me a position and even gave me ten-thousand Solarii to do with as I wanted. I could have retired to a resort world and spent my remaining days in luxury. Did I? No, I spent it on you. I formed the Consolidated Colonial Space Force and attacked the arthropods which threatened the settlers on Azul. Together, fighting for humanity, we drove the bugs from all the colonies of Nuevo Mundo. "When Shines Like the Sun asked for my help, I brought you with me. After all he'd done for me, I was glad to help him, and I wanted you to share in that opportunity, for Shines Like the Sun is generous with his friends. But now you refuse to go any further and I face a terrible choice. Do I abandon you here to stay friends with Shines Like the Sun, or do I violate my promise to him and leave with you?" Sherman paused and I could practically feel the tension in the crew in the absolute silence of the network. "Whether it's wise or not, I shall choose to stay with you." The chat channels filled rapidly with excited posts. "I would not let anyone say I led you all out into alien space only to abandon you and join the aliens," Sherman continued. "No, since you will not follow me, I'll follow you and endure whatever happens with you. Alone, I doubt I'm worth very much; together, we can still accomplish much. After all, I consider you my true home world, my family and my friends. I cannot leave you. That is a promise you can count on. Sherman paused and took a deep breath as the chat logs scrolled past too fast to read. "At this point, I'd like to suggest we take a short break for an hour or so and let every man and woman think about where the fleet will go and what we will do. Discuss it with each other and let us re-convene so we can formally decide."

His speech was a success. The crews talked enthusiastically about going home and many from the other fleets joined in excitedly. In fact a number of owner-operators, including nearly all the ships of The Patriotic Force of the Free Government of the Thousand quit their fleets and joined Sherman's fleet. The com officer on duty signaled the C&C where Sherman and his sub-commander had gone so he could privately coach them on what to say during the next meeting. Sherman stabbed the connect button on the data panel. "What is it?" "A shuttle has arrived from the Flower of Dirt." "Were we expecting a shuttle?" "None were scheduled, however the shuttle pilot says he's carrying one of Shines Like the Sun's officers and he wishes to meet with you." "Deny him permission to dock." "Sir?" came the startled reply. Blaze, Sherman's XO, shot me a panicked look. Such an act was tantamount to treason. Sherman just scowled down at the camera on the data panel. "You heard me. Send him back." "Yes, Sir. Com out." No one spoke in C&C. Sherman scowled at me. "I want you to take a shuttle and go over to Flower of Dirt. Tell that green cricket that this," he took in the C&C with an irritated wave of his arm, "is all just a show. Tell him that if he'd get a grip and trust me, I'll not only have this mutiny quelled and the men behind me again, they'll be eager to go wherever he wants." "Are you sure?" I couldn't believe he actually thought he could do that. "Yes I'm sure! In fact tell him to send the shuttle back again so I can refuse it. That will show the men I'm not his lapdog." He dismissed me with a turn of his back. I hesitated, unsure if he was entirely rational. "Go!" he shouted when he noticed I hadn't left. "Very well." My breaching pod and troopers long gone, I spoke to the hanger master who had to confirm with Sherman the use of one of their shuttles. Sherman's outraged reply sped up the process. In minutes I had navigated to the Flower of Dirt, explained I was from Sherman's flagship and was quickly ushered into Sunshine's presence. "You are being not the Sherman," Shines Like the Sun said as soon as I appeared before him. "No, Sherman was not yet able to leave his men so he sent me to represent him. He wishes you to know he is still loyal to you and so will his men be once they've had a chance to calm down, gather their courage and think rationally about their situation." "This is congruent?" "Yes. He only asks for a little time to convince them and assures you their attitude will change." Sunshine stared at me motionlessly. I wondered, if he had had a human face, what expression he would have at the moment. He stood before a wall of data panels, lacking his plastic plumage, wearing only his chitinous exoskeleton. I worried his stillness might be a sign of anger and hoped he wasn't about to throw me in the brig as a co-conspirator. For all I knew he might have been suspicious of us or he might be terrified his whole enterprise was about to fall apart. Perhaps he was wondering what I was thinking. "If you are thinking this is wisdom, then let this be." The translation device's smoothly modulated voice gave no clue to Sunshine's emotional state. "Sherman has only one other request," I added. "What is this being?" "He would ask that you send another shuttle over with an official summons. He'll refuse to come, but it is a part of his plan."

Again, a long quiet stare followed. I feared I had finally gone too far. Surely I had offended Sunshine's honor, perhaps fatally. "To what purpose is this design?" "To convince his men to follow him and continue this expedition." "He Who Looks Up is an anomalous collective. You cohere in battle but de-cohere in peace." "Perhaps we have had more experience with battle than peace," I suggested. "I am thinking this congruent. Be returning to your ship." I left, glad to be off that dim, hot and dry ship and back on the borrowed shuttle. Navigating back to The Battle of Kuzikos, I was eager to tell Sherman that Sunshine had agreed to his plan and to end my term as Sherman's messenger. The pilot pulled up short of Sherman's ship and began an argument with their flight control officer. "What's wrong?" I asked. The pilot leaned back in his seat and folded his arms in disgust. "We've been denied docking privileges and instructed to hold our position." "Why?" "It seems the fleet commander doesn't want it to appear that the Cacks are influencing what is going on over there." "And what would that be?" "They're beginning their meeting of the SCs to decide what the fleet will do." "Can we access their feed?" "Sure." The pilot manipulated one of the shuttle's panels and the connection appeared in my netpiece. Once again Sherman stood on his virtual stage, this time looking a little more certain and resolute. "It should be apparent to Shines Like the Sun that our relationship has changed. I'm certain he feels betrayed so I have refused to meet with him, partly because he'll probably arrest me, but mostly because I'd be too ashamed to face him. "We are now in greater danger than we've ever been since leaving human space. If we are going to return home, we need to make immediate plans for how we'll do that and re-supply the fleet. As things stand now, I doubt we'll get very far. While we're doing this, we need to bring the fleet to full alert. I don't need to tell you of all the forces Those Who Dwell Within can bring against us. In fact you may not have noticed it, but as our fleet has grown, so has the number of warships accompanying Shines Like the Sun until his fleet is at least equal to ours in number. If we are going to leave, we should do so as soon as possible. "But now is the time to hear your views. If any man or woman has an opinion on what we should do next, let them speak now, regardless of rank." There followed a minute of awkward silence in which no one said a word. Finally one crewman signaled a desire to speak and Sherman's sub-commander, moderating the discussion, added his avatar to the stage. There followed a flood of comments, some urging going back to Solarian space, others urging continuing on with Shines Like the Sun, many just venting their feelings and fears. At length, one of Sherman's fleet officers, who had been planning with Sherman in the C&C joined the conversation. "I don't know why we are wasting this time sitting around and talking. If Fleet Commander Sherman will not lead us home, let us appoint a new leader. Let's buy the supplies we need, collect our support craft and ask Sunshine for jump ships back to Solarian space. If he won't supply the ships, then ask him for guides to negotiate transit permissions through friendly systems. If he refuses us even that, then let us form up in battle array and send ships out to the nearest transit station and seize it to keep Sunshine or the locals from blocking our way." The speech was moderated up and spurred a lot of "me too" posts. "If you do this, don't think I will lead you," Sherman cut in. "I can see too many things wrong with this plan. But just so you know that I can take orders as well as give them, I will support whomever you elect to replace me." This dampened some of the crew's enthusiasm. More discussion followed but the opinion was clearly divided. Finally another sub-commander who had been in C&C with Sherman joined the discussion. "This is ridiculous! Do you all realize how absurd it is to ask Shines Like the Sun for jump ships to transport a force that won't follow his orders, or ask for guides when we are ruining his plans? I would never get in one of his jump ships for fear he might dump us off in intergalactic space, thousands of light-years from the nearest transit station. Nor would I follow a guide who might lead us into a trap. If we are to leave against Shines Like the Sun's wishes, it would be safer to sneak off, which I think is impossible. "But all this talk is nonsense! Do we really even know what he is planning? I think we should select some men we can trust and sent them with Fleet Commander Sherman to ask Shines Like the Sun what he wants us to do. If it is a harder objective and involves greater risk than specified in our contracts, we can either re-negotiate our contracts or we can exercise our release clause, but either way we'll at least not have to watch our backs." I watched the mod points fluctuate and could see the opinions shifting in her direction. "Once our envoys have talked to Shines Like the Sun," she continued, "they can return, tell us what he says and then we can decide what to do." They ultimately followed her suggestion, just as Sherman planned. Envoys were sent and came back with the reply that Shines Like the Sun had an enemy named Fading Glory who was nearby and that he intended to finish their conflict. Of course if he should flee, then they would have to decide what to do then. The crews were not convinced the force was not still heading straight for the ruler, but they agreed to continue after negotiating a fifty-percent pay bonus. Relieved to finally make it back to my quarters on the Torchbearer, I started to catch up on my messages when Phil came by to get the inside scoop on what had happened on both Sherman and Shine Like the Sun's ships. When he had left, I had just returned to my work when someone knocked on my door. "Come in," I said. The door slid back and Cathrine Kacsmaryk peered in side. "I was looking for the FC. I was told he was here." "You just missed him." I noticed her hesitate at the door. "Can I help you?" She stepped inside, closed the door and sat in my one spare chair. "I've been doing some research," she began with an awkward wave of a datapad, "...on Fading Glory." "Oh?" "He's not just another Cack. He's a regional director, like Doggedly. Doggedly's territory guard's the Outer Gates of the Cack Moiarchy. Fading Glory guards the Gate to the Inner Worlds of the Moiarchy." I leaned back in my chair, a familiar sinking feeling in my stomach. "You think Sunshine intends to overthrow his brother after all?" "He hasn't technically lied to us. But unless he's the type to kick open the door without robbing the house, yes.  I think we're headed straight for the Cack home world."

 

Chapter 8

I relaxed into the acceleration couch, surprised to realize how much I had missed the cool green and amber displays projected on my visor and even the dry plastic-tasting air hissing into my helmet. I took a moment to scan the fighter's cockpit and ignored the three-G acceleration. Executing a quick rotation to test the cybernetic link's responsiveness, I kept the Cack warship centered in my sights. As I rolled my fast attack craft, my accompanying fleet of sensor pods and ECM drones pin-wheeled around me. Great Maker! How I had missed this!
 "Are you ready for this, Zoomer?" Fleet Sub-Commander Chris Knight sounded bored, though the sensors said his ship was half a click away on a parallel course to the warship. "Oh, yeah!" "We'll reach its threat zone in less than sixty seconds. Standby for overtake," Chris said. My counter display was at five seconds and counting down, but at one second from zero a fleet of missiles launched from Torchbearer roared past at close to a hundred gravities. I say "roared" because the situational awareness sub-systems provided 3D sound for objects moving nearby. When combined with all the other alert tones, the cockpit of a fighter can nearly be deafening, but somehow the brain sorts out all the messages. "Missile Flare," Chris announced unnecessarily. My ship had already tagged the enemy missiles from the optical sensor data and correlated it with the Torchbearer's gravimetric sensors. The incoming missiles only had the chance to close half the distance before Torchbearer's missiles began exploding. Expanding spheres, each a mix of hard gamma and other EM radiation destroyed some missiles and blinded the rest. "Initiating Evasion Plan Theta," I said before Chris could play flight leader. "Copy that, I'm going with Epsilon." Our ships began rotating on all three axes, seemingly thrusting at random, though actually navigating us around the worst of the hard radiation.  Hopefully we would slip past any surviving missiles and approach the Cack warship from an unexpected vector. An ear-piercing tone told me a stray missile had managed to lock onto me. The fighter blew chaff and jinked around at black-out inducing Gs. A flash of light followed and one of my ECM drones exploded. My three remaining ECM drones repositioned themselves relative to my fighter and continued screaming as if they were full-sized heavy battle cruisers. My sensor pods, each natural if smaller targets, stayed in formation and began to send back detailed info on the Cack warship as we circled the last cloud of radiation and started our attack runs. Target suggestions sprouted all across my display, each encoded with the fighter's estimation of the threat value. Almost as quickly, Chris began tagging the ones he wanted. "Hey! Quit taking all the good ones," I said. "If you want them, you'll have to take them from me." "Now I know where you got your call sign, Klepto." Taking into account our differing approach vectors, I flagged all the high value targets I thought I could reach first, then any secondary targets he was likely to miss. The fighter displayed its suggested flight plan and I OK'd it. At the speeds we would be traveling, human navigation was impossible. I was already inside the reach of the Cack's missiles; I could only hope my speed was great enough their targeting systems wouldn't have time to track me. My tiny craft shuddered with the release of its missiles. Though smaller than those launched by Torchbearer, my missiles had nearly as much impact. Since I was providing most of their propulsion, the majority of their antimatter could be reserved for their payload. The Cack ship flashed by, a blur on my display. My particle emission weapons raked its hull while behind me, spheres of pure white light flared across the ship's surface. I flipped my craft around in a near one-eighty, giving myself just enough lateral movement to reach the back side of the Cack ship while burning off as much velocity as I could stand. On the far side of the warship, Chris Knight was doing the same, though his arc was much tighter. "Cheater," I said, noting he was pulling around nine-and-one-half Gs.

This was the most dangerous part of the maneuver. Though my engine strained to push my craft towards the Cack ship, my momentum was carrying me backwards into missile threat range. I crossed the line just as my delta-V relative to the Cack ship reached zero and I started moving forward again. I thought I had gotten away with it until my fighter squawked its awareness of missile flares. My ship flagged the incoming threats and selected an anti-missile response, urging me to OK it with flashing lights. I confirmed the order and selected an evasion pattern that would bring me in towards the drive section at the rear of the Cack warship. The fighter shuddered as the anti-missile missiles launched. They had less punch than the ones with which I had attacked the Cack ship, but they had much greater thrust. As they flew away, a screamer shot off at an acute angle blasting out a loud radar signal that drew off three incoming missiles on a wild goose chase. Explosions flashed ahead and my fighter jerked around, dodging debris, radiation and remaining missiles. As I neared the Cack ship, I started prioritizing targets. Chris, having come in much faster, was already making his attack run. My slower speed also made it easier for the Cack point defense systems to find and target me. They began firing particle emission weapons as soon as I came within range. High energy streams of sub-atomic particles flashed past at light speed while my ship lurched back and forth. My own energy weapons carved furrows in the Cack ship's hull while my missiles left craters behind. My ship had just taken out a weapon turret and swung toward a high-value missile launcher when Sub-commander Chris Knight's craft swept in and blasted it. At virtually the same moment, the turret that had been trying to distinguish me from my one remaining ECM pod, locked onto him and fired. I heard him whooping and laughing as the weapon punched through his ship and blew the hull plates from its frame. I finished the attack run, then punched the emergency eject button which shut down the simulation and opened the Remotely Operated Vehicle control pod. Chris was still laughing. "I beat you!" I took off the com helmet and handed it to an equipment tech waiting nearby. "And died." "I still got three points on you." "By cheating." I couldn't hold back a wry grin. "We agreed to simulate manned vehicles, not ROVs. What was up with that nine-G turn?" "Hey, I've done nine Gs before." "Not in combat—and, I wager, not conscious." Chris shrugged and laughed. I climbed out of the ROV control pod. A couple of spacers drifted nearby, waiting to service the pods to ensure they would always be ready in the event of real combat in which real ROV pilots would operate real attack craft. Chris clapped me on the shoulder. "The pilots should finish their mandatory flight hours by next week. Want me to schedule a rematch?" "No. I've got a regular seat at Kouvaras' poker game. Redburn thinks he's figured out a tell when I bluff and keeps walking into all my good hands." Chris had a slightly puzzled look on his face. I was certain he had no idea who Redburn was. "So are you faking a tell when you bluff?" I laughed as I dug my netpiece out of a pocket and snapped it on over my ear. "No. I'm a terrible bluffer. That's why I don't do it." An alert icon flashed in my field of vision. I opened the message. "Looks like I've got to go." "C&C?" Chris stared up into the middle distance, evidently reading a similar message. "Me too. Something's up." * * * The acceleration alarm sounded before we got half-way to C&C, so we jumped to the nearest stern bulkhead just as the one-G acceleration alarm sounded. Five seconds later, the bulkhead leaped up under us and became the floor, leaving us to clatter down a half-dozen ladders as we zig-zagged from compartment to compartment. "Does this feel like one G to you?" I asked as I climbed, gasping, down to the command deck. "It always feels like more after a few days of weightlessness." We hurried into the C&C. Phil, Kacsmaryk and Harlow were already sitting around the holographic table. "Glad you two could join us," Phil said. Chris slid into a seat at the table. "We were just running some combat simulations." "Well, I hope you have some time for real combat." Phil did not smile and I could tell he was not in a good mood. I had heard that contract negotiations had been grueling. The ships which had defected to Sherman's fleet signed on with his Consolidated Colonial Space Force, seriously under-manning Innman's Pilgrims and gutting The Patriotic Force of the Free Government of the Thousand and sparking fights among the fleet commanders. Some of Phil's owner-operators had even challenged his command and he narrowly survived a call for a vote of no-confidence by members of the board. "I take it we're boosting for That Which Overturns?" I asked. "Yes." Phil caught Sub-Commander Harlow's eye. "Brian, why don't you brief us?" "Yes, sir." Harlow rose and called up a holographic display of a ring of four transit stations. Instead of a star and system of planets, shadowy fingers stretched through the space between. Brian touched the data-panel and one of the transit stations glowed brightly. "This is the Outer Gate that connects what Those Who Dwell Within refer to as their economic zone with the outer worlds of the Moiarchy." Chris looked at me and yawned. "The economic zone consists of systems with which they have some sort of trade relationship such as our own. The outer worlds are semi-independent protectorates and are overseen by Doggedly and a few other regional managers. Fading Glory—I'm told his real name translates as Ancient Glory but Shines Like the Sun obviously doesn't get along with him—anyway, our target, is situated somewhere inside the middle sphere. "This—" the display expanded to show more systems and more transit stations with a glowing light threading through them. "—is the main trade route through the outer worlds. Most of this area lies deep within the Sagittarius Arm of the galaxy and is thick with hydrogen gas, stellar debris and dense nebulae. Since the debris could easily overload our QWEGs, the fleet will be forced into narrow, winding and easily defended channels." As my eyes followed the path, I remembered the kairogram Dr. Swiftly had shown me. The pattern was similar and I wondered if it were possible to use my kairogram as a literal map through space. It was an absurd thought, but I decided I'd have to look at it again when I got back to my quarters. "So, what's the plan?" Chris asked. "Do we just make a break for it, try to blast through their defenses before they can concentrate on us?" "That would not be optimal," Phil said. Cathrine's brow furrowed. "We've been waiting for something." "Have we been negotiating with Doggedly for passage?" Brian asked. Phil continued to frown at the display.  "Sunshine has, but so far Doggedly has been cagey with his support." "It's Moony," I said. "We're waiting for him to do something." "Yes." Phil gave a single nod. "One of Sunshine's ships has docked with the Outer Gate transit station and seeded their EPRs with the Cack media feeds. We've learned that Moony has been seen well inside Doggedly's territory. Unless Doggedly  has fully committed to opposing Sunshine, he now has an excuse to let us through his territory. He's got a large enemy force deep in his territory, one that also holds his wife hostage." "Hostage? I thought he was escorting her." Cathrine turned a bemused expression on me as if I couldn't possibly be as naïve as I appeared to be. "I'm sure Sunshine would present it that way," Phil said. "The reality, however, is a little more complicated." "So how will we know what Doggedly's decision will be?" I asked, eager to keep the subject off me. Phil sighed. "We'll know when we transit the gate and they either start shooting or not."

 

Chapter 9

The grav-sensor feed from the recon drone showed the local defenders turning their ships about and slinking off as Sherman led the first fleet through the transit station. Once through, he immediately accelerated into an outwardly spiraling orbit of the far transit station, a defensive maneuver that not only ensured no one lurked in the blind spots to each side of the station, but also that if an enemy fleet were to try a surprise attack from out of the nearby nebula, he'd have enough velocity built up to deal with it. I shivered as the Torchbearer took its turn through the station.
 The transit stations were never armed. The Cacks would rather be forced to retake a transit gate than see one even accidentally destroyed, but the important ones were surrounded by a constellation of stationary defenses. Each one looked like a tangled web of scaffolding, or a space dock, except that instead of manipulator arms and assemblers, the framework mounted missile racks, particle emission weapons and massive tracking sensors. Watching the—hopefully—deactivated stationary defenses slide past, I realized Sherman's move also ensured that if these defenses activated, at least part of the fleet would survive long enough to retaliate. Once through the gate, the fleets reformed, coordinated their flight plan and went super-luminal. After several days of transiting through strangely abandoned systems, we came to Byway, the region's governing world. The moment we passed through the gate, we were hit with a wave of distress calls. Sherman's fleet went to tactical alert and boosted for the planet. The other fleets followed his example and I sat in my pod in C&C, staring into the monitor, stunned by the number of wrecked ships and the expanding debris field around Byway. I called up a map of the system. "The orbitals are gone! Everything but their primary space port and that has taken heavy damage." "Looks like Moony's fleet is here," Chris said. "But he's missing ten percent of his force," Cathrine added. I called up the optical sensors and zoomed in on some of his ships. Moony's bright, shiny new fleet definitely showed signs of wear and tear. Sherman's ship signaled the space station using their EPR transceivers to hook into the Cack network, and I played the message. "Byway Station, this is the Battle of Kuzikos, flagship of the combined Solarian fleet. Do you need assistance?" A nearby explosion had scored and darkened a section of the station's hull. Other sections appeared freshly patched. One docking port was wrecked and the others were filled with shuttles from Moony's fleet. I could find no intact native ships in orbit around Byway at all. "Byway Station, this is the Battle of Kuzikos...." the message repeated as the fleet formed up and went super-luminal, severing their EPR connections. Arriving at Byway, the fleet switched to reaction drives and assumed a high orbit around the planet. The fleet switched to com lasers and soon Sherman's face scowled on the com display. "Byway station, this is Fleet Commander Sherman of the combined Solarian forces, respond!" Moony's smug face appeared in reply. "Greetings, Sherman. Welcome to planet Moony." "Moony! What have you done?" "Done? Nothing. The locals weren't feeling too hospitable, so I just made myself at home." "Moony, if you've fouled things up for us with the natives, I'll—" "You'll do what?" Moony sneered. "You don't pay me and you don't command me." "Perhaps I should come over there and settle this personally? You know I know how to get in through locked doors."

Something in the way he said it made me wonder if the spontaneous mutiny on Sherman's flagship was entirely spontaneous. I hadn't heard even a rumor that it wasn't, but what I had heard of Moony implied he was capable of orchestrating such a thing. Looking at Sherman's icy glare, I wondered what he had learned from his questioning of the captured spacers. Moony blinked rapidly, and with a side-ways glance off-camera, uttered a nervous laugh. "Hey, I was only joking." "And I think you know I'm not." "Look, everything's OK. Doggedly's wife is back home unpacking and she let us have the use of the station for re-supply." Shines Like the Sun's ideogram suddenly broke in on the command channel, then his face appeared on the display. "I am requiring to be speaking to Doggedly." Beads of sweat broke out on Moony's brow. "The Regional Manager appears to have fled the system when he'd heard my fleet was approaching." "Moony, unveil to me his currently occupied location." "N-No one will tell me his hideout, but I believe he may have left some way for his wife to communicate with him." "Have her offer to him to come to me. I am desiring to be speaking to him." A drop of sweat rolled down the side of Moony's face. "Yes, sir." It took days of negotiation with Doggedly's wife running messages between him and Shines Like the Son before Doggedly, reassured of his safety, came out of hiding. He arrived with money and supplies for Sunshine's fleet. In exchange, Sunshine promised no more harm would come to Doggedly's systems. Before long they were treating each other like long lost brothers. * * * Kouvaras' stoney face glared down at me from the ceiling while I gripped the sweaty handhold between my feet. By some unspoken signal, we both launched at the same time. I leaped high, hoping to attack him from behind as I passed over, but he anticipated my move and leaped over me. Kouvaras must have seen the surprise on my face. "Your eyes gave you away," he said as he flew at me in the microgravity. "I knew where you were going to jump." I raised my arms and arched my back, trying to lower my center of mass relative to where we were about to impact. I blocked his punch with a hand to the inside of his right elbow and braced my right hand on his shoulder, relying on his greater speed and mass to rotate my lower torso upwards as he knocked me backwards. Using that momentum I snapped a kick to his mid-section, but he brought his knees up to block. I felt a shove and cursed myself for letting go. I slammed against the combat ring's padded frame and twisted around, seeing nothing but stars, and blindly grabbed a handful of netting. The ring consisted of a series of padded, crescent-shaped barriers standing in a circle. Wrapped in plastic webbing, it formed a sphere with openings at two poles. Kouvaras paused and looked down—or up—at me, I could no longer tell. "You improvised that last attack, didn't you?" I nodded. "I had to do something. You blocked my planned attack." "That was good. It would have been effective against any spacer and quite a few troopers. If you had held your grip, you might have been able to counter attack." I rubbed my shoulder. I was going to be sore tomorrow. "I knew that was a mistake about half a second before I slammed into the ring." Kouvaras gave me the kind of smirk an instructor gives a student when he sees any progress, no matter how minor, as an excuse to visit new torments on him. "Next time I'll bring some tethers and teach you to think in arcs."

A buzzing noise interrupted. Kouvaras dug his net piece from his training suit pocket and slipped it over an ear. "Looks like duty calls. I'm going to have to leave you. I've reserved the ring for the rest of the hour. You might want to get in some more practice on those attacks we discussed earlier." Kouvaras left and I practiced leaping across the ring punching and kicking the padding. It was, frankly, boring. "Need a partner?" I poked my head outside of the ring and saw Cathrine strapping a gym bag down on a tool rack. I had occasionally seen her working out on the resistance equipment which, along with the combat ring, filled the half of the spare cargo hold set aside as a gym. "I didn't know you knew zero-G combat." Cathrine kicked off and drifted over to the ring. "I don't, at least not the stuff they teach the boots. But when I got too old to compete in the world zero-G acrobatics competition, I studied a little mutan-idou." "You competed at the global level?" Cathrine looked away with an embarrassed smile and shrugged. "I didn't actually compete. I was stuck as an alternate." "Still, that's amazing. I assume you're a blackbelt in mutan-idou as well." "Only third degree. I could never find a partner to help me develop my kata at the academy. Too many men see mutan-idou as a women's style and there weren't any women at my rank who could help me, so I never tested for the next." I remembered seeing a video once of a mutan-idou competition. It was like watching two ping-pong balls rattling together in a clear plastic ball. I'm pretty sure both combatants were female. I moved aside and invited her within the ring with a gesture. She seemed so young and so small, I couldn't imagine her strikes even comparing to Kouvaras' crushing blows. "Show me what you've got." I should have taken her slight knowing smile as a warning. Cathrine slipped on a padded headpiece and the thin sparing gloves we use. She floated casually to the far wall and hooked one foot under a handhold to keep from drifting off. "Say the word when you're ready." I crouched, both hands on my handgrip, legs tensed and ready to spring. I couldn't help but smile grimly. I fully intended to dish out some of what Kouvaras had been giving me. "Go!" I leaped. She jumped to the side. I landed on a padded section, planting one foot on the side and turned to leap after her, but she was already racing away, building up speed. I jumped back across to where I had started, hoping to cut her off as she circled around, but she zipped past above me. I landed on my hands and knees, having failed to rotate enough to land on my feet, but I quickly got up and pursued her. At this point Cathrine moved so quickly she could actually run in a loop within the sphere, using her own momentum as a type of artificial gravity. I heard the pad of her feet as I leaped back and forth in a fruitless attempt to catch up. The sound of her footsteps ceased and I looked over my shoulder just as her feet crashed into the small of my back. She kicked off, smashing my face into the netting and sending me spinning off into space. Cathrine didn't miss a step. Using me as a launching pad, she circled around and flung a strike at my head just as I stopped my movement and got my feet under me. I flung up an arm to block and got knocked spinning away. As soon as I touched something solid, I kicked off, landed and jumped again, trying to move at an angle to the circle in which she ran, though I wasn't entirely clear where that was. By luck, more than planning, I got in front of her and launched a straight on attack that she couldn't dodge, determined to end this embarrassing fight.

Kouvaras' attacks had mostly been straight on attacks, like knights jousting, as we flew at each other trying to get in a solid blow. This was usually followed by grappling and punching. Cathrine's style had completely disoriented me and I was glad Kouvaras wasn't here to see this travesty. With a slight sideways step, Cathrine slipped past me, hooked my arm and flung me into a tight spin. The ring whirled around me in a nauseating blur until one of the padded crescents slammed up against me. Cathrine landed on one foot, fell into a rolling dive and got back up. She had lost much of her momentum, but seemed otherwise unfazed by my attempt at an attack as she bounded away. My ears rang with a high-pitched sound and my arms and legs seemed to move too slowly. I jumped and jumped again, just trying to keep moving, knowing that if I stayed in any one spot she would quickly find me. My foot skidded across one padded section on an awkward landing and the toe of my shoe caught in the netting, jerking me to a stop. I had just yanked my foot free and drifted into the open space without a good kick of momentum when I looked up in time to see Cathrine flying toward me feet first. I reacted instinctively, swinging at her ankles and sending her into a spin. We collided hip to hip and chest to chest and I locked my arms around her. In the only effective move I had made during the entire fight, I twisted around and got her between me and the wall. She gave a surprised grunt as we smashed into the ring and I fell on top of her. We drifted a moment, stunned, her nose an inch from mine, her rapid breath brushing my face. Her raven black hair swirled weightlessly like a sea anemone and her irises dilated in wonder as I gazed deeply into her pale blue eyes for the first time. Complex shades of expression, from surprise to longing, flitted across her pale face until, having caught her breath, she settled on a gentle teasing smile. "Are you going to let me go?" I still held her tightly in my arms. They fit her body perfectly as if they had been made to hold her. I took a deep breath, my mind still spinning at hundreds of rotations a minute. "I think that would be a very unwise thing to do." "Oh?" "I'd be too afraid to let you go." She chuckled, just a few low notes tinged, I thought, with the throaty undertones of desire. She started to say something, stopped, then shrugged. "I've been in worse places." I smiled, feeling a little light headed and out of breath as we slowly drifted head over heels in the middle of the ring. I wanted to say something, to uncover what might really be going on, but was afraid of saying something stupid that might push her away. I should have just pulled her close and kissed her. I realized that too late. Our netpieces buzzed and we each drew back to dig in our pockets. I kept one arm around her waist and she one arm across my shoulders as we each dug out our net pieces and slipped them over an ear. From: FC Porter To: Fleet Command Staff Subject: All Fleet Command Meeting on Flower of Dirt Message: Report to transport bay 4 @ 16:45. Come in formal dress uniform. I sighed. "I guess we better go." I looked over my shoulder. The sides of the ring were well out of reach. With an apologetic smile, she put a hand to my chest, gave me a push and we drifted apart. * * * I had just enough time to shower, jump in my dress grays and make it to the command shuttle before it left for the Flower of Dirt. Harlow was already in the shuttle talking to the pilot as I claimed an acceleration couch. Phil, Cathrine and Chris joined us soon afterwards.

Chris signaled for the attendant to bring him a drink before the shuttle launched. "So what is this about?" "Presentation of honors." Phil strapped himself onto a chair to keep from drifting off in the microgravity. "Shines Like the Sun is giving Doggedly gifts and wants us as witnesses." "Has he finally sided with Shines Like the Sun?" Cathrine asked. "Not exactly," Phil said. "His eldest son left for the Cack home world. He's probably reporting our presence and activities to Righteous Ruler." "So Doggedly is still trying to play both sides," Chris said. "Something like that." The shuttle eased from its berth and turned, gently accelerating toward Flower of Dirt while Chris sipped from his drink pouch. I had heard some pilots were skilled enough that one could drink from an open container without spilling a drop in the microgravity. I thought this pilot might be able to do that. "So, why is Sunshine doing this?" Chris asked. "By showing Doggedly honor, he hopes to cement their agreement," Phil said. "And he thinks he can win Doggedly over by having us stand around and watch him give Doggedly gifts?" "That's just how Cack leadership operates," I said, flashing back to my xenology classes at New Athen's Academy. "Leaders are expected to give gifts to their followers; this creates a debt of honor that binds them together." The pilot turned the shuttle and slowly decelerated, easing us into the Flower of Dirt's shuttle bay. Once we docked and floated through docking tube to the ship, I hung back a little and managed to catch Cathrine away from the others while we waited to transition to the spinning habitat module. "I hear there's a nice little restaurant on the Blaylock called the Commander's Mess. Would you be interested in going with me to check it out?" Cathrine cast a bemused smile at me over her shoulder. "Are you asking me out on a date?" "If you'll say yes." "Very well, yes. But you might want to check the revised boost schedule before you pick a date." "I take it we're shipping out soon?" "About three hours after this little reception is over. The SCs have already begun issuing crew recall orders." "What's the last destination listed on the schedule?" I asked, anxiety suddenly gnawing on me. Was this it? The attack on the Moiarchy everyone feared? "It's a world called Good Passage. It's the last system before one reaches the gate to the Middle Sphere." "Do you think Faded Glory will try to stop us?" Cathrine gave me a sly look. "I see you're already assuming Faded Glory himself isn't the objective." I shrugged and said nothing. She was obviously too sharp to try to fool. "Well, it is his job to defend the region, but none of the regional managers have had to deal with a force this size and many have hired Solarian mercenaries because of the reputation we gained in our war with the Cacks. Against a superior force with a fleet of uncertain loyalties, he would have to be very loyal to the Moiarchy or very stupid to stay and fight." We rode down to the habitat module and joined the others in the reception hall, the same room in which Sunshine had first received his fleet commanders. It was large enough that the hull's curve formed a noticeable dip in the middle of the room like the cross section of an amphitheater. Some Cack functionary arranged us in a circle about the room, our feet slightly apart, elbows bent, palms up and open. It was an awkward position that grew slowly painful as the proceeding dragged on. The career military types seemed to take it all in stride as if they had been doing this ever since putting on a uniform, so I attempted to emulate them without quivering in place from muscle fatigue. "Friends of Shines Like the Sun," the interpreter began after the spokesperson paused in his chittering. "Gather and attend in witness to Shines Like the Sun's great pleasure." Sunshine stood apart in the center of the great room in his bright plastic strips, surrounded by other important Cacks wearing long strips of cloth bearing glowing ideograms around their necks like vestments. "It is his highest ambition to be able to give gifts to his friends and see that they are elevated to the high positions they deserve." A plain or at least unadorned Cack stepped up next to sunshine. His head swiveled almost mechanically from side to side as if taking in the whole room. I had no idea if this might be an expression of fear or pride or embarrassment or disdain. "Witness, this day our brother Doggedly—." I cast a quick glance at Harlow who frowned as he listened to the translation. I was pretty sure Doggedly and Sunshine were not related and that the title "brother" was being used as an honorific. "—who having given us a small token of his esteem, stands before you all in the place of honor." There followed a presentation of endless grants of titles, honors, rights and privileges in the form of what looked like bamboo scrolls but which I suspected were the chitinous strips of Cack exoskeletons. I could only hope they were strips shed in molting by honored Cacks and not the flayed exoskeletons of murdered slaves. As I stood, arms burning from holding the awkward position, I ignored the words flowing over me and tried not to shake or collapse from fatigue. A new group of Cacks came in bearing long plastic strips in their hands and a chittering murmur swept through the observers. The commotion grew as new comers began applying the strips to Doggedly and some Cack observers even fell prostrate on the floor. This caught my attention, though I still grit my teeth in pain, waiting for Sunshine to lead Doggedly from the room and his functionaries to release us. When the time came, I dropped my arms and sat on the floor next to the wall. "What was that about?" Phil asked as he dropped to the floor next to me with a relieved sigh. "I have no idea." I nodded toward Harlow who walked over to our Cack liaison and spoke with him. "You should talk to Harlow." We watched him and Circling Winds struggle with communicating through the automatic translation device he carried. When he'd finished, he walked away frowning thoughtfully. "Brian," Phil called out. "What was that commotion about?" Harlow cast a puzzled glance back at our retreating liaison. "That last gift of honor Shines Like the Sun gave Doggedly has upset some people. It's called something like The Mantle of Glory and indicates a special favored status with the ruler. It's very rare and significant in their culture." "So, is he unworthy of it, or something?" Phil asked. "It's not Doggedly's worthiness to receive the mantle that's the problem, It's Shines Like the Sun's worthiness to give it. Only the ruler himself is allowed to award The Mantle of Glory to someone. By daring to do this, Shines Like the Sun might as well have just crowned himself ruler of the Moiarchy.

 

Chapter 10

"I think the codpiece is too big. You need to go smaller." Edwards smirked at me as he floated nearby, one hand holding onto a support strut on the mobilization deck, deep in trooper territory on the Torchbearer. He had apparently decided that I was OK, despite being an officer, and so felt free to offer "constructive" criticism.
 Kouvaras had anchored himself to the deck between my feet, floating in something like a crouch, staring up at my crotch. "Well, you certainly don't want any gaps that would allow you to rattle around in the suit, but I think this will work." He shoved the codpiece into place at my groin and smashed it closed with the heel of his hand. I hung in the air spread-eagle, arms and legs pinioned by industrial looking equipment, wearing only a black polymer-skinned sensor net while machines measured my body, selected pieces of equipment from its stores and assembled my own suit of Multi-Environmental Combat Armor. Kouvaras assured me I'd only have to undergo this indignity once unless I started putting on weight. My legs and lower torso had already been assembled, and as I hung there more mechanical manipulators brought out modular armor components and began attaching them to my chest and back. "You know, I'm beginning to regret questioning your zero-G training techniques." "It's too late now," Kouvaras replied grimly. "You seemed to think our techniques couldn't stop a single unarmed girl so now you need to find out why we train the way we do." "I told you, I wasn't thinking about combat armor when I asked that." The corner of Kouvaras' mouth twitched as he continued inspecting my armor's seals. "What? You being an officer, I thought they paid you to think." "Well, you know what they say," I laughed nervously as machines snapped more armored pieces into place leaving only my neck and head uncovered. "Behind every good officer is an NCO making him look good." "So you can be taught." Edwards moved over to a control panel and pressed buttons. "And soon you'll learn why we don't bounce around a lot in these suits," he added. "Bouncing around in these things is a good way to get yourself hurt or hurt someone else," Kouvaras added. "You could even bounce your way right through the hull if you're not careful, which isn't good for anyone." I bit my tongue, hoping they'd soon forget this whole bouncing thing. I had adjusted to the call sign "Zoomer" as long as no one knew how I'd earned it. I didn't want to be known throughout the fleet as "Bouncer." "OK." Having finished checking the seals, Kouvaras slapped my armor. "Let's button him up and do a quick systems check." Edwards punched a button and the helmet attached to the back of my collar clamped down over my face. My ears popped as I equalized the air pressure. The heads-up display lit up in cool green and amber lights and a faint current of cool recycled air brushed my face. In some ways, it was like being back in a fighter's cockpit. "Com check. Can you hear me?" Edwards' voice came over the speakers in the helmet. "I hear you." "Stand by while we run a quick check." Edwards continued poking at the control panel then turned to Kouvaras. "Life support systems are good, control systems are good and the myocells are all powered." "Are the safety governors on?" Kouvaras asked. Edwards tapped at the panel. "Yes." "Then activate the setae and let's turn him loose." "Gecko powers activated," Edwards chuckled. The restraints thunked open and I flexed my arms and legs for the first time in several minutes. I snatched at one of the restraints as I started to drift, the suit responding slowly to my movement.

"Just press your foot to the floor," Kouvaras said. "The setae in the souls of each foot piece are billions of sub-microscopic filaments that will grab onto the atoms of the decking by way of the van der Waals force. If you knew what you were doing, you could safely walk around the hull of the ship in a total vacuum." "It feels kind of funny," Edwards warned, "like walking upside down on the ceiling. You have to pull the floor up to you with your attached foot." With Kouvaras' help, I was able to stick my foot to the decking. I swung forward and managed to get my other foot out and attached to the floor. "I hope it knows when to let go and when not to." "The suit's AI is pretty good at anticipating your intentions," Kouvaras said. "I'm noticing a lag between when I start to move and when the suit responds." "You can adjust the suit's response under the master control settings." I looked at the settings icon in the upper corner of my vision, but the menu didn't appear. "Um, I'm not getting a menu." "Oops, we forget the cybernetics calibration," Edwards said. He tapped his panel and a white screen with a large black arrow overrode my helmet display. "Try to move the arrow in the direction it's pointing." "I've done this before," I said, feeling like a slow child and growing irritated. The arrow remained unmoving. "Of course it's been a while. My devices usually pass on my user settings to each other." "This is all military hardware," Kouvaras said. "It's designed specifically not to inter-operate with civilian equipment." The arrow lurched forward and I willed it to move again. "Good," Edwards said when it had reached the edge of my visual field. "Again." The arrow vanished, replaced by another one in the center of my vision pointed the other way. After a moment, I got it moving as well. It was soon followed by up and down arrows which were, in turn, replaced with a ball and circle. "Move the ball into the circle," Edwards said. I had to move the ball at about a thirty-degree angle to get it inside the circle at the edge of my vision. The display reset with the circle at a different angle. "That's enough for now. We can fine tune the interface later if necessary, though the AI will continue to adapt to your input through normal use." Edwards cleared my helmet's display. "Try your menu now." I opened the master control settings and found the input sensitivity slider and moved it from the median setting to the maximum. "OK," I said and took a step forward. The suit lurched forward and I would have flown up and bounced off the ceiling had the suit not waited until my left foot was anchored to the floor before releasing my right foot." "Whoa there speedy," Kouvaras said. "I think you might want to dial that back before you bounce off something important." "I'm just getting a feel for the suit," I assured him, glad he couldn't see me blush. It took me a few minutes to get the hang of walking, then Kouvaras taught me how to control the setae through the cybernetic interface. This was necessary in order to learn how to jump. Half an hour later, I was making small leaps across the room and sticking to the walls and ceiling." "You know, if this fleet officer thing doesn't work out, I could always use another pair of boots," Kouvaras said. "I figure I could get you rated in the assault armor in a three or four days. What do you say?" I laughed. "As soon as they figure out that I've been faking this whole fleet officer thing, I'll be lucky to get a clerk position with you troopers." Then I glanced down at the time display. "Uh, oh. Is it 18:30 already? Help me out of this thing, I've got to catch the next shuttle to the Blaylock."

"Oh? Got a date or something?" Edwards asked. "As a matter of fact, yes." "I don't believe it. Who?" "Cathrine Kacsmaryk" "The girl who kicked your butt in the zero-G combat ring?" Kouvaras sounded incredulous. "Well..." Kouvaras helped me walk the suit back into a storage locker and popped the seals. Edwards shook his head as I climbed out. "Going out with a girl who can beat you up is never a good idea." "She didn't beat me up." "I'm guessing he's looking for a rematch under more favorable conditions," Kouvaras said. "Perhaps some form of wrestling," Edwards suggested. "Sorry to spoil your speculations," I pulled my flight suit out of a nearby locker, "we're just checking out a new restaurant." I hurriedly slipped it on and left their leering smiles behind. I made it to the hanger deck just in time to watch the shuttle leave without me. "Crap!" I slammed the bulkhead as the small craft accelerated away. "Is there something wrong, sir?" I glanced back down the corridor. The trooper, Cruze, drifted towards me, fingertips lightly brushing the handholds on the wall as he passed. "Oh, I just missed my transport." "Where was it headed?" "The Blaylock." "Headed out for a little R&R?" "I was." "That's unfortunate. Me, I'm stuck on maintenance duty on the breaching pods for the rest of the shift. Sometimes I even have to take them out of the hanger for testing. It's a shame you don't have access to something like that." I looked at him with renewed hope, tempered with irritation. I still wasn't in the mood to banter. "Are you saying you could get me over to the Blaylock?" Cruze shrugged. "We'd need an officer to authorize it. Think we could find one?" I pointed at the transport master's office door. "Don't just drift there, get going!" "Hey, Lori. I need to take out one of the suicide barrels," Cruze said as we entered. Lori Seaward, the spacer on duty in the flight attendant's office, sat back in her chair staring into the distance, obviously streaming some entertainment through her netpiece. "Which one?" she mumbled. "Number sixteen." "Log it out." Cruze kicked over to a data panel and punched in the info. He gestured me over to thumb my approval, but I got the impression the deck master wouldn't have cared if an officer had authorized it. She didn't even seem to notice one was in the room. "Thanks. Later." Cruze called out as we left the room. Lori only grunted in reply. The breaching pod didn't seem any bigger despite the empty seats. I grabbed one near the pilot's controls, hesitated, then remembering my last high-G trip in a breaching pod, decided to strap in. "We're not going to be doing more than one G are we?" Cruze powered up the craft and sealed it. "Not much more, no." He fired the thrusters the second he got clearance to leave and pulled smoothly away from the ship, never doing more than two or three Gs.

"Ever thought of being a transport pilot?" I asked, thinking he had the skills of one. "Only when I think about the pay." Cruze kept his eyes on the flight path. "I don't know. I'd think it'd be pretty boring flying fixed routes on regular schedules. Besides, they don't get to play with guns." The Blaylock's hanger was busy, but our craft was small enough for us to slip into a non-commercial bay. As we left the pod, I turned to Cruze. "I'm going to order you to have a good time, but stay sober," I said. "I may need a ride back." "Aye, sir." Cruze grinned and made an elaborate solute. "Just as long as I get the suicide barrel back sometime around end of shift." "I'll let you know one way or another." I tapped my netpiece as I turned to leave. * * * Fortunately, I found the Commander's Mess before Cathrine arrived. It was a new restaurant with ambitions of class. Real cloth tablecloths were clipped firmly to the sides of dozens of tables which crowded the small room. Overhead, live images of the local star system spun slowly across the dim ceiling. The only other lights in the room came from the flicker of simulated LED candles and the glare of the menus. As I scanned the well-dressed people waiting in the antechamber, I wondered if I should have made reservations. I walked up to the head waiter; a tall, skinny, middle-aged man with gray hair combed back from a high brow and an elevated nose. "Is there any chance I can get a table for two?" I asked. He looked down at me with a hard cold expression. "Tonight?" "Yes?" He glanced at his datapad resting on a traditional simulated wood podium. "For whom shall I reserve the table?" I got the distinct impression that he thought I couldn't possibly be the person who would dine in his restaurant and that I must be seeking a reservation on behalf of someone more significant. I decided to pull rank. "Fleet sub-commander Kenneth Phon and fleet sub-commander Cathrine Kacsmaryk." At the mention of my name, the corner of one eyebrow twitched slightly and without seeming to move, the head waiter's expression changed from icy disdain to cool subservience. "My apologies for not having a table right away, sir." He tapped at his datapad. "I believe I will have a table for you in just a moment." His eyes flickered across my MDF flight suit from which I had removed my old pilot officer rank tabs but kept my old unit patch. I suddenly felt very underdressed. I could only hope that others might take my casual appearance as a sign that the unknown guy in the flight suit was so important that normal social conventions didn't apply. "That's OK," I assured him. "I'm still waiting on my party." I tried not to stare at the other customers as I waited and worried about my dress. Within a couple of minutes, Cathrine arrived looking like a beautiful if somewhat short fashion model. Dresses were out of the question in space, even with ships possessing spinning habitat modules. She wore a Chinese cut tunic and pants which appeared to be red silk embroidered with bird wing designs in golden thread. The colors emphasized the pale skin of her neck and the dark hair she wore pinned up. She arrived, scanning the other guests and looking uncertain. She saw me, smiled nervously and came over. "I almost didn't find this place," she said. "I almost didn't make it to the Blaylock." The head waiter returned. "Ah, good. Your table is ready. Follow me." Cathrine took my arm and we followed the waiter into the room. "This is beautiful," she murmured, staring up at the ceiling. "Yes," I agreed watching her admire the ceiling. I tapped off my netpiece, clearing my visual space of distractions so I could admire her. The waiter showed us to our table, took our drink order and handed us our menus. I scrolled through the displays, skipping the "cultured" (vat grown) beef and pork items and selected a teriyaki chicken dish (real) while Cathrine chose a curried tilapia (also real) rice pilaf. The menus transmitted our orders and kept a running tab. After the waiter brought our drinks and some fresh baked bread, we sat munching while I tried to find a way to break the suddenly awkward silence.

"So...," I began, remembering some off-hand advice from Dr. Powers that if one found themselves in this sort of situation the best thing to do was to get the other person to talk about themselves since your interest in them makes you interesting to other people. "Tell me about yourself. A world-class athlete, black belt in mutan-idou, graduate from the prestigious war college on New Sparta, what else should I know about you?" Cathrine turned aside with a nervous smile. "That pretty much sums me up." "I admit those are quite amazing accomplishments, but I suspect there's more to you than just a pile of accomplishments." "Oh?" she laughed. "You want a list of my failures as well?" "You know how we mere mortals are—always trying to bring others down to our level." Cathrine held up one hand and begin counting off items on her fingers. "Well, I'm a terrible painter. I failed at the piano and every other instrument I've tried. I'm at best a mediocre cook—." "You cook?" "Only a few dishes." "I'd like to see that." "I've never learned to dance. In fact, I've never even been to one." "Now, that I cannot believe," I said. "You must have had the whole war college asking you out." "You know nearly half their enrollment is female, right?" "I doubt that would deter many of them." "Now stop that." She laughed and slapped the back of my hand playfully. "That's just a myth." "Still, no one asked you out?" "One guy. Once. But he canceled on me, said he had a school project come up and couldn't go out." "Well, some guys may be intimidated by a beautiful and accomplished woman, but we can take care of your dance situation tonight. There must be a half-dozen dance clubs on the Blaylock. How do you feel about pac-rim-mixed diss-oriental skip-beat?" A frown flickered across her face. I don't think it related to my choice of music, rather I got the impression the idea of dancing made her uncomfortable. "So." Cathrine leaned forward across the table. "Tell me about Kenneth Phon. As the son of the wealthy and famous inventor, I'm sure you have a pile of accomplishments of your own." I sighed. "Actually, no. When I discovered my math wasn't good enough for trans-geospace engineering, I changed my major to a double in philosophy and xenology. Of course, I was a disappointment to my father long before that." "Not enough light to flourish in your father's shadow?" I shook my head. "I grew up knowing the world—and my father—expected great things of me, but no one could tell me what that was. Total strangers thought they knew me because they knew my father, but none of them were interested in who I really was. I don't think I ever figured out who I was either." The waiter's arrival with our food broke the awkward silence that followed. We concentrated on the meal, the clink of tableware against our plates the only sound, as I mentally kicked myself for my surprising eruption of bitterness. I watched the other couples chatting happily then exchanged apologetic looks with Cathrine. "You can't tell me," Cathrine began, apparently trying to resuscitate the conversation, "that the handsome playboy didn't have women fawning all over him." I shrugged. "Up until I left for school, the only women I saw were family members or the ugly daughters of father's business associates. My parents lived in mortal fear that some unscrupulous woman would latch onto me and use me for my fame or fortune. "That didn't change until I went to New Athens and got out from under their collective thumb." "Oh?" "Well, there were incidents." I hesitated, but she egged me on with raised eyebrows. "I and my Alpha Tau pledge brothers sort of kidnapped our sister sorority and commandeered a spaceship that had been donated to an alumni organization which had refused it for complicated legal reasons. Cathrine gasped and her eyes widened. "The SS Bacchanal!" I winced. "Most of the stories you hear repeated on the converse are fabricated." "They made a movie of that!" "Three, actually. But father's lawyers sued them to keep the family name out." Cathrine laughed. "Wow! When you decide to cut loose on your own, you don't mess around." I laughed with her, feeling a little self-conscious. She held up her glass as if proposing a toast and I did the same. "Here's to future adventures," she said. "May we retain the media rights," I finished. We laughed together and, having confessed our failures, the conversation flowed more easily. I was just beginning to get to know her likes, dislikes, hopes and fears when the room lights came on full bright and a warning siren sounded. "Attention all military personnel. Please report to your ships immediately." The diners all looked up with stunned expressions as the message repeated. There was a three-second pause as if the whole room were sucking in its breath at the same time, then two-thirds of the room rose and raced for the exit. Cathrine watched them, then gave me a puzzled look as I leaned back in my seat and tapped my netpiece back on. "It's going to be a moment before we can get out of here." She tapped on her own netpiece. The Blaylock being a civilian ship, I couldn't get on the mil-net, but as I jumped on the local converse node, I saw that everyone had plussed-up a live feed from Blaylock's external cameras. I opened the feed and watched as dozens of massive Cack jump ships materialized just outside our orbit and began disgorging fleets of heavy battle cruisers.

 

Chapter 11

As the numbers funneling through the restaurant's doors dwindled. I grabbed Cathrine's hand and we plunged into the flood. I found myself wishing they would stop the habitat and return us to weightlessness so that we could use that extra dimension in which to move. We bumped and jostled our way to the shuttle deck, which was weightless, but it did us no good. Even if we could have got around the mass of people waiting for transport, the first group of shuttles had left and the docking bays were all empty. These people had shuttled over all day from ships across the combined Solarian fleets and it would take hours to ferry them all back.
 I flash messaged Cruze. He responded by voice, "Let me guess, you're trying to get off the Blaylock and all the transports are full." "Not only that, they've left." "Huh? I expected you to call sooner. OK, on the left side of the boarding deck, you'll find a security door. Today's pilot code is ten-sixteen. Punch that in and go down to the service deck. If anyone questions you, just flash your ID and keep going like you belong there. I'll be there in a couple of minutes. Just hang tight." He killed the connection and I scanned the boarding deck until I found the security door hiding in plain sight. I caught Cathrine's attention and pointed at it. "This way." The code worked and soon we drifted down to the service deck and waited nervously outside the sealed pod. I checked the external camera feeds again. The jump ships continued disgorging battlecruisers like seeds from a field of dandelions in a wind storm. A minute later, Cruze came leaping from wall to wall. "Did you kids have fun?" He slapped the hull with a digital key and stared into the laser which scanned his retina. "Up until the invasion started," Cathrine said. "Have they started shooting yet?" Cruze dove into the pod and powered up the systems. "Not yet." I helped Cathrine in and dove in after her as the hatch started to close. "But the fleet officers are probably going berserk." "Deck master, this is tango-bravo-zero-one-six requesting emergency departure," Cruze said into his audio pickup. "Acknowledged tango-bravo-zero-one-six. This is the deck master. What is your destination?" "The Torchbearer—and I have some VIPs who need to get back right now." "One moment while we clear it with flight control." "How long is this going to take?" I asked as the deck master relayed our request to flight control. "We're too small to lock properly in a docking cradle, so the only thing holding us here is—" Cruze punched a control. Something clunked and the pod let go of the docking port. Cruze backed us out into the empty hanger area. "TB-zero-one-six! You do not have permission to depart." "I told you it was an emergency." Cruze whirled us around to face the hanger entrance. "Deck master, this is flight control. A flight plan has been approved for tango-bravo-zero-one-six. Please stand by while we transmit—." The acceleration hit like a punch in the stomach. The hanger entrance rushed towards us with eye-blurring speed then we were out in the cluttered void of space, staring at the lights of hundreds of ships circling the gas giant below. Breathing suddenly seemed out of the question so I concentrated on merely holding my lungs in. The acceleration stopped briefly. Cruze whipped us around to face away from the Torchbearer and then fired up a one G deceleration. "Torchbearer, this is Tango-Bravo-zero-one-six returning hot and heavy. Please inform the flight deck master I need the doors open or I'm going to be coming through them."

"Cruze, is that you?" "Yes, Lori. I didn't realize you were awake. I hope I didn't disturb your rest." "I'll show you disturbed if you leave skid-marks on my flight deck again." "Just have the doors open when I get there." "We're supposed to be locking everything down right now." "I'll only be a minute." "That's what he said." Cruze throttled up the engines to a crushing deceleration. My vision darkened as I lay pressed into the acceleration couch and shaken by the roar. This continued for what seemed minutes before the engines abruptly stuttered and cut off. I assumed he had stopped us just outside the hanger deck and would begin to maneuver into a docking cradle when I heard the thump of docking clamps. As we unstrapped and rattled out of the pod, flying through the connecting tube on the way to C&C, I could feel the heat radiating from the surrounding bulkhead and support structures which he had bathed in the plasma of his fusion engines. I didn't think Lori would be able to ignore this. * * * Cathrine and I raced into C&C and found Phil floating alone at the center of the room, looking at a hologram of a constellation of ships. He raised a questioning eyebrow at us, but only said. "There you are." "We just got back from the Blaylock. Where's Chris and Brian?" "Chris is stuck on Madam Wong's Pleasure Barge looking for a ride back—" I burst out with a laugh, while Cathrine gave a nervous giggle. Madam Wong's synthesthetics were usually associated with perverts or sad and lonely people. "I told Brian to get some rest," Phil continued. "We'll probably be boosting soon and he'll be on first watch." I looked around and noticed the alarm signals were not flashing. "We're no longer on alert?" "That was a mis-communication." Phil gestured at the holodisplay. Those Cack jump ships were carrying Solarian warships—reinforcements. They're the remains of the fleet that was laying siege to the home world of the Free Government of the Thousand. Spartan Fleet Commander Smith has joined us along with nearly ten-thousand Cack ships." "Ten Thousand! We have over a thousand ships already," Cathrine said. "Shines Like the Sun thinks he needs even more to defeat Fading Glory?" "It's not just the battle cruisers." Phil tweaked the holo-display. The view jumped to the edge of our current system. "This is Good Passage. This is a double gate. It leads to a system whose physical location is unknown, one has to go through this system in order to get into the Middle Sphere. The problem is that this system is heavily defended. In order to reach Faded Glory we'll need to have our entire fleet pass single file through a single gate." "Obviously we have a plan to deal with that. What is it?" Phil smiled a knowing smile. "Sunshine believes Faded Glory has concentrated his forces in this one system, leaving the systems beyond largely undefended. The jump ships can reach nearly any system in the Cack Moiarchy..." "He's going to use them to outflank Faded Glory," I said. Phil nodded. "Precisely." "But jump ships are just large-mass transport," Cathrine said. "They're not warships. A single small local defense gun ship could easily destroy one." "Ah, but they have to reach it first. Local defense craft have very limited range. A jump ship can easily pick an isolated spot in the system and dump a hundred battle cruisers before the local authority has a chance to respond."

Sunshine's plan began to unfold in my mind. "Once beyond the double gate, his ships can spread out and attack hundreds of systems. Faded Glory will have to at least detach the majority of his fleet to deal with that, which means at best he would only be able to fight a delaying action. Most likely he'll simply withdraw." Phil stared into the glowing dots of the holo-display, each sporting a ring of letters and numbers representing key information on that ship. "That's the Plan." * * * It is frequently said that Cack jump ships were the largest self-propelled objects in the universe. Designed for freight transport to fringe systems lacking transit stations, these ships, when fully loaded, could mass as much as a small moon and even produce their own microgravity. Empty, the jump ships were little more than hollow frame-works attached to massive TCR generators and giant anti-matter engines. Once those lumbering ships got to one hundred or more AU out from the nearest system's primary, they could use those massive generators to produce temporary wormholes to any system in the Cack economic sphere. They turned out to be useless. As the fleet neared the transit station, warships from Good Passage began accelerating towards us from the station's far side. Alarms sounded and the fleet jumped from Fleet Alert Stance Delta to FAS Gamma. All non-combat activities were canceled and both the fleet and the individual ships configured themselves for combat. At the fleet level we double checked our communication links with the ships assigned to us and began calling up all the sensor data we had. This far out, light hadn't even had a chance to reach us yet, so all we had to study was the gravimetric data. We could calculate their mass and velocity, but had no idea of what type of ships might be headed toward us, except that their average speed, being about six times the speed of light, implied they were either warships or the galaxy's biggest racing yachts—besides the argippos. "They don't seem to be in either a defensive or particularly offensive formation," Brian said.  "Maybe the merchants are all fleeing because they know we're coming?" Chris chuckled. Phil frowned at him. "Flee toward us?" "Some of the old Cack combat doctrines called for what they called chaotic-patterned fighting," Cathrine said. "This was usually implemented with large-scale hit-and-run attacks." Phil looked at the display and shook his head. "They don't have the numbers. It would be hopelessly ineffective." I was glad he said it. I had been thinking the same thing but hadn't wanted to be the one to shoot her down. Cathrine shrugged. "Perhaps they're an older reserve force coming to soften us up or delay us as they build up their forces—or perhaps they're a local force operating independently of the regional manager, determined to go down fighting the way an Indweller should." With the shadow of a smile, she gave me a wink and I realized she thought all our speculation was pointless. "We could send a recon drone," I said. Since the H-drive would sever the EPR transceiver link, it would have to use a reaction drive. It would not give us much of a warning, though. Phil punched away on his data panel, calculating the time of intercept. "They would meet just at missile range limit at which point our picket drones sensors would alert us." Silence settled on the C&C as we check and rechecked our data and com links. A fleet-wide alert flashed on our displays. It came from the Battle of Kuzikos, Sherman's flagship. It was an order to stand down. Everyone in the C&C exchanged looks of disbelief. As the gravimetric plots drew near, I started getting requests from my SCs for confirmation. I looked at Phil who frowned back. "Go to delta." I relayed the order to step the alert stance down one step. We wouldn't be firing the first shot, but we also wouldn't be caught with our pants down if fighting broke out. I watched the dots on the screen close in on our position and hoped delta would be enough. The C&C grew very silent and the whisper of the air handlers seemed to grow louder as we waited for the first sign of attack. Instead, the lead ship stopped just outside missile range. "Looks like they're forming up after all," Chris said. I scrolled frantically through my data feeds, trying to find the scout probes feeds. I nearly scrolled past them before tapping the correct feed. I was just resolving the ships images when a fleet-wide message alert flashed. "Attention ships of Shines Like the Sun. This is Commander Abrams of the Thedus Security Company, formerly in the employ of Ancient Glory to provide security in the middle sphere. Um, you wouldn't have any job openings would you?" Sunshine was ecstatic. Apparently his personal oracle, Dr. Hindmost had told him he would see the light of the inner sphere before he saw his enemy's face. When the deserters from Fading Glory arrived, he very nearly paid his oracle on the spot. Convinced Fading Glory would not fight, he sent his jump ships away and his fleet entered the middle sphere unopposed, confident of a swift and easy victory.

 

Chapter 12

"Did you hear about Innman and Arden?" the short Hispanic junior officer said as she heated her meal in the Torchbearer's dining area.
 "They sold the stock in their companies and left on a jump ship," the tall bald senior NCO standing in line behind her said. An older mustached technician leaned around the bald man to join in the conversation. "I heard Sunny was sending a jump ship out after them to arrest them." "Why would he need to do that?" a junior spacer asked as he cleaned a nearby table. "Their families are staying at one of his corporate resorts. One word from him and they're all under arrest or even killed." The other diners set their meals down. "Really?" I leaned back in my chair and asked Chris, "What do you think?" He sipped his coffee and shrugged. "I have no idea. I certainly wouldn't be surprised if he took offense at them running out on him. But then, who knows if he even considers them important enough to worry about." I smiled. "So you're saying it depends which is greater, his arrogance or his pettiness." "I did hear why they left." "Oh? Why?" "They were upset that Sunshine allowed Sherman to keep the ships that joined his Consolidated Colonial Space Force. And that's not all." Chris leaned closer and lowered his voice. "They're talking about reorganizing the fleets. Moony and Sherman are both maneuvering to be supreme commander. I think Innman, in particular, thought he should have the position because of his prior history with Sunshine." "What of Arden?" I asked. "He's a patriot. He still wants to go back to the Patriotic Free Government of the Thousand and reclaim his home world, but now that Bright Fortune has fled back to the Cack home world, Sunshine has no interest in it." Chris drained his cup. "Anyway, expect some big high-level meetings soon. There's definitely going to be some changes." * * * I left the dining room and returned to my quarters where I worked through my inbox. I noticed a formal complaint from the flight deck master of the Blaylock in regards to Cruze's abrupt departure, and filed it in the category of things to be dealt with when Hell froze over. I had worked through the first half of the items when a fleet-wise announcement flashed Sunshine's royal ideogram on my display. I had left my door open and could hear the alerting tone echo throughout the ship. An announcer spoke in the whistling clicking speech of the Those Who Dwell Within followed by a human interpreter who was obviously paraphrasing a machine translator. "Please stand by for an announcement from his radiance, Shines Like the Sun." Sunshine appeared on the display in all his tropical glory and began to speak. "You have, no doubt heard that Innman and Arden have both chosen to leave us. Since there may be some confusion due to the abruptness of their departure I wish to clarify the reason. "I did not ask them to leave and would have preferred them to stay. Though they may flatter themselves by thinking they have snuck off, I assure you they cannot outrun my jump ships and there is nowhere in human space or Indweller space in which they can hide. However, because of their former service I allowed them to run off. "I would not have it said that I use anyone while they have something to offer and abuse them the moment they do not wish to help me. God knows I have treated them better than they have treated me." He paused a moment in thought before continuing. "At this moment, we are nearing our final goal. Soon a great challenge and greater rewards will stand before us all. Summon up the courage you showed in stopping the first Indweller acquisition. If you find it lacking, you may leave knowing I will not blame you or seek revenge. But if you trust me, I will see to it that you are well compensated so that any past inconvenience or hardship you suffered will seem a small thing indeed.

* * * Sunshine's speech was well received and the crews were eager to follow him into the Middle Sphere. We passed rapidly through star systems which seemed eerily abandoned. Most space assets were either grounded or sent out of system. A few were even destroyed so we couldn't get parts and supplies. Without the Cack fleet to defend them, most planets would send up any supplies we asked for once our fleet showed up in orbit. Only one planet, loyal to Fading Glory, was foolish enough to try and resist us and Sunshine had us practice planetary bombardment on them. We destroyed their military, governmental and industrial centers as an exercise, stopping short of complete sterilization only because all the ships had a chance to get in their shots in and our leaders wanted to preserve most of their armaments for the conflict to come. We proceeded onwards in pursuit of Faded Glory. Sunshine believed Faded Glory had realized he couldn't defend the entire Middle Sphere against us and that he would try to hold the gate to the Inner Sphere. Phil was convinced the Moiarchy itself was our real target. He even said the planetary bombardment was practice in case Righteous Ruler should take refuge on the Cack home world, thinking its sacred position would ward off our attack. He wouldn't explain why, but he wasn't alone in his thinking and he had been in frequent conference with Sherman who seemed to enjoy Sunshine's confidence. We had paused at a world three-quarters of the way to the inner gate to take on supplies for the final push when Phil gave me a strange look during one of our routine update meetings. We were in his quarters, each with a datapad in our laps, going down the latest list of administrivia brought up by our SCs when he asked, "Which ship would you prefer to run the C&C from, the Torchbearer or the Athena?" "What? Are you thinking of moving the C&C?" "Yes." I shrugged. "The Athena is a slightly newer ship. I hear the accommodations are a little better, but honestly, the inside of one crashpod is pretty much like another. I'd just as soon leave the C&C here." Phil nodded and made a note on his datapad. "I'll transfer over to the Athena, then." "Transfer? But why?" Phil leaned back in his seat and set down the datapad. "The fleet commanders have been reviewing the command and control structure, looking for ways to improve inter-fleet coordination. One of the things we've been looking at is wing-level tactics. Sunshine wants us to plan for fighting forces much larger than our own." "Fading Glory cannot have that many ships," I objected. "Otherwise he would have held us at the first gate to the middle sphere." An idea suddenly hit me. "That's why he withdrew to the inner gate, isn't it? He's not just trying to consolidate his defenses, he's waiting for reinforcements from the Inner Sphere." "Most likely," Phil agreed. "We've been told to expect stiff resistance. We're going to have to be nimble and quick. If necessary, we'll break up the fleet into semi-autonomous wings—that's why we want a strat-o assigned to each wing. Each wing will function as a single unit. If they have to go trans-luminal, the wing will contract to com-laser range and move in a series of coordinated maneuvers." "They won't be able to support other wings. Defense will suffer." "If they're moving trans-luminal, defense won't be an issue." "Until they pause to attack," I added. "This is a very aggressive plan. If you're dealing with superior numbers, it's only really useful to isolate and attack a limited number of high value targets." "Or one." Phil gave me a significant look. I had no doubt about what he was implying. I let the comment go unanswered.

Phil picked up his datapad and started tapping icons. "We have some simulations to run. It'll just be fleet officers. We'll begin once everyone gets transferred to their new stations." We continued working down the list of items, but I was distracted as I realized this meant Cathrine would be leaving for another ship. * * * I sat alone in the C&C feeling awkward and a little useless as the room's sole occupant. I had turned on the holo table display and kept glancing from it to my pod displays. Shine Like the Sun's combined Solarian and Cack fleet displayed as a series of numbered blue dots and was rapidly approaching a mass of red triangles that had us outnumbered five to one. "Solomon and Moony, you will lead the attack," Sherman said. "You will head straight for their formation at 4C until you are 10 A.U. from their position, at which point you will veer 300 degrees and try to draw away as many of their ships as you can." "What happens when they don't fall for our little ruse," Moony complained. "You have to give them time to respond. If they prove too clever to fall for our feint, then head straight for the primary target and try not to engage the ships on the front line." No one actually expected the Cack fleet to come at us in a line—it would probably be a sphere or spheroid wedge—but everyone was so tense that no one, not even Moony, corrected his terminology. "Porter and Orden will wait until the enemy adjusts to the first attack before engaging those ships that attempt to move up and fill the gaps left behind. Smith and I will lead the Cacks and try to force our way into the gap blasting our way to the primary target. "You strat-o's are going to have to be quick on the target selections—especially Porter's and Orden's. The objective is to keep as many ships as tied up as possible—just hit and move on, hit and move on, no FACs, static missile exchanges and certainly no boarding parties. Is everyone clear? Then start queuing your commands." I began grouping my ship icons and assigning com triggers as I watched the enemy triangles near. The usual Cack approach was to send in wave after wave of ships at superluminal speed, dropping missiles and autonomous attack drones in a hit and run fashion to overwhelm their enemies. More often than not—especially when they enjoyed a numerical advantage—they would stop and fight, attempting to claim their enemy's ship as a prize. This tactic would bog us down and prevent us from reaching our "primary target." So to prevent that, we were using an aggressive approach to try to seize the initiative and force the Cacks to fall back into a defensive position. And if they fell into confusion instead, so much the better. I watched Moony and Solomon's fleet approach the enemy formation then suddenly veer off. The ruse somewhat worked. A number of ships moved to block the anticipated attack, then at a certain point, moved back into position while other ships took up the chase. This caused a ripple across the surface of the sphere. "I think that's as good as we're going to get," Phil said. He sent a screen cap of his targeting screen with eight circles dividing up the areas around the opening. He had assigned one to each wing, writing our flight letters in a hasty scrawl. "Follow me," he said. Then his ship went super luminal severing the EPR connections. I transmitted the first selected target and sent the order to use the H-drive at maximum speed. By the time we reached the target, cut the drive and launched our missiles, I had already cued up the next half-dozen targets in a corkscrew path through the enemy formation. As I waited for the orders to propagate by com laser to the other ships in my wing and for the confirmation to return, the enemy's answering missiles began to close in on us. We got the confirmation and took off for the next target even as the missiles came within seconds of hitting us. Once we went FTL, however, the missiles couldn't hit us, or even track us. Even so, coordinating by com laser during these brief stops was like trying to dodge thrown rocks while moving in slow motion. As we progressed, the enemy grew better at anticipating our movements. The ships moved to block us and their missiles grew closer with each new encounter. We started to have to call on our point defenses to destroy the incoming missiles while we waited for the confirmation that our next set of orders had been received by all ships. Our progress slowed to a crawl. Solomon and Moony's feint got surprisingly close to reaching our primary target before getting bogged down in the formation's internal defenses. Sherman and Smith's fleets pushed past us dragging the Cack host behind them. I had our wing parallel them to try to run interference. Phil's other wings, seeing our example, followed in suit. As we neared the primary target, we began to lose ships. One by one their dots were eliminated. Warning signs flashed on my displays as the Torchbearer started taking damage and the communication bandwidth dropped. I had just enough time to transfer control to one of my senior tac-officers when the Torchbearer took a crippling hit. I was forced to watch passively while the rest of the fleet dove into the heart of the enemy formation, shedding ships like sparks from a burning spear. Sherman and Smith's fleets took near one hundred percent casualties, but Shines Like the Sun's fleet was able to take out the target. I sat back in the crashpod, sighed, and unzipping the top of my flight suit. I could smell the sweat and fumbled for my netpiece to adjust the C&C's environmental controls. We're going to have to try something else, I thought as the simulation's statistics began to scroll across my displays. Sure we achieved our objective, but the cost was too great. Of course five-to-one odds were ridiculous, but even so, it was a pyrrhic victory at best. As I tapped into the senior command discussions, I learned Shines Like the Sun felt differently. He had seen it as a glorious victory. Overcome by emotion he made a confession he had been holding back. "Our vanguard machine eyes have seen Faded Glory's absence from the inner gate. It is being of no consequence. The approaching goal having neared, the time of revelation is come. My intention is in assuming the rule of the Moiarchy from my father's son. Please be educating your warriors to motivate their assistance."

 

Part Two : Alarums and Excursions -- Chapter 13

Subject: Liars!
 Subject: You ******* ********! You knew this all along! (Comments moderated.) Subject: You should be strung up by your ***** and shot. (Comments moderated. Security investigation initiated.) I scrolled down the list of messages, refusing all requests for real-time communication, but still hearing their anger. Quite a few came in the form of outraged video recordings. After the first frothing diatribe I had the messaging system only display the transcripts. And these were my SCs. I could only imagine what was going on with the lower ranks. Things were certainly different in the regular military. A fact I was only beginning to appreciate. I spent the morning crafting a general "why this is really a good thing and let's focus on all the opportunities here" message. I sent it out to everyone in my wing and copied Phil and his sub-commanders on it. Minutes later, Phil thanked me and asked if he could use it as the basis of a message to the rest of the fleet. Chris just forwarded it to his wing. I scrolled through the list deleting all that were merely abusive and answering the handful where I thought I could say something helpful. Most of the rest got an abbreviated form of my message to the wing, but more messages came in faster than I could answer. Finally I decided to sneak out and go hide in trooper country. What I really wanted to do was to jump in my suit of powered armor, turn off the safety governors and just smash things, but Kouvaras wasn't around and I would probably just get into trouble on my own. After looking the armor over, I closed the locker door with a reluctant sigh and found Redburn and Marcello in the weapons locker room. They were sitting on a bench playing some sort of complicated game involving both cards and dice. They had stopped rising to attention every time I walked into the room but saluted me instead with a nod of the head. Coming from them it was a gesture of respect more meaningful than traditional formal gestures. "Why aren't you running around panicking like everyone else?" I asked. "Panicking? Why?" "I assume you've heard we will be attempting to conquer the Cack Moiarchy?" Marcello threw down a card in front of Redburn. "Told  you so." Redburn rolled a die and grimaced. "Yeah, we saw that coming." "And that doesn't concern you?" Marcello looked up at me. "Show us a ship you want attacked and we'll attack it. Show us a man you want killed and we'll kill him. It doesn't matter what planet they're from." Redburn shrugged. "We leave those sorts of things for you big brain types to worry about." "I wish my SCs felt that way." *   *   * I left the troopers and found myself wandering near Cathrine's quarters. As I approached I noticed a S2C standing outside her door with arms laden with bags. Her door was open, but I knocked on the bulkhead to get her attention.   Cathrine bent over a stack of plastic bins running a label-maker across each side. "Oh, Ken. Come to see me off?" "Er, yes. I guess you're already packed up?" "Yeah, there's not much to pack, I'm afraid. That's life on shipboard." I wanted to tell her I'd miss her. I wanted to tell her not to go, how I was attracted to her and how I thought we might have a chance at a real relationship if only we had more time. But as I stood there searching for words, looking into her expectant face the only thing I could think to say was, "Need an escort to the shuttle?"

She hesitated as if expecting something else, puzzlement flickering across her face.  "Uh, sure, though my shuttle won't leave for a little while. I still have some out-processing to do." I shrugged and pulled my netpiece from a flightsuit pocket.  "I'm avoiding work right now." "I take it your SCs are taking the surprise very well?" "Not exactly. Yours?" She held up her own netpiece. "Fortunately I'm largely incommunicado, due to the move and all." I spent the rest of the day following Cathrine from one office to the next as she finished her out-processing. It wasn't exactly romantic, but I was never so glad for the slow inefficient pace of military red tape. Even so, we ended up at the shuttle flight deck entirely too soon. We lingered, chatting about anything that would delay the moment of her departure. Eventually a S1C doing flight attendant duty stuck his head out of the boarding tube connecting to the shuttle. "You need to board now or we're going to miss our departure time." Cathrine started to move toward me, then stopped. I wanted to kiss her, but I had no idea if she thought  we had that kind of relationship. We had enjoyed the occasional conversation in the C&C, one and a half training sessions in the gym and one aborted date. Out of reflex, I started to shake her hand, realized how hopelessly stupid that was and shifted to a one-armed hug. She smiled, let go of her hand-hold, wrapped both arms around me and gave me a squeeze. "Perhaps we can finish that date sometime?" "Oh, so it was an official date then?" "It was it you want it to be." I smiled. "Good, then let's schedule another one as soon as possible." The attendant grew impatient. "Excuse me?" "Let me know next time you're about to schedule leave," Cathrine said, then with a hand to my chest, pushed off. With a brief smile and wave, she flipped around and slipped into the boarding tube. *   *   * By the end of the day I started noticing many of the complaints were about contract violations, risk assessments and appropriate levels of compensation.  It started when one ship commander observed that the last time Sunshine took Innman's Pilgrim's with him on a visit to the Cack home world he had paid them more and there had been no question of combat then. Once money came up, it ceased to be a revolt and became a negotiation. In the end no one was very surprised who the real target was, though it didn't ease the sting of the deception. The SCs debated back and forth throughout the night, filling the message queues with demands before finally choosing a group to go before Shines Like the Sun to negotiate a new contract. As they were nailing down the terms with the Cacks, Moony decided to pull a fast one. Moony held a closed-door meeting with his SCs which someone secretly recorded and posted on a video server.   "Ladies and gentlemen, if you will take my advice you will be able to, with no effort or risk to yourselves, secure Shines Like the Sun's special favor. At this moment Shines Like the Sun is begging the Solarian fleets to go with him to the Cack home world. I say we go ahead and transit to the next system now while the ship commanders are still debating whether to accept his contract. "If the contract is approved, Shines Like the Sun will give you the credit for swaying the vote and will gratefully reward you as only he can. While if the contract is rejected and we return home, he will remember how you alone followed him faithfully—evenly enthusiastically—and he will trust you with all the best contracts. In fact, as his friends, he will gladly give you anything you ask that is in his power to give—and that is quite a lot."

In the end, they followed Moony's plan. Not having seen the video until later, we were stunned by his ships' sudden departure. Some even thought he might be running away while others thought Shines Like the Sun might have sent him on a special mission as when he had outflanked Doggedly's forces. Moony's ships seized control of the nearest gate and sent a taunting message back to Sherman, "The enemy is this way." Messages flew back and forth across milnet as the various commanders tried to find out what was going on, then Shines Like the Sun sent out a message to the entire group. "Warriors of Moony, you are having only my gratitude now, but soon you will having gratitude for me or I am not Shines Like the Sun." The Cack fleet followed Moony's fleet into Good Passage and, not wanting to be left behind, the other Solarian ships joined them. The contract was approved after the fact. The combined fleet had grown so much it took hours to transit a gate. Once on the far side we formed up in a defensive sphere formation. Traveling through Good Passage was like walking down a hall of mirrors. Hundreds of transit stations circled the system's star allowing access to nearly any system in the sphere. More than the gates, I was amazed by the number of ships passing through the system. Because of the traffic, it was possible for Shine Like the Sun's entire force to pass through the system unnoticed. Even more stunning was the discovery that this nexus was just one in a chain of such systems stretched across the middle sphere linking the outer worlds to the Cack home world. The volume of trade and traffic was truly incomprehensible and I was only now beginning to get a feel for how vast the Cack Moiarchy really was. I thought back to the two kairograms Dr. Swiftly had shown me back in his lab on space station L5, the  red and blue lines that represented the Cack Moiarchy and the Solarian futures. I just couldn't see how they might ever fade away or how the Solarian worlds could ever grow to anything like this in size. Our scouting drones had already confirmed that Faded Glory had left the middle sphere, but we had no idea what awaited us through the next gate until we reached it. We traveled across the system under H-drive, stopping 1AU short of the opposite gate to give us a chance to re-establish our communications and fleet formations before approaching possible hostile forces. We proceeded the last AU using the matter-antimatter drive to maintain communications. We thought we were ready for  anything. We almost didn't notice what had happened until we were within close visual range of the transit station. Staring into the giant ring-shaped station, we didn't see the distant stars of the inner sphere. Somehow, they had turned the gate off. *   *   * "Is that even possible?" Chris's voice sounding clear over the milnet connection as if he were actually in the empty C&C with me. "As far as I know, this has never been done before." Brian sounded distracted as if he were searching the milnet database. "It's always been assumed that attempting to turn one off would cause the station to collapse into the singularity." "Are there any other gates to the inner sphere?" Cathrine asked. "Three," Phil answered.  "But they are so far apart, that it might actually be faster to travel to the inner sphere under H-drive than go around to another gate." A long moment of silent furious thinking followed.   "I don't suppose Shines Like the Sun keeps any transit station engineers on the payroll?" I asked. "I don't think he anticipated this" Phil looked grim. "Any chance he can call back the jumpships?" Cathrine asked. "That's an option," Phil said.  "But he'd never get enough to move the entire fleet in one jump. Then there's the cost. It is actually cheaper to buy some colony worlds than to operate even one of those ships for one jump." I called up the portions of the transit network the Cacks had shared with us and tried super-imposing it on a map of actual star systems. The transit map was an abstract map of connected stations whose arrangement had nothing to do with their nearness in real space. Two connected stations could appear directly next to each other on the network map while having dozens of other stations between them in real space.   Of course the gate to the inner sphere was a double gate and nobody knew where the system that connected the two was physically located. But as I compared the two maps—something no one had probably ever bothered to do before—I realized that the borders of the inner sphere and the middle sphere were not that far apart. A string of dense nebula, the remains of an ancient chain-reaction of exploded stars deep in the Sagittarius arm of the galaxy, seemed to form the physical boundary between the two economic systems.   "Hey boss, I think I may have something." I shared my display with Phil and flagged the two worlds I found.   "What am I looking at?"   "System A is in the middle sphere just two jumps away. System B is in the inner sphere. They're about a quarter light-year apart. We could cross that distance under H-drive in just a few weeks." "I don't know, that's a pretty thick nebula. I don't think the QWEGs could handle that much mass." "So, we just build up some momentum with the reaction drives before going super-luminal then, when the collected mass builds up too much, we cut the drive and let extra mass slough off." "Let's run this by the Cacks first. Perhaps they can find some locals who know of a passage through the nebula." It took two days of arguing before the Cacks decided my option was really the only viable option. They found some locals that knew of a path through the nebula which passed by a research station where we could stop for repairs if necessary. Considering how hard we were going to have to run the drives, we would probably need it.

 

Chapter 14

"Commander Phon, why have you ordered my crews to perform a full engine inspection?" Ship Commander Brennon glared at me from my video display. "That will waste an entire day! A full inspection isn't due for nearly two weeks. A routine service inspection should be good enough."
 I looked back at him coolly unimpressed with his displeasure. I had already made my request through normal channels, but it had gone ignored, so I went around the normal chain of command and had instructed his Chief Engineer, Michael Droemer, to take care of it. "Under normal circumstances I'd agree, but we're going to be traveling under H-drive for some time." "What do you mean?" "If you paid attention to the daily briefing, you'd know the fleet will be traveling between two star systems that are not directly connected by transit stations. They are about a quarter light-year apart and we're going to make the trip in about a month or less." "A month?" "Or less." "That's not possible." "We may have to skip a few routine service inspections, thus the full inspection now." "You can't do that! The QWEGs and the engines must be shut down and serviced after every ten hours of use." "We'll have to find a way to make do with less." "But, what about the support craft? Many of them can't even make C2." "They'll have to forego servicing entirely." "They'll never make it. The QWEGs will destroy themselves and possibly the whole ship as well." I hesitated. This was true and I wasn't happy about this part of the plan, but then we were just about to take on the entire Moiarchy, and this part of the journey was the closest thing to danger the support craft were likely to face. "Most should make it." "Whose stupid idea is this?" "Shines Like the Sun." I thought that might shut him up, but after taking a moment to digest the news he muttered. "That stupid Cack is going to get us all killed." "Would you like to log a formal protest?" I asked. "Of course not. How stupid do you think I am? But I would like to know why." "The short answer is that Faded Glory has disabled the gate to the inner sphere. The longer answer is that this will allow us to bypass most of any defense force they might have gathered and allow us to strike deep into the heart of the Moiarchy. Shines Like the Sun has been cultivating the loyalty of various nobles for years. He believes that a strong show of force now will convince them to switch their allegiance to him. "I sure hope it's worth it." "If this works, the war may be over before it starts." "Sounds like famous last words." * * * In interstellar space, there is no sense of movement. Not even at a relative speed of three times the speed of light. The Torchbearer just seemed to hang alone in the infinite darkness. Another ship could be inches from the hull and yet be completely undetectable without the gravimetric sensors. The cosmic dust and hydrogen we encountered along the way would simply be scooped up and carried along as it fell within the field of the Quantum Wave Effect Generator. If we were to hit a ship that was not traveling under the power of the H-drive, that ship would find itself torn apart at the atomic level and spread across our hull. No one knew what would result from a collision of two ships with active QWEG fields. Two Cybernetic Awarenesses trying to observe two objects with overlapping fields would probably collapse the fields unevenly. It would almost certainly destroy both ships, though how violently was anyone's guess.

The engines ran for days and the engineers, the few times one saw them outside the engine room, appeared tense and quiet. The ship's commander stepped up the crew's routine inspections for matter degradation due to the increased time spent under H-drive and to keep the crew occupied. Once, when a section of hull was found to have lost a small but measurable amount of mass, commander Brennon shut down the QWEGs and waited in empty space while repair crews reinforced it. This made the ship late to arrive at one of the few prearranged meeting points and upset Sunshine considerably. Yet at every stop, one or two support ships failed to arrive. It wasn't known whether they had merely fallen behind, been left crippled in the depths of interstellar space, or been destroyed. The slower support craft, however, never stopped for service inspections and no one would know how many would survive the trip until those who did arrived at their final destination. Without the supply ships, the force quickly began to run out of both food and spare parts. The supply masters would barter with each other for what they needed at each repair stop, but it became increasingly difficult to find critical components. This became a special problem for the Torchbearer about a week and a half into the trip. I had been sitting in my office/quarters endlessly rerunning the last fleet simulation trying to come up with a better strategy when the H-drive suddenly quit. I didn't realize it until I glanced up at the gravimetric sensors and noticed the tail end of the fleet speeding away from us at three times the speed of light. I flashed messaged the duty officer on the bridge, a Ship's Sub-Commander Joanna Torres. "What's happened?" "Equipment failure," came the terse reply. "It's not the AI is it?" That was the one part of the ship that was irreplaceable. The AI had to be grown into the ship and took years to train into something useful. "No. The master engineer says it's the QWEGs." "Is it reparable?" "It would be...." "But?" "But we don't have the parts for it and—oh, blast it!" "What is it?" "We've lost power as well." "One of the TCR generators?" "All the TCR generators!" This was not something fixable. Unless one could somehow recognize, locate and capture a tachyon in the wild, it took a working TCR to start another reactor—one of the reasons the technology could be traced almost solely back to the Cacks who got it from the Crawdads. We Solarians had stolen the technology from a captured Cack scouting craft just before the war. The sick feeling of disaster hit me like a punch in the stomach. "How is that even possible?" "I don't know yet." I glanced at the gravimetric sensors. "What about the other six ships?" "What ships?" I tagged my gravimetric data for her. We were sitting in between six other ships all sitting dead in space. "That's not good," she said. I picked a ship at random and sent off a message querying their status. They were doing the same thing, asking if we could relight their engines. Fortunately their QWEGs were still functional. Time logs, however, showed they had all lost their power at about the same time just a few microseconds before we lost ours—almost the same moment our QWEGs malfunctioned. The fleet had noticed our absence and was returning to find out what had happened. They wouldn't have stopped for the support craft, but they couldn't afford to lose a single warship much less seven.

The support craft were left to look out for each other and were probably better equipped to do that. "It looks like the fleet is coming to our rescue. Let me know if you can find what you need on one of the other ships." "Commander Brennon is on his way to the bridge to take command, but I'll let him know." I sat in my room as long as I could stand it, then slaved my com to my netpiece and went out prowling through the ship. I ended up in the empty C&C and pulled up the holo display of the fleet, then booted up all my com screens. When I could take it no longer, I flash messaged commander Brennon. He ignored the first couple of attempts then answered before I could initiate a command override of his com system. "What's the status of the reactors?" "We'll have them lit in a moment." "Good. And the QWEGs?" "We're working on them," came the irritated response. "When are they coming back online?" "Look, I already have Sunshine breathing down my neck. However long it takes, it's going to be even longer if everyone keeps interrupting me." I ignored his insubordination for the moment. "Have you found parts?" "No. The ship engineers have already set up a parts-exchange throughout the fleet. If anyone needs anything, all the engineers know about it. We've checked with all the other ships. No one has the parts we need." "Can you fabricate them?" "Yes, but it will take a few days." "That's not acceptable. Have you checked with the Cack engineers?" "No. Their equipment is not compatible. But Sunshine is sending some engineers over anyway." I left the bridge and headed for engineering. Most of the ship's critical components were buried in the core of the vessel. Engineering, however, was in the rear third of the ship, sandwiched between the TCR power plant with their massive anti-matter batteries and both the QWEGs and the AI/com hub. I opened a hatch and drifted down a tube that was nothing more than the twisted space between data cables, and environmental and power conduit. The feeling of living in the bowels of a giant machine was more pronounced now than ever. I came across an assistant power technician. "Where's the chief?" "Sir?" The kid tried to come to attention in zero-G then hastily pointed to a group of people huddled in a cloud of floating debris. For a moment I feared something had exploded, then I realized the chief master engineer was directing a bunch of technicians in dismantling some equipment while a swirl of assistant technicians brought requested tools and took away removed parts. "Thanks." I drifted over and watched, knowing better than to interrupt. A group of Cacks wearing strange belts strapped to their bodies with rows of tools and equipment, brought in a large plastic lump. How they got the thing into the room, I had no idea. There must have been some sort of cargo entrance I didn't know about. The lump turned out to be some sort of odd shaped crate which they opened up and pulled out a strange glittering multi-branched piece of equipment. At least I assumed it was equipment as they pushed and pulled it around, apparently trying to fit it to our equipment while chittering loudly to each other. It looked something like an enormous dark ceramic bonsai tree. Once our engineers had the area cleared, they mostly stood back and watched the Cack technicians work. Chief Droemer noticed me and came over. He was a squat late-middle-aged fellow who looked like he'd been built for muscling heavy equipment around in tight spaces. "Think that will work?" I asked. "It better. They ripped out the entire quantum phase interferometer." "We'll just have to assume they know what they're doing. They did get to space before us." He watched them while stroking his bristly salt and pepper mustache. "I suppose..." "If you want to continue fabricating the failed parts, however, I wouldn't blame you." Chief Droemer grimaced. "Oh, we're doing that right enough. I just hope we can finish before their tree wilts or something." "Any idea what caused this?" "Near as we can tell, the QWEGs failed due to normal matter degradation. Somehow this caused stray particles to enter the reactor which interacted with the tachyon stream, flooding the reactors with virtual particles and causing the tachyons that actually sustained the process to get lost in the shuffle." I had been around spaceship engineers all my life, so one might think that some of this kind of talk would have sunk in by now, but I was struggling to just get the general idea of what he was saying. "So this explosion of virtual particles snuffed out the cascade reaction?" "You could say that." "Could they have affected the other ships?" "Absolutely." "Even though the logs show their reactors failed before ours?" "That would be expected. Tachyons naturally move faster than light and thus backwards in time. As the number of virtual particles increased into the past, they could easily have caused similar interactions with the other ships' power systems." "Right, well, I'll leave you to it then." Not having anything useful to do, I returned to my quarters. On the way I noticed how irritable the crew was. Having been locked away for most of the trip, I hadn't realized how great a toll the fear of spending eternity trapped in a lightless void had taken on the crew's moral. The research station was still three days hard travel away. I hoped our delay wouldn't cause Shines Like the Sun to cancel the anticipated leave. The crews needed a chance for rest and recreation almost as badly as the ships needed supplies.

 

Chapter 15

The spacer flew out of the dining room's doors and hit the corridor wall followed by a flying tray of food and another spacer who grabbed the first spacer's uniform and drew back her right arm to punch him in the face.
 "What's going on here?" I demanded as I hurried toward them. Seeing an officer's tab on my flightsuit—I had taken to wearing them of late to help restore the fraying order among the crew—the two spacers shrugged to a surly form of attention, their glaring eyes focused on the mess on the floor. "I-I stumbled, sir" said the man who had hit the wall. I caught the second spacer's eye. "And you?" "I was helping him, sir," she said sheepishly. I slowly drew my gaze across both the spacers and the plates spilled across the floor. "Clean this mess up. You know you're not supposed to have food outside the dining room." "Yes, sir," they sighed. "And I want you both to go to your quarters afterwards. It appears fatigue has affected your coordination." "Yes, sir." I walked away shaking my head. The crews were getting too keyed up. Even on leave, the stress of the impending conflict was beginning to tell on them. I thought about heading back to my own quarters, but realized I was too wound up to rest. Instead I went to C&C. The net piece was probably just as effective for dealing with whatever messaging was required, but I couldn't resist calling up every tac display and holographic monitor at my disposal. I surrounded myself in glowing rectangles of light. Images of the research facility, the fleet and nearby asteroids, circling tagged and labeled, provided a comfortable illusion of order. I couldn't help feeling that the illusion would not last long, that it might even now be fraying. I considered messaging Cathrine, but we had just taken leave together and finished that date we had started back on Good Passage. It had seemed to go well, but we'd both been distracted with urgent problem messages. Then one of those awkward silences fell where neither one of us knew what to say. We ended up watching crewmembers singing karaoke in the bar which ultimate evolved into an improve talent show. It was pleasant but somehow vaguely disappointing. I'm not even sure what I had been expecting, but I don't think it rose to her expectations either. I flash messaged Phil. It took a minute, but he answered more quickly than I had expected. "Ken, you're calling from C&C. What's wrong?" "You're not answering my messages. What's happening?" Irritation flashed on Phil's face, then quickly faded to fatigue and worry. "I'm sorry Ken. I haven't been avoiding you. Things have just been crazy." "No dissension in the ranks is there? Any of the fleet commanders backing out now that they know Sunshine's true plans?" "No. Everyone is spoiling for a fight. In fact, if we don't cross into the inner sphere soon, I think they'll just rip out each other's throats." "Oh? What's happening?" Phil waived his hand helplessly. "Everything. I've got a dozen complaints about our men from the other fleet commanders, from our ships taking more than our share of allocated supplies to an incident involving some of Sherman's spacers and an attempt to commandeer a pub on the research station." I laughed. "And then there are the complaints from the Cack merchants." "Their complaints? They're the ones robbing our crew with their prices." I froze, noticing out of the corner of my eye something moving on the monitors.

"What is it?" Phil asked. I cycled through a series of sensors, external cameras and ship navigational displays. "It's the Black Adder." "The Adder? Isn't she one of Moony's ships?" "Yes. It looks like—she's launched breaching pods?" "What? Why?" I looked at Phil's exhausted face. "I don't know, maybe it's an exercise. Why don't you let me handle it?" "Would you? I'd really appreciate it. Thanks, Ken. I owe you one." Looking relieved, Phil disconnected. I sorted through the ship-to-ship com channels trying to find the one the Black Adder was using. That I was able to even see them was one of the advantages of being a fleet officer. "—right now! You haven't any right to hold him!" came the angry voice from one of Moony's breaching pods. "I repeat, back away from the ship or we will be forced to fire upon you." The reply came from the Star Jumper, one of Sherman's ships. "He was trying to stop the fight, he wasn't involved...." I noticed the other breaching pods moving into assault position. This was going to get ugly fast. I punched up the com panel and paged the bridge. First officer Joanna Torres answered. "Bridge here. What can I do for you C&C?" "Go to FAS Delta and sound the acceleration alarm." Torres blinked several times very rapidly. "I'll have to inform the ship's commander." "You'll do it now on my authority. He'll find out soon enough." "Yes, sir." The lights flickered and panels that, until that moment had appeared as normal wall panels, suddenly lit up with an orange light and a FAS delta symbol appeared. At the same time sirens blared and two synthetic voices called out, "Fleet Alert Stance Delta. Danger is likely. All crew, prepare for acceleration." "Do you have a course heading?" Torres asked coolly. "Put us along Star Jumper's left side as fast as you can. Make us close enough I could lean out and kiss her hull." "Yes, sir." I turned up the volume on the com panel as the announcements blared. "Let him go, or we'll come in and get him," one of the guys in the breaching pod threatened. Alarms flashed on my tac display. Star Jumper had activated their targeting radar. Somewhere bulkheads were sealing and umbilical tubes and cables were snapping free. The station ports master was probably freaking out. I could only hope he released the ship before we tore the docking clamps free. A chime sounded on my com panel. Commander Brennon was calling. I tapped the connect icon. "Phon! What are you doing commandeering my ship?" "Sorry commander, I haven't time to explain. But I suggest you find something to hang on to." I killed the connection. The Torchbearer leaped forward at something close to two gravities. Torres re-appeared on my com panel a little stiffer than usual. "Sir, there's a breaching pod in our path." "Put us between the pod and the Jumper. Nudge the pod out of the way if you have to." "Nudge, sir? Yes, sir." Her tone sounded more like, I tried to warn you. Then, barely audible, "Man, is he going to be pissed." The Torchbearer decelerated just as hard, causing my crash pod to rock forward on its hydraulics. I feared I'd hear a loud thump from hitting the pod, but of course the pod was nowhere massive enough to register against the Torchbearer's hull. It was probably even now shooting off in some random direction. That's when I realized the "he" Torres had been referring to was the pod's pilot.

A page icon buzzed angrily. The Star Jumper was trying to contact us. I took the call. "Torchbearer! What do you think you're doing?" "You looked like you could use some help, commander." "I most certainly do not! Go away. We can deal with you too, you know." "Now let's be reasonable—" "Sir," Torres cut in. "The Jumper's got a weapon's lock on us." The commander of the Star Jumper was already yelling at someone off-camera. "No, I didn't send for him! I'll take care of him, then you're next." A new com panel opened up with a page icon from one of the breaching pods. Without thinking, I accepted it and another voice began yammering at me. At the same time, I noticed three more ships arriving. One was from Sherman's fleet and the other two were attached to Moony's fleet. "Sir, I've got multiple weapon locks. It's from a squadron of Cack warships and they're approaching on an attack vector." Oh, great, I thought. Now what? Yet another com panel opened up, this one with a fleet command override. It was Shines Like the Sun. "Sherman! Phon! You are committing ignorance! Undoing me is fighting among yourselves. We all will being undone. If making me your enemy, the Indwellers among us will destroy you." Several tense moments followed where the push of a button could have ended the whole expedition, but then the Star Jumper took its weapons off-line. The pods withdrew and later Sherman agreed to turn the prisoner he had arrested over to Moony's custody. Moony also agreed to pay for the damages in the pub where the whole conflict started, but knowing his reputation, I doubted he intended to keep his end of the agreement. * * * The fleet eventually made it to a system whose name translated as something like Peanut. Though it lay deep in the nebula, it was connected to the worlds of the inner sphere by a single transit station. The Cacks, anticipating the possibility of our arrival, had withdrawn every space-based asset in the system, leaving the locals trapped on their world. Even the gate defensive systems had been pulled as if its defense wasn't worth the effort. The Peanut system was just a single spur off a ring of local systems connecting to the broader network through a single transit station. "If they're going to try to stop us, that's the place," Phil said. The Cacks, having always been a little reticent of giving us too much information about the worlds of their Moiarchy, had only now parceled out some additional maps of the local systems. We poured over the charts trying to anticipate Righteous Ruler's actions and could reach no other conclusion but that if he intended to fight us at all, it would have to be where the local ring of systems joined with the rest of the inner sphere. Once we were past that point, there were too many paths and too many transit connections to bottle us up. The whole of the inner worlds would lay defenseless before us. As we transited through the ring, we passed through several systems all of which had been stripped bare. Finally we stopped just outside the last system. Here the fleet commanders made last minute preparations for war. Soon the final battle to determine who would rule the Moiarchy of Those Who Dwell Within would commence. After the fleet commanders had transmitted their latest battle plans and formations, Shines Like the Sun addressed the fleet. He appeared simultaneously on every display and smart surface on every ship in bright plastic plumage that was, if anything, brighter and more elaborate than ever. He clacked and chittered before the monitors while his best human translator, having been well briefed before the address, translated for the Solarians. "Warriors of He Who Looks Up, I am not leading you into battle because I lack ships and crews of my own. No, the reason I sought your help was that I consider you to be more efficient and more effective than even large numbers of Those Who Dwell Within. I am counting on you proving you deserve the freedom from my father's Moiarchy which you enjoy. "In order that you may know what kind of enemy you will be fighting, let me tell you of my own combat experience. Your enemy's numbers will be enormous, they will charge aggressively and their missiles and energy weapons will fill your displays and dazzle you. I am ashamed to say, however, that they will not fight well at all once you are inside the firing arcs of their weapons. "The fleet of Those Who Dwell Within is comprised of a dozen space-faring species, each with their own languages and protocols. They cannot coordinate as you do, effectively turning entire fleets of ships into a single massive weapon. They rely on their energy weapons and their speed. They hit and they run. They have no troopers as you do and are unprepared to board your ships or resist your boarders. "If you can hold your courage and formation, and if the Great Maker aids me, I shall see to it that those of you who choose to go home will be the envy of his friends, while those who stay with me shall live like kings." This caused quite a commotion and I actually heard cheering in the corridors of the Torchbearer as the crew stopped in the midst of their duties and listened to the speech wherever they happened to be. "Now, no doubt, there are older and more experienced men among you who have heard similar promises from other employers who have failed to make good on them. They may even say that it is easy for me to make such generous promises now when the expedition is at such a critical point and we will soon be facing battle, but that if things turn out well, I will quickly forget those promises." Shines Like the Sun made a strange melodious hooting. The human translator laughed. "Warriors, the Moiarchy of my father lies before us. It stretches across the galactic arm from the sparse outer worlds to where the radiation of the core makes habitation impractical. My brother's friends currently manage all the countless worlds between. When I am ruler, I will have to find people I can trust to manage them. As you can see, I am more afraid of running out of friends than I am of running out of things to give them. If we are successful and you wish to stay with me, each of you may well rule an entire world." The crew exploded in cheers and shouts of approval. Not a single man or woman even remembered their prior fears of taking on the largest space force in the galaxy. The rewards they fantasized about had driven out any other thoughts. Even the fleet commanders had such thoughts in the back of their minds when they discussed the formation of the fleets, insisting Shines Like the Sun's ship Flower of Dirt take a position safely behind the force. "If authentically being a son of my father, forcing Righteous Ruler to the fight," Shines Like the Sun replied. "I doing no less intentionally being the one killing him."

 

Chapter 16

As the fleet formed up in battle array, deserters from Rightous Ruler's fleet began to trickle in, providing important information about his fleet's size, formation and movement. That's how we learned that Righteous Ruler's fleet outnumbered ours by nearly ten to one and was still growing. To deal with the size discrepancy, we had the combined Solarian/Cack fleet form up in a convex lens shape with Shines Like the Sun's flagship at the center in the forward convex portion of the lens surrounded by his elite guard. Circling Winds and Most Noble took positions above and below him. Sherman was in charge of the right side formation, his fleet taking a position on the edge of the lens with Phil's fleet between him and the Cacks. Moony was in charge of the left. This formation allowed us to maximize the space occupied by the fleet and, hopefully, prevent the larger Cack fleet from outflanking us. Once arranged, we sent the first wave of ships through the transit station. They secured the far side of the gate, including the outbound lane, which allowed us to turn the near gate's inbound lane into a second outbound lane. This cut the transit time in half and provided a moment of disorientation while watching two columns of ships move toward each other as if in a head-on collision at the ring's center. Even knowing the colliding ships would instantly appear, hundreds of light-years away, leaving another station in opposite directions didn't lessen the unease. On the far side, we traveled about 150AU into the system under H-drive before stopping to reform the fleet and reseeded the EPR transceivers with phase-entangled particles to ensure the communication network's bandwidth was at its maximum. Having saved up the TCR generators' waste anti-matter, we proceeded across the system under heavy acceleration. It was not long before our gravimetric sensors began picking up large numbers of massive objects guarding the far gate. It appeared Righteous Ruler would fight after all. Nearing the far transit station, we launched drone scout craft. They traveled under standard matter/antimatter reaction drives, but as they could accelerate much faster than a human or Cack body could stand, the remotely operated drones would arrive days before we did. Since they were equipped with EPR transceivers, we wouldn't have to wait for the slow speed of light to carry our reconnaissance data. Sitting at my duty station, tapping nervously on the edge of my console, I waited online with my fellow strategic officers breathing into their audio pickups for the drones to crawl within visual range of the targets. When the first images appeared, I sat up, stunned.  There were no warships.  "They're gone!" Maxwell, Sherman's strat-o, shouted into his pickup.  "Are you sure?  Perhaps it's a trap." Dexter, Moony's strat-o, suggested.               "It appears every missing transit defense system has been towed to this spot," another of Smith's strat-o's said.  "It's as if the Cacks had been preparing for a last stand defense of the inner worlds, but had been interrupted." I moved one of my drones closer.  "The missile racks are empty. From what I can see, all the missiles and defensive weapons systems have either been removed or hastily destroyed." We left the drones to inspect the equipment around the transit station, but long before the fleet arrived it became clear that the Cacks had given up on defending it. At this point it was later said that Shines Like the Sun's paid his personal oracle a fortune for predicting that he would see the light of the inner sphere before he would see the enemy. Sunshine said that if Righteous Ruler would not do battle here, he wasn't planning to fight them at all. That was also when his friends began referring to him as The Ruler. * * * For days we traveled deep into the inner sphere. Everywhere we went we saw signs of the Cack fleet's passage, mostly in the form of stripped or missing space assets, but no signs of any defenders. Our supplies were running very low and many of our ships were struggling to maintain equipment already strained to the breaking point. Getting supplies would be very difficult without climbing down into a gravity well, and landing any sort of shuttlecraft on a planet's surface was fraught with unacceptable levels of danger. We got lucky in a couple of instances and found research or resupplying facilities hidden in asteroids. But even those had largely been stripped of anything useful. As we traveled from system to system, never finding the enemy or the resources we needed, I began to wonder if perhaps this were all part of Righteous Ruler's plan. I suggested to Phil that Righteous Ruler might be using the very size of the Moiarchy against us. The sheer challenge of crossing this vast Moiarchy we meant to conquer, without aid or resupply, would surely either dispirit or destroy us for him. Phil thought the idea had merit and passed the idea up to Shines Like the Sun's strat-o's, but they only repeated Sunshine's belief that his brother would have to fight if he meant to rule. As far as we could tell, the Cacks believed that if he failed to launch an aggressive defense of the Moiarchy, the other nobles would fail to support his rule and it would collapse on its own. We set a course for the Cack home world, our invasion turning into more of a victory procession. The Cacks began declaring Shines Like the Sun's rule to all the stripped and huddled worlds we passed along the way. The fleet didn't bother with the tedious process of reforming the fleet and re-seeding the communications network as we transited from system to system and as a result the fleet stretched back in a line through three or four systems. The alert stance was dropped from FAS-Delta to FAS-Beta: danger possible, which meant that routine scans for enemy were made and no vital combat systems were taken off-line for repairs or maintenance in case the alert stance were to be raised. After several days of traveling like this we straggled into a system the Cacks had selected for a temporary rest and resupply when a manned scout ship came screaming back to us broadcasting warnings on Solarian and Cack channels. "The Ruler is attacking!" The fleet went to FAS-Gamma and the Cack warships began gathering in battle formation. Since much of the Solarian fleet lay scattered behind us, it took most of the day for the fleet to gather. Early reports from the scout craft confirmed Righteous Ruler's fleet outnumbered us ten to one. While we returned to our lens formation, Righteous Ruler's massive fleet transited through the gate on the far side of our star system and formed a standard defensive sphere. Had they used their H-drives to go super-luminal, they would have caught us unprepared with half our ships still missing. But once they formed up, they used their gravitic drives and advanced toward us at the stately speed of light. That gave us at least ten hours to get our act together and to prepare to fight them. It also gave us ten hours to sit and worry as we watched them approach. 
 
 * * * Author's Note * * * Thank you for sticking with this story so far.  I hope you're enjoying it.  However you feel, please feel free to leave comments.  They help motivate me to write and to improve the story.  And, as always, votes are much appreciated. Next chapter: the shooting begins, immediately followed by disaster.

 

Chapter 17

I sat alone in C&C suffering through constant two G acceleration as an irritating trickle of sweat ran down the small of my back. I checked my pressure suit helmet strapped to the side of acceleration couch, ensuring it was properly secured against rapid manuvering and resisted the urge to seal the crash pod. In the event of depressurization it would automatically do that, but as I sat nervously waiting for first contact, there wasn't much for me to do. All the planning had been accomplished beforehand.
 "How's it going over there?" Cathrine asked on a private channel. I tried to sound nonchalant. "Just waiting." "I know. It's driving me crazy." I chuckled, testing the com links to my wing for at least the dozenth time. "Why aren't they going trans-luminal?" Cathrine asked. "The Cacks prefer hit and run tactics." "I heard a rumor that they've hired a Solarian strategist. It looks like he's enforcing unit discipline. Since the H-drive would normally sever the EPR transceiver links, their use of grav-drive means they plan to use organized fleet-wide tactics." "This could be a little tough." I punched up the gravimetric sensors. There was no way our lens formation, as thin as it was, could hold back a properly trained Cack fleet. We would be forced into a conical formation as we plunged into the enemy's formation and, unless we quickly took out Righteous Ruler's flagship at its center, we would ultimately be forced into a defensive sphere as our smaller fleet was surrounded and overwhelmed. In addition to their numbers, the Cack's grav-drives gave them another advantage. It allowed them to attack at the speed of light without severing their EPR connections. However it made them show up on the gravimetric sensors like a tight swarm of fast-moving planets. Though the matter-antimatter engines of our own fleet plunged us forward under multiple gravities, we seemed to crawl in comparison. "I heard Sherman and Shines Like the Sun argued over the fleet formation when they saw Righteous Ruler's fleet," Cathrine said. "Oh?" "Yes. Shines Like the Sun wanted to use a conical formation and drive straight for the center of the enemy formation. As he put it, we only have to defeat his brother, not the entire fleet." "Good point. I take it Sherman was not convinced." "No, he was afraid the more aggressive formation would be too easily bogged down and overwhelmed." As we watched the enemy's slow advance, our conversation faded out. Though they approached across the system at light speed, watching them on the gravitic sensors was like watching a time-lapse simulation of two galaxies colliding over the course of billions of years. A message flashed on my monitor and, to my surprise, it was a personal message request from Shines Like the Sun himself. I accepted. "Yes, sir. How may I help you?" Sunshine listened to the translation click and chitter, then replied. "Contacting Commanders of the winged fleet, I seeking status of readiness." "All wings report they are ready for combat. Do you have any further instructions for them?" "Reporting, please, to the crews the oracle saying the futures of our success predominates." "Yes, sir." The Cacks had three oracles on staff and didn't make a move without consulting at least one of them. They had even asked for my kairogram earlier saying they could combine all such kairograms into a composite represented the fleet. I only hoped it would actually help us.

I relayed Sunshine's report about the oracle's observations and then continued to wait and watch as the two fleets slowly drew to within attack range. Alerts flashed on my display. The ships at the leading edge began firing their missiles. As the two fleets neared, the ring of ships firing missiles grew wider. The first flare of exploding anti-missile missiles flashed and somewhere in there the remotely piloted fighters were flying toward each other. I felt the blood pounding in my veins and forced my breathing to slow. I thought about the hundreds of troopers waiting in their cramped breaching pods, just waiting for the enemy to come within range for the troopers to make their attack. I knew the waiting would be worse for them, yet I couldn't see Kouvaras or any of his men showing any nervousness. "What's happening?" Chris Knight asked on the fleet command channel. I double checked the gravimetric scanners. "Am I seeing what I think I'm seeing?" "They're starting to flee," Brian Harlow said. Sure enough, the ships along the edge of the sphere, part of the enemy formation which had not even made contact with our fleet yet, were breaking off and flying away. Our plan called on the entire fleet to reduce thrust as the center made contact so we could maintain formation, but our ships along the edge of the lens continued accelerating, eager to attack the Cacks as their formation began to break apart. "This isn't right," I said. "They're up to something." My crash chamber lurched forward as the Torchbearer cut its engines throwing us into temporary weightlessness. My tac display lit up with scores of missiles being magnetically launched each second, their internal clocks counting down the milliseconds to the moment when a couple of hundred A/M engines would fire, sending a wave of destruction raining down on the nearest Cack ship. While most of the missiles would be destroyed by the Cacks' energy weapons, not many would need to make it through their point defenses. The ASM 629 "doorknockers" would collapse their remaining fuel/payload in an antimatter explosion as soon as they were within blast range. The ASM 830 "ice picks" would fire their forward anti-matter engine moments before impact, burrowing deep into the enemy ship before exploding. Usually, by the time a Cack warship had dealt with the first attack wave, the suddenly very close Solarian ship had already launched the second wave of missiles which would hide the fighter craft. These would buzz around inside the firing arcs of the Cack ship's weapons and take the ship apart. If the Cack ship was still putting up a fight when the Solarian ship came into close range, the breaching pods would generally finish them off. I flash messaged the captains along the outer edge of our wing. "Maintain formation!" The Cacks were still retreating along the edge of their formation, leaving the hardened core around the ruler's flagship. Our own ships were beginning to break formation in pursuit, but we didn't have the depth of numbers they had, leaving Shines Like the Sun and his core of Cack ships increasingly vulnerable. Even as I watched, Righeous Ruler and his elite guard of warships were swinging around Moony's side of our formation. "Arg!" I slammed a fist against the side of the crash chamber then called out on the command channel, "It's a feint! It's a trap! We have to rally the ships—" A giant hammer fell on us and the Torchbearer lurched sideways. The power went out leaving me in thundering darkness. I counted three and a half seconds, three and a half slices of eternity before the emergency lights struggled on. My displays flickered through their connection routines, but my thermometer icons indicated I had lost nearly all my ship-to-ship bandwidth. I began closing down displays to conserve bandwidth and tried to open a single channel to Phil. After too many seconds, a stuttering pixilated video feed appeared on my screen.

"Ken, what's wrong?" "I think we've been hit. I've lost most of my ship-to-ship. Can you get Fleet Officer Anderson?" Phil paused. "Yes." "Tell her she's in charge of the wing until I can get my coms back up. I'll re-establish contact as soon as I can" "Acknowledged. Good luck." I called up the video feed from the bridge. It would be suicidally stupid to interfere with Commander Brennan's running of the ship, but I had to see what was going on. I risked my bandwidth and called up some internal ship data-feeds to try and determine the extent of the damage. "Target their forward weapons array," Brennon ordered. "I can't, sir," his tactical officer replied. "All targeting systems are out." "Switch to manual." "Yes, sir. Switching to manual targeting." "Fire as soon as you've acquired the target." A Cack warship waited motionless before us. It didn't take long. "Target acquired. Firing...no response from main guns." "All forward missile batteries fire." "I'm getting a red light," Mia, his tac officer said. "I've got damaged launchers on left and right sides." Brennon slammed his fist on the side of his crash pod, then stabbed the engineering icon with his thumb. The moment Chief Droemer's image appeared on the screen—before he could acknowledge his commander's call—Brennon barked out. "Damage report: all stations." "Heavy damage in fore and aft hulls. Main guns out, targeting out, navigation out, life support out, I've got functional missile launchers on third and fourth batteries, but the bay doors are jammed." "Direct repair crews there first," Brennon ordered. "Tell them to cut the hull off if they have to!" The engineer punched in instructions off-screen. "Continue," Brennon said. "We have hull breaches on all decks along the left side. The engine room took severe damage. Main power is out. The CA is functioning on reserve power...." The officer hesitated a moment as he read the next item. "The reactor is out." "What? Main and reserve?" "Yes, sir." "Antimatter reserves?" "I had to blow most of it out when the magnetic fields collapsed. We've only got what little is left in the fuel system." Everyone on the bridge froze. The silence of the non-functioning air handlers suddenly pressed in on me. The ship had only the reserve fuel cells for power. It was barely enough to power the critical ship functions and that would only last for a few hours, or even just minutes depending on use. There would be no H-drive, no reaction drive and no way home. "Does anything work?" Brennon demanded. "We have one operational reaction engine." "One reaction engine," Brennon muttered darkly. "I have half a mind to ram them." Brennon sat on the bridge and stewed. I checked the gravimetrics and it seemed that the nearest Cack ship, which must have been the one to hit us, was already engaging another passing ship. He probably tagged us as a war prize and was looking to catch other ships. Suddenly a message light flashed on my console. Brennon, unaware I had connected to the bridge was paging me. "C&C, are you there?" "Yes, C&C here." "Are there any ships in this area who can come to our aid?" I didn't tell him that I was mostly relying on the Torchbearers own sensors since most of my ship-to–ship bandwidth was gone. "All ships in this area are engaging the enemy," I said. I pulled up my tactical display. Our formation had gone from a convex lens to a concave— almost bowl shape with the enemy filling the interior. "The Cack center formations are moving toward us as the enemy's wings are pushed back. If we can last until the rest of our fleet overtakes us, we might be able to dock with one of the support ships." I didn't voice my estimate of the likelihood of that happening. "What is he doing?" Brennon asked. It took me a moment to realize he had forgotten me and was staring at his own monitor. I cloned his monitor and copied it to one of my dead ship-to–ship monitors. The Cack warship that had struck us was performing some sort of maneuver that involved drawing very close to us with his gun ports open. "Energy spike!" the tactical officer said. "They're charging weapons!" "Rotate the ship!" Brennon ordered. "Don't let him focus those beams on a single point." "Brace for acceleration," the helmsman called out. He didn't wait the regulation warning period, just slapped the warning siren and began turning the ship. The Torchbearer responded sluggishly. The Cack ship fired, but the blast missed us completely. It maneuvered again and fired, but that attack missed us by an even wider margin. "They're not trying to hit us," I said. "But, what are they—?," the tac officer began. "They're using us as cover." I said. "They may even be using our distress signal to draw more ships in. The rest of our fleet is just now coming into range." Brennon slammed his fist on the side of his crash pod. "I will not have them using us as bait to attack our own fleet. One reaction engine! What can I do with one reaction drive? Helmsman, do you think you could maneuver us to catch the Cack ship in our exhaust?" "I doubt it, sir. With only one engine, she'll be slow to respond." "Without navigation," I warned, "we probably couldn't maneuver close enough without just ramming it. Plus, with their hull armor, we'd have to maintain the same relative position for several minutes against our own thrust and that's before you factor in the effects of their magnetic shielding." "Thank you, C&C. That will be enough." Brennon fumed silently for several long seconds. "We can't just sit here and wait to be taken as a war prize. I, for one, have no desire to become a slave on the Cack home world." An idea popped into my head. It was a crazy, and probably stupid, idea but we were all out of good ones and out of time. "There is one alternative," I said, remembering Brennon's threat to ram the Cack ship. "We'll need to re-code the docking procedures to override the collision avoidance routines and change a few other key parameters such as acceleration. And, of course, it would mean abandoning the ship." Brennon glared at me—actually looking at me in the monitor for the first time. The idea of abandoning his command was an outrageous suggestion. But as he considered the situation he had to come to the same conclusion I did. I saw the first sad hint of despair appear in his eyes. There wasn't much ship left to save anyway.

 

Chapter 18

In less than five minutes, after a brief meeting with commander Brennon and Chief Droemer, I was back in the Argippos while a tech floated with his head in my control panel installing the remote control interface. It would take him longer to install it than it would actually be used, but it was integral to our plans.
 "All done, sir." The technician crawled out from the console and touched a spot on the control pad to activate the new display. "You can control the ship's helm, such as it is, from here." "Very good," I said. "Are the EPR transceivers installed?" He gave me a worried glance as I sat motionless in the pilot's chair, then he tapped his netpiece. "We've removed three transceivers from the ship. One has been installed in a life pod and one in the auxiliary command boarding pod, but we're having difficulties rerouting communication functions in the command craft." "Tell them I don't care if they can watch ISN. Tell them we're going to boost in a couple of minutes, so get the transceiver in now. "Yes, sir." "And call up my tac display before you go strap in." "Yes, sir." The tech gave me another worried look as he punched up my tac display, then left for his life pod. I sat still, not wishing to impair the efficiency of the nano-bots crawling over my body like a wave of oil. The nano-bots issued from a sphere the size and weight of a lead bowling ball which rested under my left hand. The first wave had covered my body and left behind a polymer skin which covered everything but my face. The second wave was leaving behind a network of sensors, actuators and heat/moisture exchangers." "You're taking a risk," Kouvaras said from the breaching pod in which he would command our troopers. "Without sufficient cover, the Cacks will be able to pick us all off at their leisure." "I think I can keep them occupied if Brennon's techs did their job. Can your men do their part? Without you, we really are dead." "If you can get us there alive, we'll do our part, never fear." "Good, have your men stand by. We'll boost as soon as I get the word that everything is ready. Phon out." I sat in the silences of the Argippos trying to slow my heart and breathing. Outside, a titanic struggle was being fought in the silent void of space. Inside, I tried to forget that the Argippos was the fastest ship ever built and that if I were to run, no one could hope to catch me before I got back to Solarian space. The third wave of nano-bots were disassembling the sphere under my hand and begun weaving an iridium-carbon mesh for my armor's outer shell. Underneath it all, my uniform had been disassembled, molecule by molecule, and was migrating to the small of my back where it was being reassembled, cleaned and pressed in a pod forming there. Mentally, I blessed my father for hiring such obsessively skilled programmers. Already my powered armor, unlike the general issue, fit better than any uniform I'd ever worn. On the tac screen, the front line of the battle had swept over us, leaving us behind. All our calls for help had met with replies to the effect of "We'll be back," as each ship left, intent on claiming a prize. We could have easily ended up drifting out here a week—assuming we could get life support working again. I watched our Cack opponent maneuver around a fresh kill. It had survived the conflict largely by staying close and playing dead. One Solarian warship had moved in to claim it and been promptly destroyed. As the zone of conflict left us, the Cack warship began to move off—most likely to claim more prizes. We were about to lose our chance. "Evacuation complete, all personnel are accounted for and waiting in the life pods," Brennon said from the command craft. "All hands brace for acceleration," I said, "in five seconds, four, three, two one...." Our ship lumbered forward on its single reaction drive, chasing the receding Cack warship. "Launching missiles now." With the targeting computer out, I had to paint the enemy ship manually with the laser range finder. Any chance of our attack being effective was slim. But then our attack didn't have to be effective, just creditable.

The missiles must have triggered the Cack's warning systems for the Cack warship turned and decelerated. And in those precious seconds, we reduced the gap between us to a manageable distance. If they had gone FTL or performed any fancy maneuvers, we would have only succeeded in destroying our ship. But, being confident of their superior firepower, they stood their ground—so to speak—and prepared to destroy us. Alarms buzzed as they targeted us. "All craft prepare to launch on my command." I waited until the Cacks started firing their particle weapons, slicing through our forward weapons and sensor arrays. "Launch!" I stabbed the release button sending the Argippos hurtling out into the void. The Cack warship pounded away at the Torchbearer with particle weapons and missiles. It blasted off great chunks, yet the hulk stubbornly refused to break up. The twelve boarding craft, three surviving fighters and numerous life pods drifted among the debris on near intersect courses with the Cack ship whose weapons continued to focus on the Torchbearer. I watched with growing worry. What if the Cack's weapons were not powerful enough? If the Cack ship was destroyed, we would all be doomed again. The front end of the Torchbearer began to boil away under the Cack's energy beams as if it were a falling meteor entering the atmosphere of a planet. Already it was frighteningly close to the Cack ship and accelerating. I had always thought of these ships as fragile, but in truth they were hard to destroy. They almost never blew up like in the vids. Well targeted energy weapons while capable of destroying important systems, could punch holes in a ship all day before one could say that it was totally destroyed. Suddenly, a secondary explosion ripped through the hull as one of the mostly-empty anti-matter fuel cells ruptured. I quickly estimated the distance between the ships, praying I hadn't delayed too long. "Attack!" The breaching pods darted through the debris and latched onto the ship like angry barnacles. I followed one of the boarding craft as it raced toward the main hanger bay. The three fighters kept the gunners busy as we slipped in, then peeled away to lend support to the other boarding craft burrowing through the Cack's armor. By the time I docked the Argippos and got out, the troopers had taken up defensive fire positions and secured the outer hanger. A Cack silhouette moved across my suit's heads-up display. I spun and took him out with the suit's built-in particle emission gun. I felt foolish when I realized it was just a Cack technician. Kouvaras' face was stony. "Sir, this way." I leaped towards him and switched to the command channel. "Sir, we don't use the PEGs inside the ship. Too dangerous." I nodded, feeling even more foolish. "Right." We caught up with the rest of the squad outside the door to the hanger control deck. The troopers all had their Magnetically Accelerated Flechette Launchers at the ready, though Breiner was aiming something that looked like a portable rocket launcher at the door. Kouvaras made a hand gesture and I held my breath as Breiner pulled the trigger. To my surprise, a paste squirted out and plastered itself across the door. Cassidy shone a low energy laser on the paste to "feed" the nano-bots which began eating through the metal. Before the hole was wide enough to crawl through, the troopers began firing their MAFLs. Thousands of tiny metal shards shredded the Cacks inside as if they had been caught in an explosion. Kouvaras held up his hand and the firing stopped. Another gesture and Redburn slowly tossed a small sphere through the hole in the door. It drifted into the room scanning it for threats while the team watched on their built-in helmet monitors. Though the nano-bots were programmed to go inert after consuming a specific amount of material, another gesture from Kouvaras brought Fuche up who sprayed the door with a chemical command telling the nano-bots to disassemble themselves. Cassidy and Marcello leaped through the door and secured the room, then opened it for the others.

Kouvaras drifted over to the room's com panels and pointed at a data port. "Put the AI in here." Redburn unstrapped something from his back and plugged it in. "You two," Kouvaras pointed at Redburn and Cruze, stay here and hold the hanger. Signal the life boats that it is OK to begin docking." "Isn't it a little premature?" I asked. "I mean this is a huge ship, we hardly have control yet." Kouvaras looked at me quizzically through the un-polorized armored face plate. "But, sir, this is a Cack ship. We're inside now." He looked at me for a moment as if he had just explained everything, then shrugged. Tapping a com panel on his forearm he said, "All units, report." "Unit 1 here, forward guns secured." "Unit 2, left side secured." "Unit 3, right side secured." "Unit 4 here, we've got their troopers cornered in some sort of rec room. They're too afraid to poke their heads out 'cause we keep blowin' 'em off." "Unit 5 here, topside secured." "Unit 6 here, no one in the lower decks but us bilge-rats." "Unit 7 here. We're at the bridge now. They've buttoned up just like you said. How's the AI coming?" Kouvaras looked at Redburn kneeling before the gray box. "About five minutes, I guess," Redburn said. "Give us five minutes to get to you," Kouvaras said into the com. "The AI should be through by then." "Acknowledged." Kouvaras looked at me as if to say "are you satisfied now?" I nodded. Kouvaras lead the way out the door. "The rest of you follow me." The wide ship's corridors surprised me, though I quickly saw the reason for both the corridors' width and for the ease with which the ship had been captured. For unlike their flag ship, though commanded by Cacks, this ship was mostly operated by crawdads. Being largely pacifistic by nature, the crawdads would merely attempt to scurry out of the way whenever a group of troopers came thundering down the hall—if a two-legged crustacean weighing a quarter of a ton could perform any action that could be described as scurrying. Soon Kouvaras, his troopers and I joined the unit before the closed blast doors sealing off the ship's bridge. "Any attempt to communicate?" Kouvaras asked. "Not a peep," Marcello said. "Redburn, how's the AI coming?" "We've just seized control of ships functions. You should be able to talk to the AI directly through the command channel." With gestures, Kouvaras indicated to his men that they should split up on either side of the door. "OK, remember these are the Cack nobles in there," he said while crouched on the opposite side of the door from me. "They'll make valuable hostages and bring rich ransoms so try not to kill any of them." Switching to the command channel, Kouvaras said, "AI, open the bridge blast doors." The Cacks would not be affected by a normal flash bang, so as the doors were opening, Marcello tossed in a shrieker—a grenade like device that emitted an overwhelming sonic blast pitched for Cack ears, stunning everyone on the bridge. The troopers poured in like angry wasps and stopped the Cacks with the universal gesture of a gun barrel under the nose, or in the Cack's case, under the mandibles. "Fleet Sub-Commander Phon, you have command of the ship." Kouvaris smirked. I smiled, knowing the Cacks probably wouldn't understand the gesture. "Thank you trooper." I walked over to the Cack sitting frozen in the crash pod where the ship's commander would normally sit. In fact all the Cacks stood silently with their arms splayed out, frozen. I could only guess this was some sort of Cack gesture of surrender. "Why don't you secure the prisoners somewhere and make sure they are under visual guard at all times."

"Marcello," Kouvaras barked. "You heard the commander. Get these bugs out of here." The Cacks had been so still that I half feared that the shrieker had done some real neurological damage, but a gesture from Marcello and the other's weapons was sufficient to get the Cacks to leave the bridge. They left quietly, without any attempts to resist or communicate. I wondered what they had expected. No doubt they had heard horrible things about the primitive and violent race of Solarians. They had probably expected to be murdered on the spot. I looked about the bridge. At the center of the room, a holographic display showed my new ship surrounded by an expanding debris field. No functioning ships of either side seemed to be close by. "AI?" I began. "Can you access the holographic projector in this room?" "Affirmative." "Expand the display area by 500 percent." The ship shrank to a dot. A swirl of ships curled away on the right. "AI, color the ships under Righteous Ruler's command red and color the remaining ships blue." The colors changed and it seemed that most of the Cack ships were in retreat, being pursued by the Solarian ships. The initial formations were completely lost. Another group of Cacks, however, seemed to have broken through and were attacking the Solarian supply ships. As I watched, a group of Solarian ships whose ID codes indicated they belonged to Sherman were headed towards them. The Cack ships that had broken through were meeting up with a second group that appeared to have outflanked Moony on our left. That looks like trouble, I thought. Then I saw a ship heading straight for us. It was Phil's flagship, no doubt answering our distress signal. Unfortunately, he didn't know that the Cack ship that had destroyed us was now our ship. "I'm amazed, Commander Phon," Brennon said as he entered the bridge. "I truly am. Considering the position we were in, I never would have thought to try and capture the Cack ship. I don't know how you did it." "Before we swap battle stories, commander, we need to get this ship in fighting readiness." "Yes, of course." "Right now Phil's fleet is heading this way and they are probably thinking we are the enemy. We need to get the ship's ID codes changed or we'll be fighting our own ships soon. Get Torres up here working on that. You'll also need to explain to the crawdads what's going on here and establish new crew assignments. The crawdads can probably take care of the ship repairs for now. Finally, we need to sweep the area for survivors and try and re-establish contact with the fleet. I left Brennon and Torres to get things organized and found a room I could use as my new C&C. I watched Phil's progress on the monitors as I quizzed the AI about the sensing equipment available. Finally I received a coded laser transmission from Phil. The picture was very low rez and pixilated. "Torchbearer? Is that you? Please respond." It took me a minute to get the ship's computer to figure out the proper controls. "This is the new Torchbearer, Phon here." "Ken is that you? I'm seeing a Cack warship here." "Yeah, well, we ran into some trouble and had to hitch a ride. How goes the fighting?" "We have them on the run, but Bright Fortune broke through our formation and is devastating our support and supply ships. "We need to regroup. I should be able to collect my fleet, but I need some new EPR modules. We lost ours with the ship." "We'll send some new ones over on a shuttle. I'm afraid many of my ships are too far out of range to get here in time to help us, but I may be able to collect some of Ormond's ships." "Do you know where Shines Like the Sun is?" "No, we've lost connection with his ship. He may have been forced to go FTL. The last we saw, he was executing a fleet maneuver to outflank Righteous Ruler." I wasn't too worried about Shines Like the Sun. For the most part, the Cacks seemed to be giving up with little fighting. Phil's shuttle arrived quickly and I began signaling all the ships within strike range of Bright Fortune's ships trying to put a task force together. However Bright Fortune must have noticed the Solarian ships regrouping, for his ships left off their attack and returned to the rest of their fleet joining the Cack ships on our left flank. They formed up in a defensive sphere formation. We held off our attack to gather more ships and reformed our lens formation. Before long, every ship that could maneuver and fight had joined us and we found ourselves in the same positions we were in before, but only reversed. We accelerated towards the Cacks, preparing to attack again. They waited until we were nearly in attack range and broke up, turned on their H-drives and fled at faster than light speeds.

 

Chapter 19

The support and supply ships looked like some sort of ancient space junkyard. Not a single ship was whole. Debris and an occasional flash-frozen crewman floated wherever our crews directed their searchlights. We patched what ships we could salvage and cannibalized those we could not. We searched the ships for survivors and recovered what few supplies were left, though there were plenty of shortages to go around. We scavenged both our own ships and those of our enemies. Repair crews worked round the clock and those who tried to sleep were frequently interrupted by falling pressure alarms, life support failure alarms and false alarms from imagined enemy attacks.
 By the start of the morning shifts of the next "day," Shines Like the Sun still had not been heard from and everyone was worried. The fleet commanders decided to form up in battle array and advance in the hope of catching up with Shines Like the Sun's forces. As we prepared to set out, one of Moony's ships came through the transit station behind us. Moony had apparently fled with Most Noble's fleet to the last system we had passed through the day before. As the ship approached, it broadcast a message on all frequencies. Shines Like the Sun was dead. * * * I raced to the C&C as soon as I heard the message from Moony's ship. The other fleet commanders were already logged into the virtual conference room. I could tell from their expressions that it was no idle rumor. "So it's been confirmed, then?" I asked. Phil didn't look up from the virtual conference table. Sherman looked at me with a strained expression. "That's what we're discussing now. It seems Most Noble's ship commanders witnessed the event. Shines Like the Sun's ship became separated from his wing commanders and was either captured or killed. We're not sure which. Not that it really matters at this point." The other commanders looked at each other hopelessly or just stared into space. Somehow, in the very moment of the battle's victory, we had lost the war. "So what are our options?" "We could keep fighting," Sherman suggested. "They were completely unable to stop us. We're very nearly at their home world now." "Surrender is obviously out of the question," Solomon said. "Perhaps we could negotiate a contract with Righteous Ruler," Ormond suggested. Everyone looked at him in disbelief. "I hear the Moiarchy is having difficulties with the region of The Expanding House. They've nullified their trade agreements with the Indwellers." "I don't suppose we could just go back to Solarian space," I suggested. "We don't have any supplies," Phil said. "We can't afford to go on but we can't afford to stay." The discussion continued with fits and starts for several minutes when a Cack courier ship appeared through the transit station at the far side of the system. It broadcast a Cack news program, then chased the signal across the system at the speed of light. "Rejoice all you who dwell within," chanted the program host. "The enemy of our great ruler, that most traitorous of brothers, Shines Like the Sun is dead." "Rejoice! The enemy is dead! Rejoice! Shines Like the Sun is dead!" chanted the background news readers. As the program host gave the news in a traditional Cack chant, a video displayed digitally enhanced sensor logs of the battle from the Cack's point of view. Once again I saw the two forces arrayed for battle. Shines Like the Sun's forces advanced and Righteous Ruler's formation melted away in a total rout. Righteous Ruler began retreating, surrounded only by his elite core of warships. A hole opened up in Righteous Ruler's defenses and Shines Like the Sun's flagship, The Flower of Dirt plunged forward. The camera view zoomed in on The Flower of Dirt as it launched punishing missiles and energy beam attacks on Righteous Ruler's flagship ripping devastating breaches in the hull.

The camera view pulled back. Righteous Ruler's elite guard swarmed around Shine's Like the Sun's ship. Shines Like the Sun's own guard leaped into the fray. This time his ship took a pounding while Righteous Ruler raced away FTL. Shines Like the Sun's defenders managed to drive back the Cacks from his damaged ship and for a moment it looked like they had at least won the skirmish. But then a single damaged Cack ship, either out of control or on a suicide mission, slammed through The Flower of Dirt under H-drive. It scooped up a large section of The Flower's hull and most of its drive in its quantum wave field and carried it off before its own QWEGs seemed to overload and it exploded. Not all of Righteous Ruler's defenders fled with him. Seeing The Flower of Dirt stricken and dying, they swooped in to attack. Shine's Like the Sun's defenders shielded him as best they could with their own ships, but one by one, they were all destroyed. It was like a kick in the gut. I could only imagine how it must have felt for those Cacks who had sided with him. Most were of noble birth with positions of power and prestige in Righteous Ruler's administration. They had thrown those lives of privilege away. Depending on how vengeful Righteous Ruler was feeling, even their families could suffer for their mistakes. The news readers continued to chant of Righteous Ruler's great victory while they showed him holding Shines Like the Sun's severed head. In the tradition of Cack victors, he carved up Shine's Like the Sun's body and distributed pieces as souvenirs to his friends and supporters as mementos and proof of his victory. As the program ended, a messenger shuttle arrived from Righteous Ruler. A tone sounded in the virtual conference room. It was the bridge. "Sir, we have a signal from the courier vessel. They want to speak to the commanders of the Solarian fleets." The fleet commanders exchanged puzzled glances. Sherman said, "Connect them here." The avatars of two Cacks, messengers from Righteous Ruler and Bright Fortune appeared along with the image of a human interpreter named Richards. He was a former security specialist for the Pentaminc Corporation and was now something of a consulting military strategist. "We are offering here your terms of surrender." The fleet commanders stared back in puzzled silence. "Are you asking to surrender?" Solomon said. "No," Richards corrected. "They're here to discuss the terms of your surrender." Sherman laughed. Richards' expression clouded over. "The Ruler has defeated and killed Shines Like the Sun. He orders you to turn your ships over to him and requires your commanders to appear before him so they may try to earn his favor." "It is not our custom for the victors to surrender their ships," Sherman said. "However I have something that requires my attention. I shall leave it to you commanders to respond as you think best. I'll return shortly." With that, Sherman's avatar disappeared from the conference. An awkward silence followed as if the Cacks had not anticipated the possibility of a refusal. Then Phil spoke up. "Perhaps I'm confused. Is Righteous Ruler asking for our ships because he wishes our support as allies? If not, if he has defeated us, why bother to ask? Why not just take them? But if he wishes to contract our services, he should offer a proposal so we can negotiate it." The Cacks waited for the computer translation, then looked to Richards. "The Ruler's view," Richards replied, "is that since he has killed Shines Like the Sun, and there is no one left to challenge his rule, he is the victor. He also believes that since you are in the heart of his Moiarchy, thousands of light-years from home, with hundreds of gates blocking your way and that since he can bring against you so many ships that even if they did not defend themselves, you would run out of ammunition and your ships would break down just trying to destroy them all, you have no choice."

The Solarian commanders were sobered by this idea. Ormond looked positively terrified. "W-we know that "Righteous Ruler's district, The Expanding House, has given him some trouble of late. This force could easily bring them back under your rule." One of the Cack messengers responded quickly. "No." "Then there are The Unbounded Ones and That Which Overturns..." "No." A long moment followed where the two sides simply stared at each other. At last I jumped in. "As I see it, the only thing we have now is our ships and our courage," I said, more to my fellow commanders than the Cacks. "If we keep our courage, we can make use of our ships, but if we give up our ships, I don't imagine we'd keep even our lives very long." I turned to face the messengers. "So, don't think we will surrender our only possessions to you. In fact," I smiled knowing that I was speaking from a former Cack ship, "we may just use them to take your possessions." This brought a few grim smiles from my fellow commanders. They didn't last long. "Brave words." Richards chuckled. "You should be a politician or at least a speech writer. But you are mad if you actually think your courage can overcome Righteous Ruler's power. As we spoke, Sherman's avatar reappeared. "Have you reached a decision yet?" "The commanders have said a number of things," Richards replied before anyone else could speak. "What do you say?" "Well, I was glad to see a Solarian among Rightous Ruler's messengers," Sherman said. "What is the best advice you can give us fellow humans, knowing that whatever you say will reach the Solarian media and will spread throughout the colonies?" My estimation of Sherman went up a notch. Richards couldn't advise us to surrender without being seen as a traitor to the human race, and if he advised us to keep fighting, that would greatly encourage our crews. In his own way, Sherman could be nearly as crafty as Moony. Richards gave his fellow messengers an uncomfortable look and a bead of sweat formed on his brow. "My advice," he paused to clear his throat, "is not to surrender if you have even one chance in ten thousand to fight your way back home. But, if you have not even that chance, I suggest you do what you can to save yourselves." "Well, so much for your advice," Sherman growled. "Go back to your ruler and tell him that if he wants us as allies, we'll be more useful to him if we keep our ships, and if he wants to fight, we'll fight better with our ships. "Very well," Richards shrugged. "Then that is the answer we will take back. But one more thing. Righteous Ruler is assuming that as long as you remain here, we have a truce, but if you advance or retreat, it is war. So which should I tell him it will be?" "Tell him that we agree." "What does that mean?" "Truce if we stay, war if we leave." "So do I tell him truce or war?" Sherman's scowl deepened. "Truce if we stay. War if we leave." * * * Within hours of conferring with Righteous Ruler's messenger, I received a message from Phil. "A courier ship will be docking with the Torch—er –your ship in about half an hour. Get on it." I thought about sending a message back asking why and what it was all about, but I didn't think he had left that info out by accident. Whatever was going on, his secretiveness meant it was big. Twenty minutes later, the hanger deck master paged me. "Sir, I've got a courier here who says she has a pouch that only you can sign for."

"Thank you. I'll be right there." Normally, if anything had to be couriered to me personally, the courier would track me down and I would sign for it wherever I happened to be. In these days of quantum computing, normal secured electronic communication was usually quite sufficient. I certainly never had to actually crawl through a boarding tube into a courier's vessel before. I followed the polite pilot officer inside and found Phil, Sherman and Solomon waiting for me with their XO's. "Is it someone's birthday?" Sherman frowned not appreciating my humor. "Not now." He pointedly watched the pilot officer seal the craft then seal herself inside the forward cabin. No one said anything until the craft got clearance to leave, by which time I began to fear that, perhaps the fleet commanders might have concocted a plan to run out on the fleet. It would have been uncharacteristic of Sherman to run out on a fight, but then we were in a very unusual situation. "So, what is this all about?" I asked once we were away. "Most Noble is waiting for us two systems back. He intends to return to Sardis and has asked us to come with him." "So that's it?" I asked in growing indignation. "You're just leaving?" The commanders exchanged uncomfortable looks. "That remains to be seen," Solomon said. "Sherman here believes we can still defeat Righteous Ruler's forces. We're going to ask Most Nobel if he would like to be the new ruler." "Ah! So this is a conference—" Sherman's scowl deepened. "You didn't think—" "Are the other commanders included in this?" I interrupted. "They'll be meeting us there," Phil assured me. We transited to the next system and raced to the next gate where we found Most Noble's Cack fleet waiting as Sherman said. Moony's flag ship was already with him, having slipped out earlier. He had ingratiated himself with Most Noble and considered himself the Cack's friend. It is a custom among the Cacks that a higher ranking Cack never enters a room occupied by a lower ranking Cack unless they are a servant and so of no rank. Because of matters of protocol, we were left waiting in a hall outside a conference room until Most Noble could arrive and prepare to receive us. He appeared to us without all the finery of Shine Like the Sun's court. His only ornamentation was a series of glowing ideograms on his pseudo-exo-skeleton. I didn't know how to read them, but I could recognize one of them as belonging to Shines Like the Sun and was a little surprised that he hadn't removed it. Once we had got inside and had a chance to put Sherman's suggestion to him, Most Noble wasted no time refusing it. As he put it, once translated, "There are better Indwellers than I who will not permit me to rule." He repeated his intention to leave within hours and insisted if we were to join him we must prepare to move quickly before the ruler had a chance to gather his forces and, perhaps, use the transit station to outflank them. "Then it's just as well that we go with you," Sherman said. "While you were talking with the Ruler's messengers, I consulted Dr. Hindmost, Shine Like the Sun's oracle, about the fleet's kairogram. The oracle told me that if we had the support of one of the Cacks who was willing to rule, we had every chance of being successful against Righteous Ruler, but if we did not, we could not be successful. In hindsight, it makes sense, for conquering the Moiarchy and ruling it are two different things. I think we should agree to go with Most Noble back to the Solarian worlds as soon as possible." The other fleet commanders agreed and both the Solarian and Cack commanders exchanged oaths calling on the Great Maker to witness our promises to support, defend, and not betray each other. Once the oaths had been exchanged, Sherman turned to Most Noble. "Now that we've agreed to travel together, what do you say is the best route to take? Should we return the way we came or do you know a better way?" "The familiar path warranting our destruction. Having once satisfied our needs it offers only wanting." "You know of another way, then?" "Yes. The lengthening path offering objects of our need." "Very well. You lead and we will follow." "Readying for leaving now the long delayed first rest. A barrier of two or three systems may prevent Righteous Ruler. His swiftings being weak to stop us. His strengths being slow to catch us." I had to puzzle over his words, but it sounded to me as if he were saying we needed to leave now and get as much space between us and Righteous Ruler. Returning to the fleet, we formed up and seized the nearest transit station as quickly as possible before Righteous Ruler's spies could report back and a force could be sent to attack us. By exiting through both sides of the station we were able to cross the next system and join up with Most Noble's fleet without seeing any sign of response. Beginning our return journey on a new path, we transited to a different station than the one we had taken on the way down. Entering the next system we surprised a large contingent of Righteous Ruler's forces repairing and supplying their ships. Forming up as quickly as we could, we accelerated to the attack.

 

Chapter 20

No sooner had we formed up and begun our attack, but that the Cacks turned and fled the system. If the physics of the H-drive had allowed it, we might have given chase, but the QWEGs were well past their maximum run time and needed to be taken off-line for inspection and servicing. We returned to the one inhabited world with its sole space station in hopes of finding something useful in the way of supplies, but found the space station stripped bare and the inhabitants too primitive to offer any help.
 Engineering crews worked round the clock fixing damage while logistic officers shifted weapons and equipment to ensure that the fittest ships were properly supplied. At Sherman's suggestion, the fleet officers transferred their flags to their best ships which proved fortunate when messengers from Righteous Ruler appeared in the system and signaled a request to speak. Not wanting to expose our weakness, the commanders took only a small force of their best and strongest ships. "What do you want?" Sherman demanded once we were in com-laser range. He had taken the de facto leadership of the fleet after Shines Like the Sun's death, not because of any deliberate vote on our part, but by an unspoken recognition of his experience and ability. The rest of use waited, watching silently in virtual conference space as three Cack avatars appeared "Bearing Righteous Ruler's authority, we seek harmonious agreement with you." "Well then tell you master we'll have to fight first," Sherman said I've had no food today which makes me cranky. It take a pretty brave—or stupid—person to offer us peace without first offering us a meal." The three Cacks disappeared from v-space and on my monitors and I noticed that one of the ships return back through the gate. It must not have gone far for it returned in mere moments which told me Righteous Ruler was probably very close by. The three Cacks reappeared in the conference. "Your words are congruent with righteous Ruler's thoughts. With your harmonious agreement, we are unveiling to you systems of sustainment." "Just to make certain we understand each other," Sherman said, "We will have a truce while the fleet gathers supplies?" "Yes. The harmonious agreement extends to the moment of Righteous Ruler possessing your last word." "One moment." Sherman dropped the Cacks from the conference. "I say we accept their offer," Ormond said. "Yes," agreed Smith. "I agree as well," Sherman said, "But we don't want to seem too eager. They may take it as a sign that we're desperate. Let's let them wait awhile before answering." "You want them to think we are ready and willing to fight them?" Phil said. "Of course. He seems pretty eager to avoid that." "I just hope our Cack allies don't start getting nervous," I said. We waited for several minutes in silence, then Ormond asked a speculative question about what Righteous Ruler must be thinking and how he was likely to deal with such a large force in the heart of his Moiarchy, which led to more speculation and, in the end, we happened to wait quite a bit longer than we had planned. Finally, Sherman waved us to silence and pinged the Cack messengers. "We have decided to accept your offer. Lead us to these supplies immediately." * * * The scouts led us deeper into Cack territory and we wound through systems far from the area of fighting. The commanders grew impatient, especially Sherman, who acted as if he expected a trap and insisted the fleet remain at FAS-Delta. When we arrived at the systems they indicated, the fleets split up to raid different systems. We found tons of supplies, almost more than we could carry, including lots of high-tech raw materials from which we could fabricate many critical parts. Sherman paged us repeatedly requesting updates, seemingly eager to get the fleet back together in case of attack.

We stayed in these systems for three 'days' before the Cacks returned, this time in a massive yacht the size of a cruise ship. Shining Fortune, Righteous Ruler's brother in law and three other Cacks of noble birth arrived with an army of servants and political functionaries to negotiate a truce. With some misgivings, Sherman agreed to bring the fleet commanders and meet with Shining Fortune on his yacht. Having grown up at least familiar with the halls of power and privilege, I didn't expect to be so overwhelmed by this yacht. The hanger deck looked like a series of verandas, englobed in clear complex carbon. The passages, even in the rotating habitat portion, were wide enough to fly a courier ship through. Natural stone, some fibrous material like wood, a variety of precious metals and gems accented every surface. It was nothing like our sparse mechanical Solarian ships. Bright Fortune and the other Cack nobles received us in a huge auditorium. A personal servant stood next to each one of us pouring the sweet nectar the Cacks like to drink. The Cacks do everything standing so they required no chairs, but they brought in something like hard plastic ottomans for us to sit on, though I suspected they might actually be some sort of storage containers. When everyone had gathered, Bright Fortune chittered a welcome at us while a human translator interpreted his words. "He Who Looks Up, as your neighbor in the Outer Worlds, when I saw what difficulties you had been dragged into, I considered the chance to help you a gift from the Maker. I thought that if I were able, through my past service, to obtain Righteous Ruler's favor and get permission to bring you safely home to your own worlds, I might also earn your favor and the favor of He Who Looks Up. With this in mind I boldly approached the ruler, reminding him of how I warned him of Shines Like the Sun's preparations to attack—not just warned but actually brought him ships. Of all his fleet commanders, I alone refused to flee. I even broke through your formation to join up with his forces behind you and, after Shines Like the Sun's destruction, pursued those Indwellers who had followed him. Given all this, I told him he owed me this opportunity. Now, having obtained this chance for you, I ask you to not make my job any harder. Consider carefully how you will answer his question as to what your intentions now are. With a gesture from Bright Fortune his servants led us out to another room where we could discuss our options in private. We didn't really need that much time for we agreed to try to work out a truce if possible, but Bright Fortune seemed determined to give us every opportunity to not screw this up. Once alone, the commanders all voiced their desire to go home and, if possible, get a contract or two along the way to help pay our return expenses. Shines Like the Sun had offered us a lot of money, most of which was to have been paid when he became the ruler. Now that he was dead, we had no money and would soon be forced to pay our crews in IOUs. Once we came to an agreement, Ormond raised his hand and said, "I nominate Sherman to serve as our spokesman." Phil lifted his hand. "I agree and second that motion." "All in favor—," Ormond said. "Wait a minute," Moony interrupted. "I think I would make a far better spokesman as I already have a good relationship with the Indwellers." "Most Noble, perhaps," Solomon observed. "I don't know if Shines Like the Sun's friend can help us much with Bright Fortune or Righteous Ruler." A vote was taken by raised hands and Moony, scowling, seemed to take careful note of who voted for him or against him. Smith and I alone abstained, offering only acquiescent shrugs as Sherman easily carried the vote. Once back in the conference room, Bright Fortune asked us what our reply to Righteous Ruler was and Sherman responded. "Nowhere in our contract did we agree to attack Righteous Ruler or the Moiarchy. Nor did we have any idea of coming here when we set out from Solarian space. It was Shines Like the Sun who, taking advantages of certain clauses, led us first against one target then another in hope of keeping his true aim a secret and so surprising Righteous Ruler." I'm pretty certain that Sherman, at least, knew Shines Like the Sun's true intention all along. I also suspect he brought Phil into his confidence sometime around the time of the near mutiny on his flag ship. But as I listened to his speech I thought he made a pretty convincing show of sincerity. "By the time we learned his true aim we were already in such debt to him that we couldn't get away. But, "death cancels all contracts and obligations". With Shines Like the Sun's death we no longer have any reason or desire to be here and we certainly have no desire to harm the ruler or his Moiarchy. Our only wish is to go home, though we are prepared to destroy anyone who attacks us and help anyone who wishes to contract with us." "I will tell the ruler what you have said and I will bring back his reply. Until then, let the truce remain. We will even allow merchants to come and sell you anything you need. We returned to our ships in an almost jubilant mood, feeling that we had managed to avoid disaster and that soon we would be on the way home. Back on the Phoenix—or so Commander Brennon and the crew had named our ship—I informed the commander that the negotiations had gone well and that we had every hope that Righteous Ruler would allow us to depart soon. The crew took it as a certainty and celebrated up and down the corridors. The next day Bright Fortune failed to return, then again the following day. As the hours passed the mood became somber and I thought of all the reasons Righteous Rule had to not let us go, the least of which is that we had nearly killed him and destroyed hundreds of his ships killing thousands of his people. Just as I was on the verge of flash messaging Phil and suggesting the fleet make a run for it, our forward scout picked up the presence of Bright Fortune's yacht entering the system. The fleet commanders practically raced to his ship when summoned and soon we were standing again in his presence. "Defeating the shareholders rejecting the release of murderers and anarchists, I turned the Ruler's thoughts toward mine. I bear congruent thoughts to guide you without deviation to your home worlds. We allow you safe travel through our territory and provide merchant ships. You agree to dwell in our rules and not harm our worlds, space stations or ships unless we lack merchants and permit you." We agreed and ratified the contract with an oath in the tradition of the Indwellers then Bright Fortune left to deliver the contract to Righteous Ruler and take care of some personal business. When he returned, we were to start out for home. I remembered, on the ride back, that he never said when that would be.

 

Chapter 21

For a while, all the fleets remained together as one force. The Cack and Solarian engineers worked together to solve difficult repair jobs and the commanders of all the ships met together to organize and discuss plans. Friends and relatives of Most Noble and the other Cack lords came and went at regular intervals and we later learned that they were sent to reassure Most Noble and the other commanders that Righteous Ruler had offered them all a pardon if only they would return home. We didn't think much of it, but as the days turned into weeks, many commanders noticed a change in the Cacks' attitude. Their cooperation came only reluctantly; their engineers didn't have time for us and the requested supplies couldn't be found. When our commanders called theirs they were always in conference with their own people, conferences that didn't require Solarian participation.
 "What are we doing here?" Sub-Commander Newman demanded during one of our virtual conferences. "Don't you realize they only want to destroy us?" "They can't let us go," Sub-Commander Dexter insisted. "They have to destroy us—to make us an example so no other Solarian force will even think of opposing them. "They're almost certainly keeping us here while they gather their forces," Sub-Commander Maxwell said. "They may even be switching off gates, trapping us here so we have no way home," Chris added. "Don't even think," Dexter said, continuing his original thought, "that they'll let us go home to spread the word of how such a small force kicked their butts at the doorstep of their home world and returned home laughing about it." "Yes, I know, I thought of all this myself," Sherman said. "But it just doesn't make sense. If we go sneaking off now, we're in violation of our truce. The Cacks will justifiably assume we intend to attack them. Have you considered what that means? The merchants won't sell to us so we'll have to fight for any sort of supplies. Also Most Noble's ships will abandon us and all those Cack allies he commands will become our enemies. As we wander about lost in their Moiarchy without guides, they will be able to draw ships from every corner of the Moiarchy, surround us and trap us. "The one thing I can't figure out," Sherman continued, "is why Righteous Ruler would do this. If he intended to destroy us, with all his advantages, why would he swear oaths, sign contracts and discredit himself with all his trading partners throughout the Moiarchy?" Daily, Sherman would reason with anyone who voiced fears of Cack betrayal, and though his reasoning was sound, as the days dragged on, I admit that even I frequently found myself convinced of our impending destruction. At last Bright Fortune arrived with a Cack named Overbearing. Overbearing was a regional manager of a neighboring region who was traveling home with one of Righteous Ruler's daughter as his new bride. They arrived with a fleet of supply ships as if prepared for a long trip. When we left, the Cacks all took the lead, flying in formation together, Righteous Ruler's ships and Shines Like the Sun's former fleet. The Solarian ships brought up the rear lagging behind—with the exception of Moony's flagship—to put some distance between us and the Cacks. We also sent scout ships ahead to keep an eye on what the Cacks were doing. At this point we were two separate fleets that just happened to be traveling the same direction. We remained at FAS-Delta the entire time, prepared in case the Cacks turned on us. The Cack fleet remained on alert as well. After several days of traveling like this, we came to another collection of systems that were somewhat isolated from the rest of the Cack Moiarchy. They were called The Fertile Worlds and formed an interconnected web, only joined to the rest of the Cack Moiarchy at two points. We stopped for supplies at the last system which was something of a trading hub while Bright Fortune took the Cacks through the transit station to the next system. While we were there servicing and repairing the QWEGs, a courier from Moony's fleet arrived.  

Phil and I were in live voice chat at the time the message came in. "Oops, this looks important. Better take it." Phil played the message so I could hear it as well. "This is Ship-Commander Jane Pharlan of Universal Security Systems. I have a message for Commander Sherman or Commander Porter." "I am Commander Porter."  I have been sent to warn you," said the courier. "Most Noble says to be on your guard. A large force of Cacks are in a nearby system and may attack. Guard the gate closely. We have heard Bright Fortune intends to destroy the gate to trap us in these systems. A long silence followed before Phil replied. "Um, let me see if I can't track Sherman down." We made a series of urgent requests before one of Sherman's fleet officers was able to track him down. We met him in v-space and the courier repeated his message to Sherman. Sherman's face turned white and he sat silently staring at the virtual table top like a trapped man furiously trying to think of some way out. I had had a few extra minutes to think about the warning and something about it bugged me. "This warning doesn't make any sense," I said. Everyone turned puzzled expressions on me. "Why would they both attack us and destroy the gate? If they win, the gate's destruction would be an unnecessary expense and if we win, how will they retreat or get help? They'd be utterly destroyed." Sherman frowned, but his eyes came to life. "Do you have a map of the region?" he asked the courier. "I believe so. I'm sending it over now." Sherman shared it with us. "So these are The Fertile Worlds, eh? There are a lot of systems here with only two points of access." Phil's avatar tapped on the virtual table's surface calling up data on the surrounding systems. "Lots of wealthy worlds here, major resource processing centers, a major trading hub...someone could hole up here and set up a little self-sufficient Moiarchy of their own within the Cack Moiarchy. The Cacks would have quite a time rooting them out." "Are you thinking what I'm thinking?" Sherman asked. "Someone's using a little reverse psychology on us?" Phil suggested. "Trying to make us think we'll be trapped if we stay so that we'll concentrate on getting out of here?" "I think someone is trying to be clever. And I think I know who it is." Sherman turned to the messenger. "Thank you, you may go." Then he disconnected the messenger from the conference and turned to the two of us. "Moony." Phil said. "That was one of his commanders," Sherman said. "I think he's trying to make the Cacks think we're likely to turn on them so he can get himself put in charge of the fleet." "So what do we do?" I asked. "First we should probably go ahead and put some scout ships and a light guard at the transit station to alert us to any action Bright Fortune might be taking. After that, I'll have to think about what to do about Moony." * * * Once the fleet had finished re-supplying and servicing their ships, we transited to the next system and discovered a stealthed Cack scout ship watching. For ten days we traveled together under dark clouds of rumor and suspicion until we came to a system belonging to Many Graces who was mother to both Shines Like the Sun and Righteous Ruler. Here Bright Fortune refused to send the merchant ships but allowed us to take whatever supplies we wanted from the system. It was intended as an insult to Many Graces since she seemed to have favored Shines Like the Sun.

From there we traveled to a major trading system called Many Ports where we paused for three days. The system had two habitable planets designated MP3 and MP4. A third, MP5, was an airless rock yet still a well colonized world, then there were multiple space habitats and stations. The Cack fleet fell into orbit around MP3 which served as the main transport hub of the system leaving us MP4, MP5 and a host of lesser space habitats and stations. The crew' moral was so bad that the fleet commanders began to fear some spontaneous act might set off open hostilities between us and the Cacks. Finally, deciding to put the matter to rest, Sherman requested a conference with Bright Fortune who agreed to meet with him. Sherman spent half the day on Bright Fortune's flagship holding a private face to face meeting with him before sending a message to the fleet commanders that they had worked it all out. Bright Fortune even invited him to spend the following day with them as they had grown rather chummy. In the meantime his media office sent a recording of their conversation. Sherman entered the room wearing his full dress uniform. A Cack servant announced his presence and he was invited to approach Bright Fortune. After exchanging customary greetings which roughly translated along the lines of "how's business?" Bright Fortune asked him why he wished to see him. "Bright Fortune, we have kept all of our agreements with you, yet we can't help but notice that your ships remain on alert whenever we are near as if you think we might attack. Because of this our own ship commanders have heightened their alert status and I fear that, with this heightened suspicion, any slight misunderstanding might erupt into shooting. I have seen allies attack each other in similar situations and so, to avoid that, I thought it best we meet to discuss the situation and hopefully prevent such a disaster. "As for why you can trust us, did we not swear an oath of friendship together calling on God himself to be our witness? I would not envy the fate of a man who could violate such an oath and make heaven itself his enemy.
 "Even for purely pragmatic reasons, why would we throw away our greatest asset? Because of you the gates are open, our way is certain, the supplies are plentiful and all the locals are friendly. How mad would we have to be to throw all that away and on top of it add the Righteous Ruler's wrath? "The only reason we left Solarian space was to earn Shines Like the Sun's favor because he was generous with his friends. Now you have his position and territories and on top of that you have the support of the ruler. "Far from suspecting us, you should be looking at us as an opportunity. Having trouble with The Unbounded Ones? We could easily defeat them. Territorial disputes with That Which Overturns? Or perhaps you'd like to bring The Expanding House back under the Moiarchy's control? What greater force could you have at your call? With us you can easily persuade any of your neighbors to see your point of view and we would serve you gratefully, not just for money, but in gratitude for bringing us home. "Considering all these things," Sherman concluded with wide spread arms, "I find the idea that you could suspect us so amazing, that I would give a lot to learn the name of the man so clever he could convince you that we would actually want to betray you." Bright Fortune waited for the last of the translation to play, then began chittering and clacking his reply. "Reasonable thoughts of yours are pleasing. Your understanding opposition to us as congruent to suicide. Perfecting your thoughts, test yourself—in desiring your destruction, should Righteous Ruler account a lack of missiles, ships or battle stations? Struggling, you, through friendly spaces—lacks the Ruler hostile spaces? Controlling transit stations may divide and defeat you. Doing nothing, the Moiarchy swallows you. "These thoughts being congruent, test yourself. All paths being open why go, the Ruler, where his trading partners and the Great Maker despises? Apprehend you how we refrained from your destruction? Have you pondered on this? In fashioning your release, I worked for He Who Looks Up's trust. Shines Like the Sun bought your obedience. I seek your friendship." Bright Fortune paused here and I thought he had finished speaking, but then he continued in an awkward halting style. "Offering yourselves as many uses, there is yet one more. Though the Ruler alone wears his mantle of glory, I would wear you as my own." I turned to Phil on our private conference channel. "Did he just say what I thought he said?" "What did you think he said?" "It sounded like he wants us to help him overthrow the ruler." Phil shrugged. "He is an ambitious person. I wouldn't be surprised. That was the reason he and Shines Like the Sun always fought." "But to rule the Moiarchy?" "No doubt he will wait until he feels he has the political support. Still, it sounds like he may want to keep us on the payroll for a while." "Considering all the reasons we have to be allies," Sherman continued, "does this not mean that those who have slandered us in order to turn us against each other deserve the most severe punishment?" "Your words being congruent," Bright Fortune said. "On my ship I will exposing to you and your commanders your accusers." "Good," Sherman said. "I will bring them all and show you, who on our side, warned us about you."

 

Chapter 22

Having returned from his visit to Bright Fortune, Sherman called for a meeting of all his fleet officers on the Battle of Kuzikos. He had a powerful personality and I'm sure he called for a face to face meeting because he thought he could strong arm us all into going along. While the commanders were somewhat encouraged by Bright Fortune's words, most were not quite ready to trust him.
 "I've spent the last day and a half with Bright Fortune, and I'm convinced he has plans for us and eagerly wants us as his ally."   "And you think Moony is the only reason he has been acting suspiciously toward us?" Solomon asked.   "I'm certain of it," Sherman snapped. "I know Moony has been talking to the owner-operators, trying to get them to come over to his command."  "Do you think Bright Fortune will denounce him?" Ormond asked.   "Yes. That's why I've insisted that whoever is responsible be considered a traitor—not just to Righteous Ruler but to the fleet as well."   "I'm just not comfortable sending all the FCs over at the same time," Smith said. "His change of heart—if those things have hearts—seems a little too sudden."   "The logic is irrefutable," Sherman said, growing agitated. "It really is in our mutual best interest to work together. Anyone who has worked against that has undermined us both. I've made that clear to him." Smith just shook his head.   "But I need you there." Sherman paused and took a calming breath. "After this, Bright Fortune is likely to want the fleet under the command of some one person he can trust. Even if Moony is arrested, that man has surrounded himself with other treacherous and deceitful men. I need the support of as many people as possible to secure the position. If I could pack that ship with every command officer in our combined fleets, I would."   I couldn't help but notice how he assumed we would all just naturally support his bid for leadership of the combined fleet. It was true that we had all largely followed him by unspoken agreement when Shines Like the Sun died. He certainly had more real battlefield experience than the rest of us—even more than his elder fellow Spartan Commander Smith. If he had a quick temper, it only seemed to be a problem in peacetime. In battle I never saw a more calm and self-assured man. In truth, though I enjoyed serving under Phil, he had difficulty dealing with some of the more unruly elements of his command, preferring to merely set a good example and withhold rewards from those who didn't support the team. I could never stand to serve under Sherman in peacetime, but in war, I couldn't think of a better commander. * * *   "I don't want you to go," Phil said later. "I have a funny feeling about this." He had sat, lost in silent thought, on the shuttle back to the Athena. Once back in his quarters, he ordered me to stay behind.   "If you think it's a bad idea, then you shouldn't go either," I said.   "I have to." He gave me a smile meant to be reassuring. "I'm probably just being paranoid, but I don't want any of my fleet officers going just in case something goes wrong. There's still a lot of tension in the air between Moony's crew, Sherman's crew and the Cacks."   "I thought you were taking Cathrine with you."   "She won't actually be going to the meeting. I decided to position her nearby with some ships just in case. They'll just be visiting the merchants for supplies." He gave me a wink. "I suggested to the other fleet commanders that they do the same and they agreed."   "Let me go with you. Leave Cathrine behind."   "No. I want you here with the fleet."   "What about Harlow?"

"I want a strategist there in case I need someone to pull my ass out. Harlow is more of a logistics expert. That just leaves you and Cathrine and I need you here with the fleet."   "Chris?"   Phil laughed. "Chris Knight should have never left the fighter cockpit. I often think he would prefer to be back there."   I tried to think of some other option, but I had run out of ideas. All I could think was that I should go with Phil and Cathrine should remain here, but his mind was clearly made up. I told myself this nebulous fear was unreasonable, but it didn't help.   * * *   When the fleet commanders left to meet with Bright Fortune for their political showdown, I sat in my office trying to ignore my anxiety by losing myself in paperwork. I mostly ended up sorting through my personal files on the server and trying to organize them. I browsed through some old photos from my academy days and found a photo of Phil and some of my fellow student pilots the night we earned our wings. I don't know how much time I sat staring at it, wondering over the strange twists of fate which brought us so far from home and placed us in such straights. I remembered Dr. Swiftly and the kairogram I hadn't looked at since I left Sardis IV. I opened the file, looked at the complicated charts and probability scores and realized why I hadn't looked at it in a while. As I sat puzzling over my stunted futures an urgent message flashed on my display. It was Cathrine.   "...commanders arrested! The Cacks are attacking! Ken can you hear me? Put the fleet on alert!"   I punched up the executive command menus and slapped the FAS setting to Gamma.   Lights flashed and warning tones blared all around me. "Cathrine, what's your status?" "We were set up. They had fast attack craft hidden all over the place."   "Cathrine, can you hear me? What's your status?"   "We're pretty shot up. I've got a FAC on my tail right now. Think you can send us some help?"   I tried to call up a tac panel, but my cabin lacked both the bandwidth and display room for everything I needed. The cabin lurched as, according to alert status protocol, the spinning habitat portion braked and began to be retracted against the ship. "One moment, I'll find you some help," I said as I began to float away from the network console. I passed the com channel to my net piece and leaped for the door. As I shot down the corridor, pushing aside oncoming crewmen I flashed the bridge.   "Ken? Is that you? What's going on?" Commander Brennon asked breathlessly.   "Cathrine says she's being attacked by the Cacks. Find her ship, the High Victory, and move in to support it, now!"   "As you say."  "I'm headed to C&C. I'll be there in a minute."   The acceleration alarms sounded and the left wall turned, temporarily into a floor as the ship changed its heading. The alarm sounded for a second time and the ship leaped ahead under one G. I stood up and raced to the stairwell, leaping down the vibrating steps as the matter/antimatter engines shoved us toward the fight. I made it to the C&C and leaped inside my crash pod, only realizing I was not wearing my pressure suit when I absentmindedly checked to see that my missing helmet was secure.   I switched on all my displays and counted down the seconds of their delayed response by pounding my fist on the side of the pod. Once my tactical screens were up, I scanned for the High Victory but saw only debris and chaos. Cack FACs criss-crossed each other in counter rotating orbits, attacking anything that moved. Even the orbital defenses had come online, sweeping the debris fields with gamma ray lasers.

"Those bastard!" I shouted, realizing the Cacks seemed intent on ensuring that even the survivors of the destroyed ships were killed. I switched from gravimetrics, to optical, to radar, dialing up and down the spectrum as I cycled through my sensors, looking for any sign of our ships. I found a few fading transponders, but no ships.   Remembering the com channel I had opened with her, I tapped my netpiece. I had set it to record while I was talking to Brennon, but when I check, it had lost the connection. I reversed the recording to see what I had missed.   "Cathrine, can you hear me? What's your status?"   "We're pretty shot up. I've got a FAC on my tail right now. Think you can send us some help?"   "One moment, I'll find you some help."   "Hurry!"   The stuttered chirping of garbled digital signals sounded for a split second and the recording ended when the signal was lost.   Commander Brennon flash messaged me. "Uh, commander? We can't find the High Victory. Do you have a new target?"   A cold numbness washed over me and I suddenly felt like throwing up. "Any replies to our signals?" "None."   She was gone. It was the only explanation. I wanted to race over to MP3 and sweep for survivors. There was still a real chance that her crash pod survived. The rules of modern warfare required the Cacks to retrieve it. Failure to do so was considered a war crime, but if they were attacking the survivors, it already looked like the Cacks were engaged in war crimes.   I swallowed past the constriction in my throat. "Fall back. Form up with the rest of the fleet." I scanned the orbit of MP4. All Cack military ships were curiously absent. I selected the nearest Lagrange point, suggest it as the fleet rendezvous point and we boosted out of MP4's gravity well.   The ships of the other fleets, scattered across the various habitats, were recalled and we joined up as many as were available. Commander Smith, who had not gone to the conference, had instead transited to the next system looking for supplies which had begun to grow scarce at Many Ports. I wondered briefly if he had anticipated this disaster and decided to get away while he had the chance. I didn't have long to worry about him as flash messages came in from every ship of the fleet asking what was happening. I recorded my reply to one panicked commander, attached what sensor and com logs I had, including my brief conversation with Cathrine, and copied it to every SC and fleet officer in the global address list.   We reseeded our EPRs, adjusted our formations to account for the missing ships and prepared for the fight to come. I expanded the picket of drone scouts and kept an eye on Bright Fortune's fleet at MP3 and then we waited.   We didn't have long to wait.   Three battle cruisers surrounded by a small guard of FACs came towards us at a leisurely one G acceleration. They identified themselves as Most Noble and two other friends of Shines Like the Sun, Swift Righteousness and Gift of God. They came, they said, bearing a message from Righteous Ruler to whatever commanders or other fleet officers might be available. Fleet Sub-Commander Maxwell and Fleet Sub-Commander Dexter who had served under Solomon and Sherman respectively, boosted out to com laser rang to meet with them. I ordered Brennon to take the Phoenix out with them so I could discover Phil's fate and, if possible, the fate of other survivors of the attack.   "Notice, He Who Looks Up. Sherman being tested and proved guilty on fraud and contract violations was executed. Providing witnesses evidence opposing him, Porter and Moony were commended to Righteous Ruler's service. About you, Righteous Ruler says Shines Like the Sun's death transports his assets and liabilities to Righteous Ruler including him with your contract. He choosed by order his right to Fleet reassignment to contol to him immediately." I leaned back in the acceleration couch and rubbed a hand across my face. This was completely unexpected. I was wondering if the Cacks actually had a legal claim to us, if that claim might afford us some special protections and wishing I had a Cack lawyer, when Commander Dexter apparently recovered from his shock.   "Most Noble, you disgusting little bug! And the rest of you who called yourselves Shines Like the Sun's friends, have you no shame? You signed contracts and gave your oath to be our allies and now you have sided with that evil liar Bright Fortune, killed the men you swore your oaths to and betrayed the rest of us by taking our enemy's side!"   It was probably a good thing the Cacks never figured out the human social cues for anger and disgust. When Most Noble responded, he seemed genuinely puzzled. "But demonstrating Sherman conspired against Bright Fortune, Overbearing and the rest of us at the start."   I heard Dexter cursing in the background, but neither he nor Maxwell could frame a suitable reply. Still thinking of Phil, I cut in, "If, as you say, Sherman was guilty of violating the truce, then he only got what he deserved. But if commanders Porter and Moony are not only innocent, but helped you uncover this plot, then send them to us to advise us, since we can both be sure that they have everyone's best interest at heart.   Most Noble paused, listening to the translation, then stood speechless for a long moment. He turned to another Cack and clacked out something and the communication signal ended.   "Good one," Dexter grumbled.   "You exposed their lies all right," Maxwell added.   "Let's just wait and see what they say," I cautioned. I was actually hoping they were telling the truth. If Phil had a reason to suspect Sherman, he might have reported it. In that regard he was honest almost to a fault. If he's still alive, I thought.   We waited for nearly an hour after which the Cacks turned their ships around and left without another word.

 

Part Three: The Long Retreat -- Chapter 23

I stood on the bluffs overlooking the Martian colony of New Athens and admired the academy's spire through the colony's clear dome. Looking up, I saw the stars in the sky move. A handful of stars flared into life and began to fall groundward. As I watched, I realized they were missiles launched by Cack warships. The missiles punched through the dome and lifted it on a fountain of fire. The rock jumped under my feet and a huge blast, thinned by the Martian atmosphere to a mere gale, flung a tidal wave of dust and smoke over me. Darkness blotted out the stars so that I could see nothing. I waited in the black, listening to the sound of my breath echoing in my power suit's helmet.  Doctor Powers, my father, my family, my friends—they were all dead. My father's company, Trans-Luminal Systems, the Academy, they were all gone. My life as a scholar, a future business leader, whatever it might have been, had just ended. Yet as I listened to my breath rasp in my helmet and felt my hands curl in their armored gauntlets, I was still, somehow, alive. I sensed the thrumming power of the suit seemingly for the first time. Looking up through the thinning clouds, I watched the Cack warship leave. They had killed the old Kenneth Phon, I thought. I don't think they'll like the new one. I awoke with a start, lying on my bed in a flight-suit I hadn't taken off in at least twenty-four hours. All around me, the ships of the Solarian fleet drifted, unprepared, not even on alert. It was almost like we were just waiting for theCacks to stroll over and capture and kill us or torture us or sell us into slavery.  Enough of this, I thought and sat up. I stripped off the flight-suit, took a shower, shaved, fixed my hair and put on my best uniform. If I was going to die, at least I was going to look like an officer in the Solarian space force. I could almost hear my father's voice ask me. "What do you think you're doing?" "Doing what you always tried to teach me, father. I'm dealing with it." "Don't fool yourself. You have no combat experience." "And just who is going to send us a commander now?" "Besides you're too young. Who is going to follow you?" "And how old do you think I'll live to if I just hand myself over to the enemy today?" This seemed to shut him up. I left my cabin and flew weightlessly down the too quiet corridors. No one had bothered to restart the habitat modules' rotation, but at this point it was too late. We would soon be on alert. A strange peace settled on me as I entered the C&C. I imagined it must be something like the peace of a condemned man who knows all hope is gone. However I wasn't dead yet. I strapped myself into the crash pod, which still smelled of sweat and fear, called up the executive command menus, selected the fleet-wide setting and switched it to FAS Gamma. The alarms sounded painfully loud after the unnatural quiet of defeat. I watched the bandwidth meters spike upwards as the AIs of the various ships of Phil's combined Solarian/Pentaminc fleet responded. Tossing and turning all night, I had only got about three hours of sleep. Now, as the sensor data began filling my displays and the fleet came alive, I felt fully awake for the first time in a while. "Fleet Command! What's going on? Is it another attack?" came the frantic requests. "One moment. Please stand by." I waited, smiling, as the ships checked in. After I had them howling on hold, I backed the alert status down to Delta and conferenced them all. "Gentlemen, it may have slipped your notice, but we are still, technically, in a state of war. Please have your ships form up in a defensive sphere. I'm calling a conference of all SCs in five minutes.

Brennon, at least, wasted no time forwarding my orders as the accelerations alarms sounded soon afterwards. Ship Commanders of other fleets started noticing something was up and calling to see what it was. I ignored them, knowing it was the best way to get their attention. Five minutes later, I set up the virtual conference space and the commanders came flooding in. "Ken, what's happened?" Chris asked. "Why did you raise the alert?" Commander Brennon asked. "I couldn't sleep." I looked in amusement at the other commanders' faces. Even with some of the low resolution images, I could tell they were all exhausted and hopeless. Most weren't even in uniform. "Nor, I expect, could you. Just thinking of everything the enemy will do to us kept me tossing and turning and I didn't see any point in lying there like that." A couple of heads nodded and one or two grunted in agreement. "I noticed, while we were chasing the enemy all the way back to their home system, that they didn't stand and fight until they had made the best plans they could. But on our part, I don't see anyone preparing for anything but defeat." Realizing that the threat wasn't immediate, the fear faded from their eyes which glazed over with despair and drifted downwards. "What do you think will happen to us if we just surrender? You know what Righteous Ruler did to his own brother. What do you think he'll do to a bunch of aliens who tried to kill him, or worse, make him his brother's slave? Do you think he might make such an example of us that no one will dare even think of opposing him?" I paused to let that sink in, but it didn't take long. They were all close to the bottom already. "Believe it or not, I think things are looking up." This got their attention and earned me some surprised, puzzled and a few annoyed looks. "Perhaps you didn't notice, but the Cacks have some nice worlds and some pretty fancy stuff. While the truce lasted, I could only look on with envy at all the rich supplies and high technology around us knowing the only support we'd get was by spending money we didn't have for supplies we couldn't afford. Considering how bad things got, I used to fear the truce far more than I now fear war. "Now nothing is off-limits, all Cack space lies before us and, as they say...to the victor belongs the spoils." A few more faces looked up and I saw the first faint gleam of optimism in their eyes. "And let us not forget that we are not alone here. Surely the Maker, who is in all places at all times, did not fail to notice how the Cacks violated their oaths of peace—oaths they swore in His name? If we who, despite our need, stayed true to our oaths and kept from taking what some might argue we had already earned, then who do you suppose He will favor? We already know that our crews are better disciplined, our attacks better coordinated and our fleets more professional and more experienced than theirs. If in addition to these things the Great Maker himself is on our side, whose side would you rather be on? This got them talking enthusiastically. They almost sounded like the crew I had boosted with. I let them talk a minute to make sure the enthusiasm had spread as far as it would go before continuing. "As obvious as these things are, I doubt we are the only ones to think of them. Then, by God, let's not wait for someone else to challenge us to do what needs to be done. Let us instead set the example and show we are best suited to lead!" I watched them as they voiced their agreement. With only one exception, they looked ready to take on the Cack armada again. "As for myself, though I was a fleet sub-commander, I would be willing to follow whomever you chose to lead us against the Cacks. But if you were to choose me I would not make excuses because of my age or experience as I think I know what needs to be done."

"I say we appoint Ken the new fleet commander," Brian said. "I agree," Commander Brennon added. They turned to sub-commander Harlow. He had been Phil's closest associate until I came along. The always serious Brian Harlow scanned the group then said, "I agree. I believe commander Phon is the best choice for the position. Everyone, except for one holdout, talked excitedly about taking the war to the Cacks. Some were even cheering. But while most were calling to make me the new fleet commander, one commander was pouring his doubt out like water on a smoldering fire. "You're mad if you think you can oppose the ruler. Our only hope is to come to some sort of agreement with him. Do you realize how many light-years we are from the closest Solarian colony? Have you any idea how many enemy-controlled transit stations lie between us and Sol? I don't think you can even count high enough to number all the ships closing in on us as we—" "That'll be enough, sir!" I shouted, my clenched fists shaking at my sides. "Obviously you haven't been paying attention to what's been going on. Surely you were around somewhere when the ruler, flushed with pride from having killed his own brother, arrogantly demanded our surrender. Perhaps you remember how, when we assumed our battle formation, he sent messengers begging us not to attack him and bribed us with supplies until we agreed? And when our commanders went unarmed to the ruler's conference, trusting to Righteous Ruler's truce as you are recommending we do, what happened? Are they not even now suffering under Cack torture, unable even to die no matter how much they want to?" I slammed my fist on my desk. My avatar imitated my move, though the gesture was lost on the others due to a lack of a table. "And knowing all this, you can still say that those urging us to defend ourselves are mad—that we should trust Righteous Ruler again?" I looked around the conference room holding each of the commanders' gaze with my eyes. "Gentlemen, I suggest this man is unfit to command a warship. I don't know what colony he came from, but he's an embarrassment to the whole human race. I suggest we strip him of his command and put him in command of a kitchen. Let him serve food to the real warriors if he wants to be of any use to anyone." Harlow shared a personnel file with the conference "He's not from a Solarian colony, nor from Terra itself." A file icon appeared on my display. I opened the file and Commander James Ferrell's file held a picture of our coward's face. I also noticed that Commander Ferrell was one of a group of infants sent to live on the Cack home world as part of a cultural exchange of children. "Genetically, he's human," Harlow continued, "but he's been raised to think like a Cack." The commanders erupted, "He'll betray us all!" "Traitor!" "To the brig with him!" The commanders, once they had arrested James and settled down, agreed to call a meeting of all the other fleet commanders, or where a commander had been killed, his sub. By this time the other ships had learned of the alert signal, seen our fleet's movements and were very anxious to learn what was going on. They responded quickly to our request for a conference and, despite being in the middle of the third shift, the various fleet commanders and sub-commanders were soon logging in. Sub-Commander Harlow called the meeting to order. "Ladies and gentlemen, considering our current situation, we decided we needed to discuss our best course of action and thought we should include the other fleet commanders. At this point, I'd like to ask Kenneth Phon to repeat what he said to us. I set the holographic projector to full opacity and scanned the despairing faces around me. They looked just like my own ship commanders had when I had first awakened them. I could feel my own energy and enthusiasm drain away. I was going to have to do it all over again. I was going to have to turn another group around, only this time the audience and the burden seemed greater. I took a deep breath and saw Chris, with a goofy grin on his face, slip me a thumbs up. Well, I thought, at least I have something to build on. "There is one thing I think we can all agree on," I began. "Righteous Ruler and Bright Fortune have done their best to negate our truce." I paused to judge their reaction and got only grim agreement. "Considering they are doing their best to destroy us, I suggest we do our best toprevent that and, if possible turn the tables on them." Yes, I was belaboring the obvious. The sad thing is I felt I needed to, to get their attention. Anything approaching military discipline had disappeared in the shock of the betrayal and the loss of our leaders.  "A great responsibility now rests with you. Your crews are watching. If they see that you are already defeated, don't expect them to fight either. But if you act confident and ready to take on the Cacks and you challenge them to do the same, you can count on them to do their best to follow your example." This earned me some chagrined nodding of heads. "In other words, ladies and gentlemen, it's time to earn those fat paychecks they give you commanders." This brought some chuckles and a few changed expressions. Finally, they seemed to be listening. "Since nothing is accomplished without leadership, our first order of business is to re-establishthe chains of command. Vacant positions should be filled by giving field promotions to the most qualified. Some units may have to be combined and others eliminated. "Also, I'm sure you've noticed how dispirited the crews are. Routine duties are not being performed, repairs are not being made, many have reported in for sick duty or are not reporting in at all. In truth, I don't think much can be accomplished with the crews as they now are. But if we can keep them busy, get them thinking of what they can do instead of what will happen to them, then we have a chance. One thing we've already learned, fighting spirit is more important that mere strength of numbers. If the spirit is defeated, no force can stand, but if the fighting spirit is strong, any number of foes may be defeated." Having woken them up at last, I sat down to give them a chance to do their jobs. A few commanders actually clapped and all seemed a little more hopeful. Old Commander Smith of New Sparta threw back his shoulders and sat up straighter. "Until now, Commander Phon, all I knew about you is that you were a Martian. Having heard you speak, I wish I had a thousand more like you, then our fleets would be sure to have the right spirit." He turned to address the other commanders in v-space. "At this point, ladies and gentlemen, I suggest we all work to restore order in our fleets and fill the vacant posts. Then, when that is done, let us hold afleet-wide conference and see what we can do about getting this force moving again.  

 

Chapter 24

"You're a natural," Chris said as we waited for the next meeting. The rest of the fleet had spent the remains of the night shift organizing their command structure. We'd had a head start, but I still got calls, mostly from the ship sub-commanders who had been promoted, who needed direction on how to deal with problems. "I don't know," I shook my head. "They didn't teach this stuff at the academy."  "Which only goes to prove my point," Chris laughed. "You're a natural. If you had been a command officer, they would have ruined you."  I couldn't help but chuckle with him.  A lot of battlefield promotions were made, but the missing ranks were soon filled. Once the chains of command were re-established, the ships were gathered into a defensive formation. By the time of the big meeting, word had spread throughout the crews that Kennth Phon and the other commanders had come up with a plan to get everyone home. There was a noticeable air of excitement as every man and woman throughout the combined fleets connected with the virtual meeting place.  The new commanders were introduced to the crews, some routine matters of fleet operations were addressed, and then the senior commanders addressed the fleet. "I don't have to tell you how difficult our position is," Commander Smith began. "We are now in an all-or-nothing situation. We face either a glorious victory or a glorious defeat. Whatever we do, we do not want to be taken alive. You don't want to know the kind of revenge the Cacks intend to take out on us, but you can be certain it's the sort of thing you wouldn't wish on your worst enemy. If we are going to die, we are going to go down fighting like warriors and not butchered like animals."  Commander Smith was obviously of the old do-or-die school. I hoped Commander Abrams would be a little more inspiring. When Smith had finished, Abrams addressed the crews.  "Whatever happens next, our fates are in the hands of the Maker. Considering the circumstances, I can think of no better place to be. Righteous Ruler, who many of the Cacks regard as like a god, has proved himself a faithless liar. Bright Fortune is even worse. After swearing to do his utmost to save us whom he called his neighbor, after taking an oath and calling on God himself as a witness, he used our faith against us and seized our generals, even at a diplomatic meeting. Most Noble too, Shines Like the Sun's best friend, betrayed Shines Like the Sun's memory and his own oath to us and joined Shines Like the Sun's and our enemy. What reward do you think they have earned?  "As for us, we must put our faith in our Maker and not in the Cacks, fight as best we can and trust God to reward and punish as He sees fit."  When they had finished, I rose and my avatar rose with me. I had recorded a new image of myself in my best uniform and subtly edited it until my avatar looked as close as I could come to the ideal military leader.  "We've all heard, as if we didn't already know, what liars the Cacks have proven to be. It seems to me, considering what happened to our commanders, we'd have to be pretty desperate to even consider making peace with them."  Hopefully this would shut up any other James Ferrells out there I thought.  "If then, it is be war, let us do everything in our power to make them pay for their crimes!" At this point the crowd, which had remained completely dispirited during Sherman's and Abrams' talks were sitting up and looked a little more eager to do battle.  "We have already heard why we have every reason to hope that the Great Maker will deliver us from our mutual enemy, but let me give you another reason to hope. 

"Remember your own fathers and mothers who, when the Cacks first attacked Sol, fought off a more numerous and technologically superior force with little more than their own courage and determination. And later, when the colonies declared their independence and the Cacks saw it as an opportunity to expand their Moiarchy, again your parents fought off their vast armada so that half of our ships and buildings carry their names to this day. Their statues still clutter our courtyards and—most significantly—you still enjoy the freedom they won.  "This valor is your inheritance. And lest you think I am talking about the fathers of some other Solarians consider this—" I smiled. "Only a few days ago you were kicking the collective butt of those Cacks' descendents all the way back to their home world. Though they outnumbered you ten to one, though you were fighting to help an alien win his empire, you did not hesitate and you did not flinch to face them. At that time, you knew little about their abilities and tactics. Now you've taken their measure and found them lacking. How much more appropriate is this current battle for your own freedom? So what is there left to be afraid of?"  The audience exploded in cheers and I had to wait for them to die down.  I continued, paraphrasing some of what I had said to my own commanders about the end of the truce being a good thing in disguise and started making some practical observations on how the fleet should proceed.  "First, we should destroy all the supply ships."  This brought a gasp from the assembly.  "Not one can go beyond 2C and most are too damaged to do us any good anyway. Our success here lies in our speed. When we enter a new system, we should be able to reach their main supply stations before they can call up an effective defense. We are a large enough force they will give us anything we ask to be rid of us.  "In fact," I chuckled, thinking of the incident at Fertile Fields, "we should probably act as if we have no intention of leaving. Think of The Unbounded Ones, That Which Overturns, or The Swords. They are each no more technologically advanced than we are, most are more primitive, yet I have no doubt but that Righteous Ruler would build a fleet of jump ships or even a transport gate to the other end of the galaxy if they would agree to leave his Moiarchy and stop raiding merchant convoys. How much more willing will he be to get rid of us? He may even fear that, now we have seen all the Cack Moiarchy has to offer those with the strength and courage to take it, that we might lose any desire to leave and found a colony world right in the midst of his Moiarchy."  This brought some chuckles from the crowd.  "Finally, and most importantly, we must restore proper military discipline and learn to act as a single fleet. Until now Innman's Pilgrims—sorry—the SI-Transit Security force, has fought alongside of the Pentaminc Security force and the Patriotic Force of the Free Government of the Thousand—"  A cheer rose up among some of the crew at their mention. I smiled.  "—has fought alongside of the Sentinels, each relying on Commander Sherman and the other commanders to hold the fleets together. The Cacks knew this. That's why they didn't attack until they had captured our commanders. They assumed we would fall apart without them and be defenseless. But if you see something that needs to be done, don't wait for an officer to tell you to do it, take care of it. If an officer tells you to do something, even if it isn't your job, do it. Support each other, remember you are a team, and the Cacks will find not just one Commander Sherman but ten-thousand Commander Shermans."  This caused quite a lot of cheering and excited talk as everyone seemed to be for it.  "To help in this, I suggest we integrate our command structures so we can function as a single fleet." 

This also caused a commotion, but I definitely heard boos mixed in with the cheers. "I know that some of you work for different governments, some of your ship commanders are owner operators and most of the rest of you work for different corporations—some bitter rivals. This suggestion may violate some of your contracts. But those governments, corporations and clients aren't here paying the bills right now and, until we get back to Solarian space, I suggest we suspend the old charters and agreements and draft a new charter, incorporating us into a single fleet with a single command structure: The United Solarian Fleet."  The buzz in the virtual conference space increased, but most of it seemed positive. One fellow shouted out an approving "Yes!" which brought some laughter.  "Since this matter concerns everyone," I concluded, "If anyone has a better plan, bring it forward, regardless of their rank."  Some of the crew insisted we adopt my proposal immediately. Others suggested we table it for further discussion until Commander Smith reminded them that the Cacks could attack us at any moment. Some crew members wanted to set up a committee to draft a formal charter, others wanted to change the name or had suggestions for new ranks for the command structure. As the meeting threatened to spin out of control, Commander Smith stepped up and took charge.  "We will have time, I hope, to discuss some of these other issues later. Right now let's vote on the plan Kenneth Phon has proposed."  Everyone voted and, to my surprise, the measure was passed by such a large majority that I was sure it was as close to unanimous as this group would ever get.  Now if only we could continue to hold them all together.  * * *  We cannibalized the supply ships, stripping out their TCR generators and anything else that might be useful. A distribution network was established to ensure every ship had a chance to get any materials they needed for repairs. Though the crews of a thousand ships descended like locusts on the soon to be sacrificed supply ships, it still took a couple of days to take them apart. While this was going on, a trio of Cack fast attack craft lead by God's Gift arrived signaling a desire to talk. It was not completely unheard of to have Cack ships visit us. There were still independent merchants looking to make money, and there were SCs who had served in Cack space for years and who still had left behind some unfinished business when they joined Shines Like the Sun.  God's Gift came within com laser com range and sent a broad channel message to the fleet. "He Who Looks Up, witness you that I an intimate friend of Shines Like the Sun and positively not yours enemy. I am having some fear of falling from Righteous Ruler shown favor and so I searching my absence. I greatly much lacked traveling beside you if possibility, contingent on your plans' nature. What do you speak?"  Dexter set up a quick conference of the fleet commanders since the connection to the Cack ship came through his network. "Well, commanders, what do you say?"  "Can we trust him?" Smith asked.  "Not entirely, but he was a friend of Shines Like the Sun and what he says about having fallen out of favor may be true." Maxwell said.  "He's only got three FACs. If we keep an eye on him, he wouldn't be able to do too much damage and his knowledge of the Cack transit system could be invaluable. It could save weeks or even months of wandering around if he is in such a hurry to get out of reach of the ruler."  Smith looked at Abrams who merely nodded. "Very well, we'll let him join us." He signaled to God's Gift and said, "Our plan is to return to Solarian space as soon as possible, assuming no one tries to stop us. If they do, we will do everything in our power to destroy them."  "Much goodness, excepting...," God's Gift said.  "Except what?"  "You should knowing Most Noble has increased strength to Bright Fortune."  "Yes we know they've joined forces."  "Bright Fortune's strengthening daily. If fighting appears, I thoughtless you're stopping them."  "We've heard all this before." Smith sounded as if he were growing irritated.  "Possibility your best knowing," God's Gift conceded. "Yet, grasped your thoughts the supplies obtaining?" Dexter cut in, "We're going to take them from whatever systems we pass through."  "Your good plan. Few systems will having opposing strength if Righteous Ruler doesn't will later deliver his ships after you. Remember yet of our entering the inner sphere. All sought space assets the systems removed or destroyed. Their advantageous linked transit stations provide the Indweller's EPR network. Proceeding word Righteous Ruler can deliver of your coming. Fearing I empty space and quickly tired supplies before your half-way homecoming."  "You seem to have certainly thought this out," I said. I was growing increasingly suspicious of his offer to join us. "Perhaps you have a better plan and would share it."  "No plan. My difficulty of light-years in seeing no path without Righteous Ruler's help."  I flash messaged Smith, text only: kill his feed. Smith cut him off then turned to me. "Are you thinking what I am thinking?"  "That Righteous Ruler or Bright Fortune sent him to talk us into surrendering."  "I'm not sure," Abrams added, "but I spent a lot of time working for Bright Fortune before changing sides and I think I saw one of the Cacks standing behind God's Gift in the video feed, wearing his idiogram. He could well be extorting God's Gift's cooperation.  "Either way, I think we should forbid any further contact with any of the Cacks," Smith said.  "Especially after Commander Powell snuck off in that courier ship with a bunch of his subs," Maxwell added.  Smith nodded. "As of right now, we have to consider every Cack we see as the enemy."

 

Chapter 25

When the old transports and the ships too damaged to keep were destroyed, the fleet formed up and left the system. We moved in a defensive sphere formation with our slowest and most damaged ships protected in the center. This included our few remaining FACs, some captured alien ships and the faster support ships who could keep up with the fleet.
 As we negotiated the first transit station, God's Gift reappeared with twenty or so ships. He approached rapidly sending out a message asking us to wait for him. Half of the fleet had already transited the station when his ships caught up to us and opened fired.  Alerts flashed across my tac screens as dozens of ship AIs reported damage from energy weapons. At close range, particle emission weapons can quickly carve a ship to pieces. Our ship's point defense weapons seemed to come online slowly but by the time our ships responded with their own energy beams and missiles, the attackers went FTL and disappeared.  I cycled through the ship-to-ship coms and heard an unbroken string of curses and shouts of outrage from my tac officers. Harlow was the first to log into command space followed by Mike Williams and Debbie Fowler who I selected to fill Phil and Cathrine's slots. Mike was a wing sub-commander with some fleet operations experience and Debbie was a talented Tac officer from Phil's flagship, the Athena.  "Get me a status report on your ships as soon as you can," I said. "Send it to display zero one eight." I watched our attackers on the gravimetric scanners as they stopped about 2AU out. They're not done with us, I thought.  Fleet status reports began popping up on my displays. I was pleased to see far more green status indicators than I had feared. There were more yellow indicators than I liked, but at least the handful of red status ships all had working drives, power plants and life support systems.  "They're coming back," Harlow said.  "Alert your wings," I told them. Our options were limited. When the enemy was traveling under H-drive, we could throw a whole ship at them and, unless it overloaded the QWEGs, they wouldn't even feel it. The same was true with energy and kinetic weapons. A high enough energy based attack might possibly succeed, but it wasn't possible to attack while traveling under H-drive and it wasn't possible to hit a FTL ship unless you were.  Only our anti-matter missiles had a chance to stop a ship under H-drive. The missiles wouldn't be able to catch the ship so the ship would have to be attacking head-on and we would have to use an inordinate number of missiles since gravimetric sensors are not accurate enough for targeting. The missile itself would disintegrate on contact and fail to explode, but the anti-matter within would still be effective. The problem was we didn't have those numbers of missiles.  The Cack fleet stopped further out, beyond effective energy range but well inside missile range and began launching missiles. Our ships responded in kind, but before our missiles were even half-way to their targets, the Cacks turned and fled again.  Our ship's point defenses stopped most of the missiles, but a few more ships showed up yellow or red on the display who hadn't been that color before.  I looked at the ships transiting through the stations. Our defenders were decreasing in numbers and the odds were shifting against us. I couldn't allow half the fleet to be trapped here and I didn't dare try and call the rest of the fleet back. "We can't allow this to continue," I said. "I need options."  "We could attack them with fighters," Chris suggested.  "I think they'd have to be manned fighters," Debbie said. "Drones probably wouldn't catch them on reaction drives."  She sounded uncertain, though she was obviously correct. Cathrine, I thought, would have been more confident. I sudden blade of loss stabbed through me. I hadn't thought about her much since the attack and I didn't have time to grieve for her now.  I wondered if I would ever live long enough to do that. I took a deep breath and focused on my displays. 

We had precious few manned fighter craft. Their expensive H-drives required even more expensive CAs and living pilots. In the cost/benefit analysis of our corporate masters, it was considered best to have the pilots flying slower, dumber and above all less expensive drones remotely from the relative safety of the battle cruisers.  "Would they even have the range?" I asked.  "Enough to deal with this."  "Well, that's an option," I said. "Assuming we can scrape up enough fighters across the fleets." I watched the Cack ships go back out to 2AU and stop. "But we need a more immediate solution."  I kept glancing between the gravimetric display of the Cack fleet, the tac monitor, and my fleet status display. "Brian, Debbie, it looks like your wings were hardest hit. Go ahead and move them back to either side of the transit station. I want to shift more traffic to the far side, away from our attackers."  "Right."  "Yes, sir."  "Mike, keep your fleet where it is and guard this side of the station. Chris and I are going to try and take some of the heat off you."  "Ok."  "You got a plan?" Chris asked.  "Considering how the Cacks have run every time we've fought them, I'm hoping a show of force will discourage them from continuing this harassment."  "How are we going to do that?"  "Ever heard of a game called chicken?"  "Now you're talking!" "We'll be going in FTL and the coms will be unavailable, so warn your tac officers to keep an eye on our gravimetrics so they'll know when to advance and when to stop. I'll let you make the formation assignments, but the idea is to interrupt the rhythm of their attack and throw them off."  "Got it."  We began flagging ships, sending them formation assignments and briefing the tactical officers on the plan. We had barely finished when the Cacks started another attack run.  "Here they come." Chris actually sounded excited.  I sent him an intercept course plot I had calculated. "We'll go when they get to this point."  "That puts our intercept just outside missile range of the fleet."  "That's the idea."  The Cacks crossed the line and we accelerated toward them in a tight formation. I could almost see them startle as various ships dropped out of FTL or veered to one side distorting their formation. A number of ships seemed to panic and fired missiles while they were still well out of range. We easily dodged the missiles since they couldn't track us while we were FTL and kept going. Those missiles would be inert shells by the time they neared the fleet. As we closed with the Cack ships, they turned and ran away. Unfortunately they were faster than our battle cruisers and so quickly outdistanced us. I was really wishing I had some Fast Attack Craft as I watched them pull away from us on the gravimetrics. I ordered the ship to stop and the rest of the two wings stopped and formed up alongside us. We had raced nearly halfway across the system and I didn't want to get too far away from the fleet.  We had about six seconds warning. I saw the Cacks turn toward us on the gravimetrics and just had enough time to warn the other ships on the com laser. Not all the connections had established so some of our ships' first warning was the sudden appearance of Cack warships slicing into them with high energy beam weapons. We fired back and, perhaps scored a couple of minor hits, but the Cacks leaped away. They didn't go far. 

The Cacks began to circle us in overlapping orbits, each ship circling on a different plane so that we would soon be englobed. I had seen this maneuver taught while I was in the MDF and it was very useful for trapping a slower or lest numerous foe. "Go! Go! Go!" I shouted on all command channels, and the Phoenix turned and went FTL, risking a collision with one of the encircling ships. The rest of the two wings followed and, this time, the Cacks chased us.  It's no good leading them back to the fleet, I thought. If only we could communicate while traveling faster than light. We could coordinate an ambush and concentrate our fire. I ordered the captain to stop and turn about and fire a volley of anti-matter missiles. We nearly hit a couple of ships, forcing others to veer off but the missiles were largely wasted. Other ships of the wing, repeated our move, though they stopped later and further away. While they fired, we turned back and went FTL, then stopped and fired again once we had passed them. In this way we leaped-frogged each other all the way back to the transit station, giving something like covering fire for each other and occasionally getting in a lucky hit. The Cacks gave as good or better than they got, so that by the time the last of our ships transited, most of my two wings had a long list of damages that needing repairing.  Fortunately, the pursuing Cacks didn't immediately transit and continue to harass us. I could tell our crews were dispirited, feeling they had somehow let each other and the rest of the fleet down. The other ships was already awaiting us in orbit about the system's sole inhabited world, their fleet commanders sending urgent messages asking us what had happened as our wounded ships came limping up late. I knew there would be a full debriefing afterward, but as I gave a quick thumbnail synopses to the other commanders, I could tell Smith was very angry, and not just at the Cacks.  * * *  "That was very foolish." Smith glared at me from the monitor. "It was a rookie mistake. What did they teach you at the academy?"  I didn't have the heart to tell him New Athen's Academy wasn't a military academy, so I just remained silent. "You shouldn't have let yourself get separated from the fleet. They could have easily destroyed your two wings." Abrams added.  Maxwell and Dexter, the two newer fleet commanders just sat in v-space looking uncomfortable but saying nothing.  "You are, of course, quite right," I said, "which is only obvious. I just couldn't stand by and allow them to destroy our ships without trying to stop them and so I allowed myself to get drawn into a futile chase. Thank the Maker there weren't more enemy ships or none of my fleet would have made it through the transit station.  "This has, however, pointed out a flaw in our defenses," I continued. "We need to have at least one wing of fast attack craft stationed in the rear of the fleet to deal with these hit-and-run attacks. I know we have captured a few Cack FACs and, I believe, we have some other fast ships that might be converted into gunships or even missile carriers. Finally, I have heard the Freemen colony engineers have a method of adapting particle emission weapons to handle anti-matter, and since I know we have a number of them in the fleet, I suggest we try and adapt the particle emission weapons on what FACs we can find. I know handling anti-matter presents special problems, but we are going to run out of missiles quickly whereas if we save the waste anti-matter from the TCR generators, we should have a nearly limitless supply."  I could see their minds turning my suggestions over, my previous embarrassing actions temporarily forgotten. They finally agreed and assignment me the task of putting together something like a FAC wing. Before the morning shift, I had identified twenty fast ships whose particle weapons the engineers assured me could be adapted and another five genuine Cack FACs. We stayed in the system a whole day making emergency repairs to the damaged ships while the engineers planned their modifications to our new FACs and gathered the resources they would need.  "How goes the conversions?" I asked a Chief Master Engineer Droemer the next day.  "Very well! It seems like these particle weapons were nearly built to handle this. We just have to add some extra safeguards and, of course install the anti-matter bottles and delivery systems, but we should have that done in no time."  "Excellent. Do you think, then, there might be any delays in starting out tomorrow?"  "I'm sorry, when did you say we were leaving?"  "Tomorrow."  "There's no way we'll be ready by tomorrow."  "Well, when can we leave then?"  "Next week!"  "But you said—We have to leave tomorrow! The Cacks could attack us at any moment. We have to try and get some distance between us while we have the chance."  "Look, in a ship-yard, this would normally take at least six to nine months, minimum."  "Yes, well, we all know how bureaucracy normally works. How long will it take without the paperwork, union work stoppages and with your crews working around the clock?"  "I figured round-the-clock work crews into my estimates."  "Is there any way to cut the time? Do you need more tools or more workers?"  "We're already cutting the safety margin to a bare minimum." Droemer looked thoughtful. "We might be able to use a few extra hands, though. Let me talk to my master engineers and I'll get back to you."  "Anything you need, you just tell me. We have to get those ships ready immediately."  * * *  We left the next day, anyway. We tried to keep the periods of acceleration to a minimum to accommodate the engineering crews still working on the weapons, but it wasn't possible to transit through a gate under H-drive. (At least no one had tried it because the theoretical physicists told us the gravitational forces would play havoc with the quantum wave field.) We spread out a compliment of recon drones behind us, just knowing that God's Gift or some other agent of Bright Fortune would try to catch us as we transited the gate. We made it across without incident and hurried through the next system towards the next gate trying to put some distance between us and the attackers we knew had to be following us. Nor were we disappointed.  We had just transited to the following system and gotten half-way to the next gate when God's Gift appeared suddenly behind us. We later learned that, overestimating the damage he had done in the last exchange, he had promised to capture us and hand us over to Bright Fortune. This time, however, he had obtained from Bright Fortune an additional one hundred FACs plus four hundred other gunships and missile carriers.  As his fleet transited behind us, we stopped, turned around and formed up so my rear-guard became the vanguard. Our new FACs we hid just behind the lead ships, ready to leap to the attack when needed. Most still did not have working particle weapons, but we loaded as many up with missile pods as possible.  We waited until they attacked. I could only wonder what was going through the thing God's Gift called a head. From what I can tell, we Solarians had a mixed reputation of being both backwards and stupid and, at the same time, ruthlessly clever and dangerous. As we waited for them to come into range, did we seem paralyzed by dull-witted indecision or was it a confident—almost arrogant—aggression?  They passed the outer missile limit and continued their attack. At this point I figured they intended to use beam weapons. I made my ships wait until the last possible moment and then called for our attack.

 

Chapter 26

The whole fleet leaped forward. Within seconds the Cacks had second thoughts and began to turn around. Our heavy battle cruisers nearly caught up with them and our FACs actually passed them up and lay down a stream of anti-matter in their path. It is an amazing thing to see a ship, traveling—relatively—faster than the speed of light, leaving a trail of fire as the front end of their ship sparks and burns away. A number of their ships were heavily damaged as they fled back towards their last transit station. Of course their ships bottle-necked there, allowing us to board and seize many of them.
 Our crews rejoiced to have finally gotten revenge on the twice-turned traitors. I must emphasize at this point, however, that I had no knowledge or part in the war crimes that followed. As we secured those ships trapped on our side of the transit station, the crews spaced every last Cack on-board. The crawdads, they allowed to live, though I'm not sure if they had figured out how to force such large creatures out of the airlocks.  I am told, particularly by those Cack apologists with a political axe to grind in the court of public opinion, that a Cack without a pressure suit can live in vacuum considerably longer than a Solarian, though it is certainly no more pleasant. "We need to find out who was responsible and hold them accountable," I demanded in the after-action conference between the FCs.  "I don't think that's even possible." Smith shook his head. "Do you have any idea how many are involved? From what I hear it was pretty much a unanimous decision. Are you going to gut the crews from your ships?"  "There must have been leaders."  "Maybe. Maybe not. These things are frequently spontaneous," Abrams said. "They've had to swallow a lot of injustice from the Cacks and they still haven't forgotten what happened to the survivors at Many Ports Three. Holding court-martials and punishing their leaders will only turn your crews against you."  "But failure to do so can lead to the total loss of discipline. We don't want to become some sort of space faring mob, or worse, pirates."  Smith thought about this a moment, then nodded. "Agreed. Some sort of action will have to be taken, but it will have to be collective action. We can't turn the more unruly elements into martyrs, even in the metaphorical sense."  In the end, they all got a stern talking to and extra duties. There wasn't much else we could do and the additional duties were necessary anyway. The extra sense of guilt however motivated them to speed the needed ship repairs and even get the particle emission weapon conversions done in half the anticipated time. The engineers assured me that there was still a lot of work required to make them safe, but he said there was a good chance they'd destroy the enemy before they destroyed themselves, or us.  * * *  For three days, we traveled through Cack systems scattering locals before us. One system we passed through was defended like a fortress so that we couldn't approach their home world. All the transit stations along the way had massive defensive weapons systems which probably could have destroyed every one of our ships as we transited. Yet, strangely, all the battle stations had been hurriedly emptied and abandoned.  We traveled with only a vague idea of where we were going. We had captured several traders along the way and assembled a somewhat complete map of the major systems between us and Solarian space, but the web of connected systems around us remained a mystery.  On the fourth day after our encounter with God's Gift, Bright Fortune himself appeared with a large force. We were halfway through a particular system with a number of transit stations. The H-drives had already exceeded their normal allowed run-time and needed to be taken off-line for servicing. A merchant trader helping us, told us the next system out had only two gates, which would make it more easily defended, so we had planned on pushing on. 

"Great Maker!" Maxwell shouted on the command channel. "Look at those ships!"  Swarms of ships poured in from all the surrounding gates.  "That's not just God's Gift's ships," I said. "I'm seeing a lot of Most Noble's transponder codes among them."  "Those rotten traitors," Abrams muttered.  "I'm also seeing the Ruler's brother-in-law, Overbearing's ships mixed in there with Bright Fortune's," I added. "They're really holding nothing back."  "Let's form up," Smith said. "Lens formation. I'll take the center. Abrams, Phon, Maxwell, Dexter, you'll take the zero, ninty, one-eighty and two-seventy degree positions respectively."  The Cacks had apparently learned something for their exposure to us Solarians because they didn't attack in a disorganized wave but formed up instead, blocking our exit. Even after they got into formation, they advanced to a point just outside missile range and stopped. We waited and stared at the massive force before us. I half-hoped they would negotiate.  They launched their FACs and we responded in kind. Their FACs, having gotten the worst of the last exchange, fired their missiles and turned and ran as our fast attack craft came in range. Our FACs gave chase. "OK, Chris. Turn around now," I said to myself as I watched his wing on the gravimetric monitor with growing tension. The wing had followed the Cack ships back towards their main fleet and was now well inside their missile range. Several times I started to reach for the communications icon to flash messaged Chris, stopping only after remembering we had no EPR connection. Our ships should be firing their missiles and turning around, I thought. Instead they continued on a suicidal plunge into the overwhelming enemy force.  I held my breath and watched Chris' wing move through the enemy formation. I called up the optical sensors and zoomed in, knowing the light from the attack would take a couple of minutes to reach us before I could actually see what was happening. On the gravimetrics, Chris's wing passed through the enemy formation which scattered behind him like leaves in his draft. Only then did his wing turn around. I anxiously counted his ships to see if he was bringing them all back.  The Cacks withdrew a ways, but did not leave the system. Chris drew up to our fleet and his ships pulled into their slots as if they had merely gone out on a short errand.  "What was that?" I demanded once I could raise him on the com laser.  "Just making a statement," Chris laughed. "Has the light made it back yet?"  I looked at a composite image of the Cack fleet. Light flashed as streams of anti-matter raked across their ships. They staggered around like drunken sailors trying to bring their weapons to bear on Chris' wing, but he had already raced through, leaving a trail of destruction behind. My monitor gave his average calculated speed as he maneuvered through the Cack fleet at close to ten times the speed of light. They must have only switched off the H-drive only a couple of seconds at a time to fire their weapons before zipping off to the next target.  "Did you navigate entirely on gravimetrics?" I asked.  "You know what they say. If you can see the target, you're going too slow."  "You are insane! How did you not lose any of your ships?"  "You have to admit it was effective, though."  "I think Smith will have an aneurism when he sees this. Promise me you'll never do this again."  Chris' expression turned abruptly serious. "Promise me it won't be necessary again." 

* * *  We kept Chris' wing close at hand as we transited, but it proved unnecessary. I'm certain the Cacks were surprised by the strength and aggression of Chris' retaliation. Whatever the reason, Bright Fortune followed us at a distance for the rest of the day, watching but not attacking us as we traveled to the next gate and transited.  The Cacks must have thought that they were going to hold us in the last system, for the system we stopped in had not been gutted. Here we found a treasure trove of supplies so we spent the entire day raiding ships, space stations and orbital fabrication plants. Fully stocked and repaired as we were likely to get, we traveled unmolested for four days.  "Finally, a bit of luck," Abrams said during our daily commander's conference in v-space. He, Solomon, Dexter and Maxwell looked haggard. Smith looked even worse. I had begun to worry about him and his tired glazed expression didn't reassure me. We were discussing the intelligence gathered from the local traders about the systems we were traveling through. "The rest of the systems from here to Solarian space are filled with nebulae. The extra mass should slow everyone down and largely negate the Cack advantage with their fast attack craft. Without their speed, our heavier battle cruisers will have a definite advantage."  I looked at the maps we'd been able to piece together. "Except that the nebulae will also restrict our movement. Many of these systems have narrow winding channels of free space through which we'll have to funnel the fleet. The Cacks know these areas better than we do. They used their transit system to outflank us thinking they could catch us in the last system. There may be similar areas where they can trap us."  Smith, who had sat through most of the meeting with a distracted look, slowly frowned at me. "So what are you proposing?"  "I wish I had an easy answer. We will have to remain on the alert and flexible. Until now our formations have been designed to defend against large coordinated attacks. Now we will probably face smaller attacks which may come from multiple directions. At the very least we need to prepare to divide the fleet into smaller tactical units capable of independent action."  "But we can't let the fleet be broken up," Abrams insisted. "Any ships caught on their own will be destroyed."  "Agreed," I said. "We will need to develop combat doctrines allowing these tactical units to support each other even without the EPR transceivers. The key, I believe, is to use these tactical units to reconfigure the fleet to adapt to the surrounding circumstances."  In the end, the other fleet commanders agreed to split up their command and control centers as Phil had. The wing commanders, who always felt as if they were stuck with the responsibility of managing the bureaucratic issues of the wing with little input into strategic issues, were tasked with working with the fleet strategic officers on anticipating potential threats and coming up with responses. A bunch of war game simulations were planned, but I feared we would have little time to run them.  We reached the first nebula by the end of the day when we transited to the outer edge of the next system. The nebula's edge had all but engulfed the star system, leaving a narrow cleft of clear space as our only approach. As we flew towards it, the walls of the cleft seemed to close in around us. Nearing the narrowest portion of the gap, about a hundred fast attack ships came out of the nebula and blocked the way ahead.  The alarms jerked me awake in the crash pod where I had taken to sleeping of late. The only time I saw the inside of my own quarters was to go to the restroom or take a shower. Considering how the inside of my pressure suit smelled, there wasn't much point in bathing regularly.  I looked up at my monitors just in time to see another four hundred ships racing towards us from out of the nebula. I slammed us to FAS-Gamma giving the fleet a whole three second warning before the energy beams hit.  The point defenses responded, launching missiles and particle emission weapons of our own but the attackers wheeled away out of range before we could get a piece of them. I considered launching fighter drones, but then suggested to the other FCs that we press on under reaction drives. They agreed and soon the acceleration alarms added their chorus to the alert chimes and the anti-matter engines which throbbed with the effort of shoving our mass forward. Starting from a resting state, even three G acceleration seems painfully slow to build up speed. As we came within range of the FACs blocking our passage, they turned and disappeared into the nebula. We continued forward, having only now built up a significant velocity. As we passed into the narrows, a hundred heavy battle cruisers moved to bar the way while hundreds more FACs leaped at us from the sides. They raced across the narrow gap between us and the nebula in seconds, fired their missiles and turned back before we could return fire. Then I understood the nature of the trap. The FACs had been the bait. The heavy cruisers were to block us in while the FACs finished us off. Perceiving the gauntlet we were about to run, I gave the order for all fleets to veer to the left, into the nebula.  The nebula looked like fog, but at our velocity it was like flying into a sand storm. The ship vibrated even more than they had with the engines and a new sound, almost like a shriek, came from the hull all around us.  An urgent ping came from the Chief Master Engineer Droemer. I answered.  "What are you trying to do? Destroy the fleet before the Cacks get the chance?"  "Would you rather that mass we are plowing through be anti- matter missiles?"  "A few more minutes at this speed and it won't make much difference!"  Fortunately, having not used the H-drive, we still had EPR connections with the fleet. I messaged the other FCs and suggested we begin deceleration. The enemy not currently being visible, they agreed.  "We came within a hair's breadth of falling into that trap," I said in conference afterward.  "We're not out of it yet," Smith growled.

 

Chapter 27

"This mass is blocking my gravimetrics," Maxwell complained. "I can barely make out our own fleet. If the Cacks find us, they'll be right on top of us before we know it."
 "It's not likely they'll find us except by accident," Dexter said.  "At this point, we have two options," I began. "Assuming turning around and going back is not one of them, we can try and continue on through the nebula and go around the battle cruisers or we can try a surprise attack to break through the cruisers."  "I don't much like the sound of the last one," Abrams said.  "Really?" I said. "I was rather leaning towards that one."  "Why?" Smith asked.  "Well, they're probably expecting us to take the first option, in which case, they're likely to fall back to the open area and use their FACs to flush us out of the nebula. If we move back to the channel, there's a good chance we'll find the way clear and can go to H-drive and maneuver around them in the open area around the system's primary."  "And if they don't fall back?"  "Either way they're going to send FACs in after us so we can't stay here long. And driving through the nebula is hazardous at best. If we get back to the channel and find them there, I suggest we send a compliment of fighter drones and FACs out first to launch a diversionary attack to disrupt their formation then hit them as hard as we can. So far they've never dared stand up to us in anything like a straight fight. Anything unexpected could be enough to get them to run away."  "That may be true," Dexter said. "But they've been amazingly persistent. They obviously intend to destroy us so we can't go back to Solaria and report our victory over them. It would make them look weak. They may be afraid to fight us, but I don't think they're going to give up."  Smith massaged his forehead, his eyes shut as his considered our fate. "Let's go with the second option, but tell the FACs to attack the cruisers from behind. This may confirm any suspicions they might have that our fleet will try to flank them. They may view the attack as a delaying tactic and may well pull back in an attempt to catch us."  "Very good," I said. "I'll talk to Chris right away."  "In the meantime," Smith continued. "Let's press on toward the cruisers ourselves, but at somewhat reduced speed."  * * *  It took us hours to make it through the nebula to the blockade. Along the way, one of our ships practically rammed a Cack FAC that had been searching for us. They exchanged fire, heavily damaging the Cack, before it was lost in the nebula.  When our drone fighters burst out into the channel, they found the heavy cruisers still in their original positions waiting. The fighters, and gunships, borrowing a tactic from the enemy leaped out from the nebula and launched strafing attacks causing enough damage to turn the cruisers around and draw the cruisers after them. While the Cacks were dealing with them, the missile carriers launched a wave of destruction that caused them to sit up and take notice. Watching all this on the EPR feeds, we burst out behind the cruisers and attacked them from the rear, forcing them to break formation and flee.  We immediately went FTL and headed into the open area around the system primary. The Cacks regrouped and followed at a distance. We got far enough ahead we were able to transit before they got close enough to cause trouble.  "Jackpot!" Sub-commander, Mike Williams said. I looked at the recon drone's scanner feeds and saw what he meant. The star system had two habitable words and a third that had been heavily colonized along with numerous orbital habitats and fabrication facilities. Judging by the amount of traffic we were seeing in orbit, they were not expecting our presence at all. 

* * *  "I got a request to commandeer one of the captured personnel transports for use as a hospital ship," Brian said.  Mike and Debbie were doing their best, but I had learned that Brian was the one I could turn to in order to get things done. As a result, I promoted him to my XO and heaped even more responsibility on him. "Do it," I said, "Helen Parsa has been bugging me to find a way to relieve the various ships' doctors. We've shuffled the injured all over the fleets until every sick bed is full."  An updated repair estimate for some of our most damaged ships distracted me. We had taken a severe beating in the last encounter and needed to hole up for a few days.  Brian cleared his throat.  "And have the search crews look for any medical equipment or supplies they can find," I added, realizing he was still there.  "And who should I have them report their finds to."  I chuckled. "Why Helen, of course. Tell her she's in charge of the new hospital ship."  "Very good."  We stayed in that system for three days, plunging back into the depths of the nebula on the following day. Before we had left the transit station out of range behind us, the gravimetric sensors picked up hundreds of ships transiting in. Smith's flagship stopped and signaled me by com laser. "I see we're being followed. Should we stop and form up?"  "I don't think they'll give us the chance for a decisive battle. They'll probably just hit and run. If we stop, we'll only end up having to fall back fighting. I say we run for the next system now while the rest of their fleet is transiting." "Very good."  We raced for the next gate and transited while Bright Fortune's fleet chased after us. The next system had a large hot star whose solar winds had cleared most of the area between the transit stations of stellar gas and debris. It was the perfect area to stand and fight the Cacks since we could bring our entire force against them. Abrams suggested we do just that when we stopped for a quick conference of the fleet commanders.  "I don't think so," Smith said. "Aside from a large mineral processing facility, this system has nothing, certainly nothing of interest to us. Besides, we've got at least another four to six hours before we need to take the drives off-line for servicing. We can certainly make another system by then."  "Long range optical scanners imply the next system won't be as open as this one. Bright Fortune may be planning on catching us there."  "When are their engines due for servicing, I wonder?" Maxwell said.  "Considering they've probably run longer to catch up to us, probably just a few hours," I said.  "Maybe we should wait until they leave," Dexter suggested. "They won't take their engines off-line while they are in the same system with us and their engineers seemed to be pretty strict on safety procedures. One way or another they're going to have to fight or leave."  I chuckled. "Better yet, we should go ahead and position our fleet at the next transit station then just wait for them to leave. If they think we are leaving right away, it'll encourage them to waste a lot of time trying to decide if they're going to stay in system or go back."  The others chuckled in agreement and the plan worked beautifully. One could almost see the Cack's indecision as they dithered near the system's primary wondering whether we were going to leave or stay. Finally, choosing caution over chance, they transited back to the previous system. As the last ships left, we turned and ran for it.  We put enough distance between us that we were able travel for three days, undisturbed by the pursuing Cacks. On the fourth day we came to a dual star system. It consisted of two complete solar systems gravitationally locked at only a couple hundred AU apart. Between them there looked to be as many as five habitable worlds and scores of planetoid and space-based colonies. It was also a regional headquarters of sorts with massive storage facilities for holding the collected wealth of all the neighboring systems for transport to the Cack Moiarchy. On seeing it I was immediately reminded of Fertile Fields, the group of systems the Cacks had feared we might try to claim for ourselves. Like that system, this one was fairly isolated and with only two other transit stations connecting it to the rest of the Moiarchy. It would be pretty easy to defend. If someone had a force such as ours, they could set up their own little Moiarchy and hold it pretty successfully.  The first of our ships through the transit station broke formation and fell on the nearest trading ships like starving wolves on a surprised calf. They spread out from there claiming everything that wasn't nailed down. Unfortunately, we weren't aware that Bright Fortune and his fleet were already in the system, having come in through one of the other gates. They must have had their engineers in tears, but by pushing their H-drives to the limit, they were able to take an alternate route to intercept us. Considering the value and location of the system, I suspect they were hoping to catch us before we transited in. But once they found us, the Cacks wasted no time in attacking.  Fleet Commander Smith, in the lead, was forced to take a couple of wings to rescue our raiders while I, bringing up the rear, was one of the last to learn of the attack. Transiting into the system, I was surprised to find the fleet scattered and puzzled by some of the strange maneuvering I saw on the gravimetrics. When Smith returned with the damaged ships I learned what had happened. By then it was obvious that the Cacks were destroying all the space-based assets that might be of any use to us. A number of ship commanders and other crewmen complained on the public com channels that we could have all the supplies we needed if only we stopped the Cacks.  "I agree." I laughed. "It seems the Cacks are admitting this system belongs to us now. When we had an agreement with them, the Cacks wouldn't let any of us attack any of the ruler's systems. Now they're destroying everything as if it belonged to someone else. I think we should go defend our system."  "I disagree." Smith still looked sullen and angry. "If you want them to stop quickly, we should set about destroying everything ourselves." I shrugged, hiding my irritation. "Well, at least we'll be no worse off than they are. And if they leave any resources intact that we need, we can just take it from them."  We had gathered the fleet at one of the inner habitable worlds. We didn't have enough hold space on our ships for all the items we would have liked to have taken, so once we had grabbed what we could, we destroyed everything else that might have been useful. I played with my displays in C&C as the attacks began, trying to ignore the missiles striking one of the large space habitats. The inhabitants had been warned and allowed to evacuate, but it was still a terrible waste and I couldn't help but feel, somehow, the whole thing was a missed opportunity.

 

Chapter 28

We withdrew to a large artificial habitat and space port near the gate through which we had come. Bright Fortune's force remained behind at the inner habitable world, no doubt puzzled by our actions. Most Noble, blocked our only other exit with a large reserve force at the other gate. When the fleet commanders met for their strategy meeting, the mood was somewhat despondent.
 An astrogator had approached Dexter claiming he had detected a nearby star linked to the network of the outer worlds. Dexter brought him to the meeting, but on further questioning, we learned that the star was at least twelve light-years away. This would require two years of non-stop flight for even our fastest cruisers. That is assuming they could make the journey. In reality, it would take much longer.  "Any other ideas?" Smith asked.  No one had anything to say.  The next day, more information had come in from questioning the traders trapped on the space port. While our crews roamed about the port looking for anything useful, the commanders puzzled over updated maps with the new data.  "Between us and the Cacks, System A is pretty well trashed," I began. "System B, however, has been largely untouched and contains a third gate. We know the gate behind us leads to the Cack home world, and we've learned the gate Most Noble is guarding leads to the administrative and economic center of the Moiarchy. The third gate, however, is a smaller gate and leads to Overbearing's district by way of an area called The Swords. Overbearing's district is located among the outer worlds, from which we can get to pretty much any point in Solarian space we wish."  This brought some pleased murmurings from the other commanders. I gestured to Brian Harlow's avatar. "My XO has been questioning the local traders about the area called The Swords and I've asked him to brief us.  Brian rose. "Commanders, after questioning every ship's commander and crewman I could find who has had any dealings with The Swords I learned only a few things about them. Their name, which translates as The Swords refers both to the people as well as their region of space. It is comprised of, possibly, twenty or thirty worlds in a loose coalition of sometimes warring planets. Technologically speaking they seem to be a little behind Solarian development but they have, if anything, a greater reputation for violence and warlike behavior. They are not considered a part of the Cack Moiarchy and I was told that when a Cack ruler once sent in twelve thousand ships to subdue them none ever came back. Despite all this, they will occasionally make a truce with the local district manager and allow trade between some of their worlds and the local Cack worlds.  "I'm afraid I wasn't able to learn any more about them. They seem to be a very individualist, secretive and even xenophobic race. Any questions...that I can answer?"  The commanders sat frowning silently, digesting Brian's report. Finally, Smith spoke up. "Thank you for that report. I don't suppose they currently have a truce with the local district manager."  "No, sir. At least they haven't been spotted in Cack space for a while."  "Very good. That will be all." Brian logged out and I turned to the others. "I'm not sure what options that leaves us. The Swords sound, if anything, more hostile than the Cacks."  "We don't know that," Abrams said. "They are hostile to the Cacks, but they may not be to us. You know the old saying about the enemy of my enemy..." I wanted to ask him if he knew what the word "xenophobic" meant, but I held my tongue. We were all more than a little irritable from sleep deprivation and stress.  "Going deeper back into Cack space isn't really an option either," Smith said. "There may be other routes back to the outer worlds, but we have no idea where they are or how far we'd have to go." 

"I don't suppose we can try and win The Swords over," Maxwell suggested.  "We can certainly try," I said, trying to keep the sarcasm out of my voice.  "I'm afraid we may have to gamble on our technological advantage and our military doctrines," Abrams said. "Hopefully, their coalition of worlds won't be able to unite enough forces to present a serious threat."  Like the twelve thousand Cack ships, I thought, but said nothing. I was going to have to get some sleep before I snapped.  In the end we voted to cross into Overbearing's district by way of The Swords. The vote was unanimous.  * * *  We turned our ships toward the second transit station, the one guarded by Most Noble's fleet and accelerated under reaction drives. Being gravitationally balanced by System A, the two gates were only one hundred twenty degrees apart. Even with a gravity boost from the system's primary, at one G acceleration, it would take us days to get there.  "I don't like this," Brian complained. "It's completely reckless. Objects moving that quickly will distort the gravitational fields of the transit stations. Have you even talked to a transit engineer about this?"  "We've talked to someone with some knowledge about this," I said. "Look, our little feint should get us to the gate ahead of the Cacks, but the only way to transit the fleet before they can catch us is to pick up the pace a bit."  "The gate could collapse!"  "As long as we don't try and push too many ships through too quickly, we should be OK. Our engineer gave us some guidelines." "Should? In the end, this is all just guesswork!"  I took a deep breath. "Welcome to theoretical engineering."  Brian had every right to worry. As far as I know, this had never been done before. Massive objects passing through a transit station could distort the gravitational fields of the artificial wormhole and, as Einstein told us, high velocities increase mass. Add to this the strange tidal forces that tended to occur at the boundaries of the wormhole and one wrong move could easily end in one's ship being ripped apart. The normal speed for traffic through a transit station was measured in meters per second. We would be approaching at a thousand times that speed.  After three or four minutes of acceleration, the anti-matter drives switched off and the H-drives switched on. It would still have taken us between two and three hours to reach Most Noble's fleet waiting for us at the transit station, but once we appeared committed to the course, Bright Fortune moved in to intercept us. We continued with our feint for another hour, watching the distance between us and Bright Fortune narrow. When the time came, we veered back in towards the system's primary almost reversing back on the path Bright Fortune had taken.  Bright Fortune, in turn, moved behind us to block the transit station from us in case we were somehow attempting to get around him. Once in position, he switched off the H-drive and watched us for nearly half an hour. There weren't any assets of significance in that quarter of the system, which must have puzzled him. Then he must have finally remembered System B for he took his fleet FTL and continued in pursuit.  The flight to the third transit station in System B took nearly ten hours. By this time we were pushing our drives to their limits and the maintenance engineers were getting twitchy. As we neared the station, the Cacks sent a squad of FACs against us. With their slightly faster speed, they would have been able to catch us at the gate if we had slowed down for the transit. No doubt their intentions were to disrupt the transition to give the rest of their fleet time to catch up.  As we neared the gate, we began lining the fleet up in single file in preparation for passing through. I'm sure the flight controllers for the transit station were in full panic by now. A line of large freighters, preparing to transit, crawled along in front of us. The master pilot officer of Smith's flagship kept flagging them on the navigation panel as if we couldn't see that we were about to collide. Mentally, I began counting down a rough estimate of how long we had. As that count dropped from minutes to seconds, some unheard command from the gate flight control caused the freighters to scatter like a bale of panicked turtles.  We dropped out of FTL right on top of the gate, but the momentum from our earlier burn still carried us through, one at a time, at close to two kilometers per second like a string of hypersonic bullets. Behind us the lead FACs dropped out of FTL and fired missiles at our trailing ships. I pulled up the optical displays of the ships behind me as I transited. My wing, following at the rear of the fleet, began firing counter missiles and blowing chaff as we approached the gate.  The rearmost ship was forced to fire their reaction engines to dodge a pair of persistent missiles. The pilot tried valiantly to bring his ship back inline as his transited, and it looked for a moment as if he had succeeded, but as he passed through the station, the gravitation jerked his ship around sideways. Then it just came apart as if it had been shoved through an invisible sieve. I watched in horror as a hail of debris sprayed out behind us.  Then, suddenly, the transit station was gone.  One moment it was receding behind us, a giant ring shaped space station with the mass of a planet then, in microseconds, it had shattered and collapsed in on itself. I am told the Cacks create their gates by creating and shooting microscopic black holes through spinning rings of degenerate matter. As the remains of the station collapsed in on itself, crushed by the massive gravities it could no longer control, I saw a flash of light and detected a burst of gamma rays signaling the birth of another microscopic black hole.  Smith's ships in the lead had already turned around and begun slowing. I ordered the same and urged the ship's commander to push it to three gravities so we could go back and search for survivors all the quicker. In the end, sifting through the debris, we found four intact crash pods. Their occupants were unconscious and bleeding from their ears, eyes, mouths and noses. We tried to revive them, but they were already dead. Their autopsies showed that the fluctuating gravity had spiked at thousands of Gs, shredding their internal organs.  We held a service for the dead, cremating the bodies of the recovered in the fires of our anti-matter engines, turning their remains not into ashes, but into pure light. With heavy hearts we proceeded through the first system of The Swords, tense from the threat of the unknown. Whatever lay ahead, it was our only path now. There was no way to turn back.

 

Chapter 29

The natives abandoned the system as soon as they saw us coming. Their habitats, their fabrication plants, even the population of some of their more lightly colonized worlds were loaded onto ships which fled by the thousands straight in to the surrounding nebula. When we docked at one of their abandoned stations, we found a bonanza of supplies largely traded for—or perhaps stolen from—Cack traders. The largest portion was ship parts and parts for weapons.
 The order came down from Smith not to steal or destroy anything, but to treat the natives' possessions as we would those of a respected host. We took only what we absolutely needed, mostly in the way of food, and left IOUs written in crude machine-translated versions of the Indwellers ideographs. We had no clue of how to understand The Swords' native language, but we hoped, since they traded with the Cacks, they would understand our notes. Smith's com officer broadcast messages offering an alliance with The Swords against the Cacks, but though we stayed for several hours servicing the drives, we never got any response. The next day, at the regular commanders' conference, Smith said, "Our scouts report that the path from here passes through the thickest part of the nebula. Our movements will be tightly restricted as will our speed. If the natives prove hostile, we can expect to face constant hit-and-run attacks and it will be difficult to protect the ships we have, especially the captured non-combat vessels to say nothing of the most damaged of our ships. My chief strategist has suggested we consolidate our crews and leave as many of these ships behind as we can." Dexter shook his head. "I know some commanders who are not going to like that. I've seen some pretty nice captured yachts." "It's also going to cut into the crew shares," Maxwell said. "The crews would best be concerned with saving their own skins and not lining their pockets," Abrams said, irritably. "My logistics officer has one further recommendation," Smith continued. "We can expect few chances to resupply as we go deeper into The Swords territory. This means our supplies will quickly start running low, especially food. Crew support services have already started ramping up production of cultured yeasts. I'm afraid we're going to be living on it for a while, probably until we get back to Solarian space." A collective hiss shivered through all present, except myself. As a college student, during a certain period where my father cut off my stipend as punishment, I found myself eating a lot of ramen made from cultured yeast. Having grown up with a personal chef, it was something of a novelty. Somehow I never developed the dislike for the stuff that everyone else had, though I was certain I was going to be regretting the lack of meat eventually. "In light of this," Smith hesitated as if unsure or uncomfortable with his next suggestion. "Newman, my XO, has recommended that any Crawdads or any other non-Solarian personnel who are not considered mission-essential be invited to leave the fleet." Maxwell gasped and both Abrams and Dexter's heads snapped up with startled glances at Smith. "Just leave them, here? In The Swords?" Smith stiffened. "Obviously we won't just dump them somewhere if we know its certain death, but at this point we can't guarantee anyone's survival. Our chances will go up if we reduce our number of dependents and the crawdads, being pacifists, are pretty much on good terms with everyone." "That may generally be true," I said while the others were thinking. "But we don't know what their relationship with The Swords is like. The Swords seem to be a pretty xenophobic lot." "We don't have to decide on this now." Smith waved the idea away irritably. "But I suggest we move all non-essential non-Solarian personnel to one of the support ships and I would like to vote on the rest." 

I wondered briefly if all "non-essential" personnel ended up on one surplus ship if that ship might fight itself undefended during a critical encounter. It was an uncharitable thought and probably a suspicion Smith didn't deserve, especially if the suggestion really came from Sub-Commander Newman, yet I sensed a certain undercurrent of selfish desperation in the contingency planning. The discussion of the Crawdads put a thought in my head, and having largely kept silent observing the others, I spoke up. "I have one last proposal to put to a vote." The others turned curious looks my way. "It has long been the policy of most fleets, including our own to invite the oracles to these planning sessions. With the emergency we've fallen out of the practice, but I believe we still have a couple of oracles with us. I'd like to bring at least one of them into these discussions." Maxwell gave me a skeptical look. "They didn't much help Shines Like the Sun or even Sherman." I conceded with a nod of the head. "Predicting the future is still a lot like predicting the weather, but they've generally answered specific questions accurately." I winced a little inwardly, recalling how I had gotten dragged into this situation with a leading question. Everyone ultimately agreed. As we discussed which ships we would keep, which we would lose and where we would put the crawdads, I felt like we were sliding towards that ugly point of desperation where we were going to have to start placing values on individual lives. I worried about that and what other hard choices extreme necessity might force us to make. * * * After the meeting, Newman surprised me with a request for a private discussion. He asked for a secure conference, so I had to seal my quarters and implement security procedures. I tried to maintain a friendly expression when his face appeared on my display, but something about him had always rubbed me the wrong way. He was as conniving and duplicitous as Moony, but where Moony was an effusive people-pleaser, Newman was an arrogant Spartan. Most Spartans had an excess of ego, but many have earned it by fighting in the hardest wars, commanding massive fleets, governing colonies and generally doing something to be proud of. Newman hadn't. He hadn't exactly slept his way to the top, as Moony was said to have done, but he had certainly hopped on a lot of coattails. "I need to talk to you about an important fleet matter," Newman said. "Sure. Go ahead." "It's about Commander Smith." Little prickles of suspicion tickled the back of my neck. "Oh?" "I probably shouldn't say this, I shouldn't even know about it, but I've learned Commander Smith is taking medication for Pelosism." I nearly laughed. I thought it was a joke. It was the sort of thing a comedian would say only because it was the worst possible thing that could go wrong now. With the fleet lost hundreds of thousands of light-years deep in hostile territory, our senior-most commander suddenly develops an incurable neurological disorder which leads from sporadic episodes of irrational thinking, to a delusional detachment from reality, then death. I paused and took a deep breath, considering an appropriate response. Was this truth? Rumor? Or some sort of power play on Newman's part? I decided, if he were bluffing, I'd have to call it. "If what you say is true, he'll have to be removed from command." Newman looked alarmed by the suggestion. "Oh, I don't think so—we wouldn't have the authority—only the chief medical officer..." "If what you say is true, the chief medical officer will have to support us." "Those two are pretty close; they've known each other a long time. It appears they think they are controlling the disease with medication."   "Are you saying they may have colluded to hide information critical to operational security?"

"No!" "At the very least we'll have to have a talk with his chief medical officer." "You can't!" Newman yelped. "I mean, patient confidentiality won't allow his doctor to discuss his case." I enjoyed watching him squirm. "There is no confidentiality in the military." "Yes, but...." He paused. His panicked look faded and a new confident expression tinged with smugness stole over him. "He's Spartan military and you're not. As far as the law is concerned, they only answer to Spartan Command. All Solarian governments have agreed to this." I stared at him for a minute thinking that one over. Unfortunately he was correct. Short of taking the issue to the other commanders and trying to turn them against him—a move that would guarantee the break-up of the fleet, but wouldn't necessarily remove Smith from his position—there wasn't much I could do. "So what do you want me to do?" Newman relaxed a little. "Like I said, the drugs seem to be controlling the symptoms—at least he hasn't shown any—however he's largely delegated the day-to-day operations to me anyway. Which is why I contacted you. Since I'm largely running his fleet anyway, it would be helpful if you would include me in your fleet commander briefings." So now we come to his real motivation, I thought. The question was, did he want in the meeting because he wanted inside information, or because he wanted to be seen as important and improve his position in the minds of the other commanders. I considered that latter to be more likely. I shrugged. "I have no objection to you attending—in spectator mode—but you'll have to get Commander Smith's permission first. I won't go behind his back while he's in charge of his fleet." I disconnected while he pondered that. * * * Proceeding onwards, the nebula closed in thick about us. Feeling like we were stumbling along blindfolded, we were forced to break up the fleet into our smaller tactical units and proceed at reduced speed. Though the natives had fled, they never quite left us and I could see the faint mass of their small ships fading in and out on my gravimetric sensors as they followed us from within the nebula. We did not get very far before they attacked. They appeared out of the nebula, leaping in front of us, firing antimatter pellets from electro-magnetically accelerated Gauss guns. We were forced to drop out of FTL to return fire at which point other FACs, who had been waiting for us, followed up with heavier missile file. As a result, the fleet had to keep stopping and coming back for those of us in the rear. This slowed our progress and degraded the operational capabilities of the ships in the rearward wings. Under these conditions, if they had had the numbers, they could have destroyed the entire fleet. This continued, without interruption, for nearly a week. Finally, after a particularly bad exchange where one ship was shot up so badly it might as well have been considered a total loss, I felt I had to do somehow get an advantage over The Swords. The thing is we didn't know anything about them. In fact we hadn't even seen a live member of the species. I messaged Troop Commander Kouvaras. "I may have some work for you." Kouvaras chuckled. "Work? But we've been enjoying this little pleasure cruise. The boys have all been lounging around eating their yeast cakes—I think they've put on too much weight to even get in their armor." I heard an outraged yell in the background. "I'd like to try and lay an ambush," I said. "Think you could wedge your troops into their breaching pods? "An ambush, eh? Sounds like fun. Name the time and place and we'll be there." "I'm sending you the details now. I'd like your input on the plan."

I had noticed that The Swords liked to attack when we were passing through the thickest parts of the nebula. Our route wound around from one transit station to the next attempting to avoid the worst of it, but there were still plenty of places for small low-mass ships to hide. Our opportunity came soon afterwards. We were deep into the territory of The Swords and had come on a system with a young bright star and a small heliosphere. Out beyond the heliopause, in the thick shell of gas and debris of the nebula, the natives lay in wait, knowing we would prefer to travel through the clear space near the sun. They attacked, more heavily than usual. One of our battle cruisers lost its antimatter containment and exploded, killing the entire crew. The Swords damaged another ship so badly it had to be evacuated and destroyed. We fell back, leap-frogging each other as we fought our way into the system. I had expected the rest of the fleet to stop and form up in a defensive sphere once we were in the clear space of the system but instead, once they were out of the nebula, they ran away toward the far transit station. I watched the receding ships on the gravimetrics in disbelief. It was almost as if they were just leaving us to die. Sensing our sudden vulnerability, The Swords' ships chased us into the clear space. I messaged Kouvaras. "Tell your men we're about to do some fishing, assuming we survive." "Right." I messaged Brennon. "Begin Operation Teutoburg's Revenge." We dropped out of FTL as if we were going to fight. The Swords continued after us in a roughly conical pattern but with no real formation. The fleet shifted to a lens formation to broaden our profile, only pausing long enough to blow our waste anti-matter in a wide dispersal pattern, then accelerated away at maximum relative speed. The Swords slammed into the antimatter destroying nearly a dozen of their ships, two in a collision from their sudden attempt to maneuver around the hazard. This gave us the time to put some distance between us, though The Swords followed, if anything with more determination than before. Diving back into the nebula, on the other side of the system, we dropped out of FTL and launched the breaching pods. Switching to the reaction drives, we moved away from the pods and stopped at missile firing range. We turned and waited, ready to fight. The few FACs we had, moved off, disappearing into the nebula. Behind me, the rest of our fleet was transiting through the next gate as if they'd forgotten we were behind. The Swords appeared firing missiles. We concentrated on our point defense and waited for the breaching pods, too small to show up on the gravimetrics, to do their thing. The FACs lunged out of the depth of the nebula and attacked The Swords from the rear. Many of their ships hesitated, not sure which enemy to fight and not understanding why some of their ships were screaming confusing warnings over the com or worse, not responding to their calls. A great number were simply destroyed. A handful of ships were seized and captives were taken. The rest ran away and didn't come back. "Phoenix, this is Tango-Bravo-Zero-One-Zero, do you read me?" Kouvaris' voice came on the ship-to-ship com. "Tango-Bravo-Zero-One-Zero, this is Phoenix. We read you," our com's officer replied. "Please tell Commander Phon that the fishing was good and we caught a bunch for him." "Will do." I relayed orders that the prisoners were to be secured onboard the phoenix and kept under watch. The Swords' ships, however, were useless to us, so I had them destroyed. I didn't worry too much about the particulars of all this at the time. I was too upset at Smith for taking off with the fleet. At the first opportunity, we turned around and raced to join them. * * * "Why did you leave us?" I demanded the second Smith answered my urgent flash. "We lost two good ships and we've damage several others almost beyond repair!" He turned his furrowed brow away to another monitor and tapped an icon. "This is our scouts' report." An incoming message flashed on one of my displays. I opened it and got a detailed multi-spectrum map of the system. It consisted of nothing more than a white dwarf and a ring of debris where the Cacks had, generations before, set up a—now extinct—mining colony. Hidden among the asteroids, some the size of planetoids, hundreds of enemy ships lurked. "Our scouts detected the first ships coming in. We were trying to beat them here because we knew, if they got dug in, they'd be impossible to get out. Unfortunately we were too late. We've sent scouts out looking for alternate routes, but they've come back with nothing." "Well I may have something that can help," I said. "When they saw the rest of the fleet appear to abandon us, The Swords launched an all-out attack. Fortunately, we were able to set up an ambush and took out quite a few ships. More importantly, we were able to capture some prisoners." Smith blinked, startled. "Alive?" "Yes." "Have you questioned them?" "Not yet. I understand the troopers have some training in this. I was about to go down and see to it next." "Wait for me. I want to see these Swords first hand."

 

Chapter 30

The Swords were a strange looking race. For one thing, they had no foreheads. The tops of their heads ended just above insane looking glittering golden eyes, giving them a deformed and unintelligent look somewhat like a micro-encephalitic. They had tiny flat noses that rested on something that looked like a beak or a bill with tiny sharp teeth and no chin. Their little round bodies stood on long skinny legs and had short arms with ridiculously long hands and fingers that moved in quick sudden jerks. They had some sort of short natural covering like feathery down across the back of their limbs, bodies and heads, the latter of which seemed to hang down behind their shoulders in a boney extension. They wore clothing in bright solid colors made from some material like velour or velvet.
 "Weird looking things." Smith watched the trooper yell at the alien on a monitor which displayed the nearby room.  "Apparently fragile too," I said. "A couple have already died from rather ordinary treatment. Kouvaras tells me they have to treat them like eggs."  "Do they talk?"  "Apparently they understand Indweller. No telling what their gibberish means. The interrogators are using machine translators."  Kouvaris' man, a Psy-Ops Specialist by the name of Stafford was in the room with two of them asking questions. He had interrogated them for hours.  Kouvaris entered our observation room and stepped up to the monitor.  "Don't you have any more persuasive ways of getting them to talk?" Smith asked.  "Yes, sir. If we need to, we can—intensify—the interrogations. We're concerned because of their delicate nature."  "You have spares, don't you?" Smith asked.  I shot him a dark look, surprised by his apparent blood thirstiness.  He looked a little taken aback at the accusation in my eyes. "We don't have time for this," he explained. "The entire fleet is trapped at the edge of the system. More of their scattered tribes may come at any moment and we have nowhere to go. We have to find another way around them. We have to do it now."  Kouvaras gave me a raised eyebrow.  Smith was right. The longer we delayed the greater the chance The Swords would gather enough forces to destroy us. They had used other paths to get around us, we could use those same paths to get around them, we just had to know where they were.  "Do what you must," I said.  "It may require that we kill one or more of them," Kouvaras warned.  I reminded myself they had destroyed several of our ships, killed hundreds of our crew and, if they had their way, we'd all be dead.  I nodded.  Kouvaras turned and left the room. I saw him reappear in the interrogation room and speak quietly in Stafford's ear. Without missing a beat, Stafford turned around and pulled on something like a set of surgical scrubs. He wheeled over a cart bearing rows of sharp implements and carefully arranged them on a tray.  I looked at the aliens strapped to their chairs, but they didn't seem to take any special notice of the tools. They didn't seem to have any idea of what was about to happen and I wondered if they had ever seen anything like what was going to happen next.  "You have told me there are no other routes beyond the next system," Stafford continued. "I know that is a lie. If you do not tell me the truth I will have to hurt you."  The alien squawked something back at Stafford, but I couldn't hear the translation on the audio pickup.  Stafford pushed the cart up next to the chair and turned the alien's long hand over palm up. He held it down on the cart, leaning on it as he took a scalpel and drove it through the alien's hand. 

The alien gave a high pitched shriek and his companion, in the next chair, jerked his head around toward them.  Stafford wiggled the knife loose and pulled it out of the creature's bleeding hand. He placed one hand on the thing's thin boney shoulder and showed the knife to the alien. Blood cover the tip of the bright silver blade. It was red like ours.  "I don't want to do this," Stafford said. "I find no enjoyment in this." He sounded like he meant it, but he said it in a tone that clearly implied that he wouldn't hesitate to continue to hurt him. I'm certain the alien had no way of understanding that. "I will keep hurting you until you tell me the truth."  He busied himself with his tools, carefully washing off the scalpel, giving the alien time to catch his breath. It sat panting and crooning in pain. He picked up something like a mallet and walked over to the alien and showed it to him.  "Have you decided to tell me what I want to know?"  The alien, who had been squawking his replies only hours earlier decided to keep his mouth shut.  "I'm sorry you are still resisting," he paused with seeming infinite patience, waiting as the machine translated each sentence. "This is only going to get worse." Stafford held up a mallet. "I don't know why you are making me do this. Your silence will not protect any of your friends. It will only buy you pain. Do you know what I'm going to do to you next?" He held up the mallet. "I'm going to break your leg." He tapped the creatures left leg with the mallet. "That one right there."  Stafford looked over at the other alien who sat tied to his chair, watching him. Its large mad eyes stared back at him, glittering like lifeless buttons.  "You can help your friend, you know," Stafford said. "You can tell me what I need to know. You're as much at fault for your friend's pain as he is."  The machine translated his words into Indweller speech. If I hadn't heard them reply earlier to Stafford, I might have thought they couldn't understand the translations. Neither responded, yet they didn't seem defiant. It almost seemed as if they didn't understand what was going on. I am told that the majority of our communication takes place through body language and other non-verbal cues. Even with the machine translators, it didn't seem to me that we were communicating. It may be that they understood perfectly and were terrified, but that The Swords' body language was so alien, we couldn't pick up on those non-verbal cues.  Stafford's intentions were clear, at any rate. With a sudden violence that made me and Commander Smith jump, he slammed the mallet into the alien's leg, shattering it.  The creature screamed a piercing shrill scream, its voice cracking, but not, apparently, its will.  Stafford put away the mallet and walked over to a chair next to his table of tools and sat down, sipping on a bottle of water. The alien warbled and screamed and Stafford just sat like an irritated parent waiting for a wayward child to finish his tantrum.  The alien next to the one being tortured grew agitated. His head jerked around and he lurched back and forth as if testing its bonds, all the while making a low intermittent squawking sound.  Sherman and I watched the monitor in horrified silence.  Stafford sat watching the alien as its squawking slowly subsided into a continuous keening sound. With an irritated sigh, he rose and picked up something that looked like a pair of garden shears from the table. He walked over to the alien who sat panting heavily, his head hanging low. Taking the creature's uninjured hand, he wrestled one long finger loose from its clenched fist. Placing the finger between the blades of the shears, he practically begged the alien to not make him hurt him. He didn't want to do this he insisted, though his face remained as calm and emotionless as it had throughout the interrogation. The creature raised one crazed glittering eye. Aside from his labored breathing, he didn't make a sound.  Stafford snipped off the finger. The alien screamed and tried to wrench his hands from the bonds. Stafford examined the long severed finger quizzically then waved it in the alien's face accusing it of trying to upset him out of pure meanness.  To my surprise, the alien croaked out a denial.  The response, any response, seemed to surprise Stafford, but he hid it well. "Then, why won't you tell me what I need to know?"  The alien stared back in silence.  Stafford shrugged and flung the finger at his neighbor who gaped wide-eyed as the bloody finger bounced off its chest. "I'm going to start asking you next," he said.  The alien trembled.  Stafford walked casually back to his tray, and cleaned his shears. Then he picked up another knife that looked like a long-bladed scalpel and walked back to the alien who sat hunched and moaning in his chair. He shoved it against the seatback, shouting demands that it tell him what he wanted to know. He didn't bother waiting for the translation, just brought up the blade and began carving furrows into its chest. It screamed and his neighbor strapped into the next chair screamed in echo.  "Do we need to watch this?" Smith asked.  I turned to the pale-faced Smith who looked as if he might be ill. I started to switch off the monitor, then hesitated. This was my ship. I could stop this right now. It was my responsibility. How could I order this and turn my back on what was happening. It seemed, somehow cowardly. I tapped the volume control instead and turned the screams down, but not off.  Stafford walked back to his table and washed his scalpel. He began ordering his tools as if he were finished with the job or starting a new one. Returning to the alien, who sat silently hunched in his chair, Stafford bent and pulled his service knife from his boot. It was a trooper's knife. It had a nine inch blade of complex carbon. Strong as diamond but less brittle, it had an edge that narrowed to a single skinny molecule in thickness.  Holdingthe knife where the alien could see it he slowly walked around behind thechair. Wrapping a meaty hand under the creature's bill-like mouth, he wrenched the alien's head back and put the blade to its throat. He made a last demand, muffled by the low volume. The alien remained silent while its companion began making a strange hooting sound as it quivered in its chair.  Stafford sliced into its throat. Red blood sprayed out, covering all three of them. He kept sawing deep into its neck until the head came off.
 The remaining alien shrieked a shrill, high, panicked sound.  Stafford stepped back looking at the head he held in his hand. The mouth gaped, its small sharp white teeth stained red, the crazed yellow eyes still open, not yet dulled in death. He placed it carefully in the other alien's lap, face up so he could look into the face of his friend.  The alien jerked violently in its chair as if trying to dislodge the bloody thing rolling in its lap.  Stafford walked back to his table and stripped off his blood-soaked gown. He cleaned his face and hands, then cleaned his knife and stuck it back in his boot. He dragged the chair over in front of the remaining alien and sat, leaning forward, listening intently.  The machine had difficulty keep up with everything the alien said.

 

Chapter 31

Later, at a joint meeting of all the ship's commanders and fleet commanders, Smith uttered the one phrase sure to put a chill down the spine of any career military person. "We need some volunteers."
 An updated map of the transit system hung before us in v-space. Much of the information had come from the cooperative alien and, where possible, confirmed by advance scouts. Dr. Hindmost, Shines Like the Sun's personal oracle had been consulted, but all he could advise was going forward as only death waited behind.   "The neighboring system appears to have once been a mining and manufacturing hub," Smith continued. "It has a half-dozen gates that all lead into it at different points. We've learned from our captive of an alternate route, a sort of transit spur that circles through these other gates." A section of the map lit up.   "We believe the majority of The Swords are dug into this system, hoping to hold us here and assuming we don't know anything about the spur. We don't think the spur is heavily protected, but there are a few key choke points, that will have to be cleared before we can attempt to bypass the defenders. We need an advance team of FACs and light cruisers to take out these choke points and clear the way for a heavier force. The heavier force will leave small task forces behind to take up positions at each of these gates, preventing surprise attacks from the rear until our main assault begins."   "I'll lead it," Chris Knight volunteered.   "The Red Wing is ready and willing to go," another commander said.   "The Robert White has never ducked a fight," a third commander volunteered.   In moments, before we had even finished the planning, we had our advance assault team assigned.   "I will lead the main force," Smith said. "We'll transit slowly into the system to keep them focused on our gate while the other group makes its way around the spur. Ken, I'd like you to take the second group and secure the other gates."   I nodded my assent.   "I want to leave one gate free to give them a way out. But, once you've secured the last gate but one, the attack will begin." Smith paused and surveyed the commanders' avatars. "If there are no questions, make your preparations and be ready to boost in two hours.   * * *   Smith began transiting the fleet into the system, only using the far side of the gate from The Swords. Some of his ships moved inwards, trying to secure advanced positions from which to launch their attack, but The Swords launched relativist missiles in such massive numbers, they had to retreat back to the gate before The Swords stopped firing.   Meanwhile, I took the rearguard and began maneuvering through the spur. We left a small task force at the first gate and proceeded onwards, coming to our first choke point. The gravimetrics picked up the presence of several ships. I took what few FACs I had and, leading from the Phoenix, which was faster than the battle cruisers, we charged into the depths of the nebula. The enemy, using their gravimetrics for targeting, fired blindly at us. They scored only minor and indirect damage, then turned and ran away as we neared their position. We sent a scout ship back to tell the fleet, via com laser, to proceed along the main route of the spur while I led the FACs into the depths of the nebula toward the next choke point.   We continued in this fashion, I and the FACs, plunging into the cloudy depths of the nebula to drive away the lurking Swords while the battle cruisers followed along in the main transport channels. We left a small task force behind at each gate then, at about the fourth gate, one of the cruisers we had left behind, came flying back towards us heavily damaged.   It was the leader of the Beta task force. He sent an urgent message by com laser. "We've been discovered. The Swords are attacking. Alpha and Beta task forces have been overrun! " We turned our long range scanners on the central system and saw The Swords streaming from their hiding places among the asteroids. They obviously had discovered we were trying to outflank them. Knowing the light from the nearest ships was hours old, I turned to the gravimetrics and saw hundreds of The Swords' ships racing to the gate where we had left Alpha and Beta task forces. Smith had apparently seen his opportunity and rushed into the system with the rest of the fleet.  

Realizing we now held the choke point and that The Swords would probably follow the path we had taken, we positioned the battle cruisers to blockade the point and hid the FACs and light cruisers in the darkness of the nebula.   A few more damaged ships straggled in and we hid them behind the fleet in support positions. Not long afterwards, The Swords arrived. They stopped short in something like surprise and we unloaded our missiles on them. As they slowly reacted to that, our FACs and light cruisers plunged out of the nebula and raked them with energy weapons.   The exchange was brief but brutal. The battle cruisers kept The Swords bottled up while the FACs and light cruisers made short work of them. After losing several ships, they withdrew. Meanwhile, in the system we were supposed to be attacking, Smith charged through, nearly unopposed, towards the far transit station we were all trying to get to. As The Swords withdrew their attacks, I ordered my fleet to transit into the central system and join Smith's. As we transited, The Swords fell on us again, following behind and firing relativistic missiles at us as the fleet formed up in preparation for going FTL. They chased us all the way to the far transit station so that, once we arrived, we were forced to form up to defend those transiting behind us ordered a charge which scattered The Swords and gave the rest of the fleet time to make it through the gate.   * * *   Once in the next system, The Swords broke off their attack and sent, instead, a messenger to negotiate a truce. It turned out that the system we occupied was one of their core home worlds. They begged us not to bombard their worlds, offered both a prisoner exchange and to bring us the dead we had been forced to leave behind. We agreed, taking only what we needed for repairs and in the way of supplies. Staying only long enough to do what we could for both the living and the dead. We had hoped to negotiate a longer truce, but as soon as we left their home system, The Swords renewed their attacks.   The days that followed were a nightmare of constant warfare. It was easy to see why the Cacks would have nothing to do with The Swords. They contested every system and blocked every gate. Our only advantage lay in the detailed navigation charts we were able to compile when we hacked their home system's computers. At least we now knew the way to Overbearing's district in the outer worlds known as The Sons of the Archer.   By dividing the fleet between Smith and myself, we could each support the other through a series of flanking maneuvers. When Smith's fleet got bogged down, I would find an alternate route through the gate and attack the enemy from another direction. When my fleet got stuck, Smith would return the favor. The Swords were so tenacious that more than once after rescuing Smith The Swords would outflank us so that we had to be rescued in turn. We were fortunate the various worlds of The Swords were not able to unite enough of their fleets to stop us, but it was only by careful coordination and support that we made our way to the edge of their territory.   Smith flash messaged me. "Take a look at what our scouts have seen."   I ran a video clip taken from a scout transiting through a transit station. "I don't see anything but stars."   "Exactly. This is the edge of The Swords territory. Once we are through that gate, we'll be back in civilization."   "It's still Cack territory."   Smith chuckled. "But it's not The Swords' territory."   Somehow, I didn't share his mirth. "I'll feel better when I see the lights of human stars."   * * *   We stopped there at the edge of The Swords' territory for engine maintenance. The news that we would soon leave their territory lifted everyone's spirits. During the last seven days of non-stop fighting, we suffered more than the entire war with Righteous Ruler and Bright Fortune, but now, with our ships patched and fully supplied, the end of this particular nightmare was finally in sight.  

Gathering our ships, we transited into the open space of the next system and left the nebula behind. Once on the far side, peering through the next gate that would take us into the outer worlds, we found a massive Cack fleet waiting for us. They lurked just on the far side, waiting to slaughter us one-by-one as we transited through. As we gathered before the gate, not daring to go further, The Swords, who had been amassing behind us for hours, began to transit into the system we had left, cutting us off. Trapped between these two forces, we frantically searched our navigation data for a way around either but found nothing.   Hours passed. The day shift ended and the swing shift took over. The Cack fleet only seemed concerned about keeping us out of The Archer's space. The Swords patiently gathered their forces, waiting for the right moment to attack. In desperation, I pulled up the kairogram Dr. Swiftly had provided me, and fell asleep looking for some clue of a way out. While I slept on my data console, I had a dream that I had been tied up and shoved into a small space like a closet. However I tried, I could not break my bonds or get out of the room I was in. Then, suddenly, the ropes fell off by themselves and I broke out, awaking with a start.   Bleary-eyed and blinking at my console, I awoke with a strange sense of peace. Noticing a flashing message alert, I connected and Smith's face appeared on my display.   "Ken, I—what happened? You look like crap."   I scrubbed at my face. "Do I? I actually feel pretty good."   "Well, I hope you got some rest. I'm calling a meeting of the FCs. We can't wait here any longer. We'll soon run out of supplies and the force behind us is only growing bigger."   "Agreed. We should tell the ship commanders to prepare to transit, immediately."   "That's what we need to discuss. Moving in either direction is going to cost us dearly, but we can't remain trapped here forever." "Oh, I'm not worried about that. I know we're going to break out."   "You do? How can you be so sure?"   "Believe it or not, God showed me in a dream."   Smith gave me a frightened frown as if he thought I might be mad. "I hope He told you how."   I shrugged. "I'm sure we'll find out along the way. Be sure to invite Dr. Hindmost."   Logging off with Smith, I washed up quickly and put on a fresh uniform. While I was eating, I got a message alert from a name I didn't recognize. That wasn't too unusual. My crew knew I kept an open door policy and anyone regardless of rank could message me if they had something that required my attention. I selected the icon noting that it appeared to be a scout named Angela Saraun.   "Commander, Phon, " The young female scout began. "I hope I wasn't interrupting anything."   "Just breakfast, which isn't really saying much." I smiled around a toasted yeast cake. "I should probably thank you."   "I was out scouting and we came across a small trading vessel. We didn't think there were any commercial systems nearby so we followed it and found a third gate, just inside the edge of the nebula."   I choked on my cake and washed it down with some vaguely citrus flavored drink. "Have you investigated this gate?"   "Yes it appears to be a smaller, possibly older, transit station that doesn't show up on the network charts. It looks like the Cacks had replaced it with the newer stations, but never fully decommissioned it. The thing is, it connects to another system that connects directly to The Archer's territory."   "Can you send me your sensor logs?" "Already did so. It should be in your message queue."   I scanned my inbox. Sure enough, I had skimmed past it this morning. "So it is. Listen, we having a conference of the FCs in just a few minutes. I would like you to present your findings."   "Me, sir?" Angela looked a little panicked.   "Yes. You discovered this good news, you should get the chance to share it."   She didn't look very relieved. "Thank you, sir?"   * * *   Smith looked stunned once we told him. He glanced back and forth between Angela and me as if expecting one of us to laugh and tell him it was all a joke, then shook his head. "It seems you were right after all, Ken. The Maker really did send you that dream."   I put up the revised navigation map. It showed a ring of four interconnected systems. "System Alpha is the system we are currently in." I highlighted the lower left system. "Moving counter-clockwise, we'll call the remaining systems Beta, Delta and Gamma. The transit station to Beta is located here, just inside the nebula which is why we missed it." An icon lit up and a connecting line linked the Alpha system with the system in the lower right corner. "Alpha and Beta systems are both in the Middle Sphere, and both connect to systems in the Outer Worlds. Alpha connects to Gamma where the Cacks are holed up," the upper left system lit up. "And Beta connects to Delta which is behind their position." The system in the upper right also lit up.   "These two systems are also connected," Gamma and Delta flashed. "But while the Cacks have their forces gathered around the near gate, they don't have anything in Delta and only a handful of light cruisers at the back gate. This means, if we can transit to Beta then Delta before they know it, we can get behind them to Gamma before they can block the back gate."   "You're still going to have to go through two systems before you get to Gamma. They're bound to have other scouts. What's to keep them from splitting their forces and blocking both gates, when they see us coming?" Abrams asked. "They don't seem to be aware of Beta system, or don't seem to realize that it connects to us here in the Middle Sphere," I began. "I suggest we split the fleet as we've been doing and have Commander Smith lead his half through Beta and Delta systems while I keep part of the fleet here to cover for them. If Smith can secure the back gate before the Cacks know he's gone, we can follow him through. If they detect Smith's departure, I'll pull the fleet to Beta, covering our rear and, hopefully, convince them that we've committed the whole fleet to attacking that gate. This should encourage them to abandon the front gate from Alpha. At that point we can launch a two-pronged attack and, hopefully catch the bulk of their fleet between the two gates."   Dr. Hindmost and the other commanders ultimately agreed to the plan and, after the meeting ended, told their ship commanders to prepare to leave the system. I worried this plan had too many "ifs" in it, but at least we now had more options than we had before.

 

Chapter 32

Smith slipped away with his ships into the Beta system, but the Cacks scouts must have been on their toes for not long after this, the Cacks began pulling ships from the near gate to cover the far gate where we were going to try and sneak around them. I reminded myself that we had planned for this as I ordered my ships to Beta system at full speed, but I couldn't help but feel a little disappointed that they had caught on so soon. This could easily end up being a slugfest with two blocked gates instead of one, at which point we would be no better off than we had been before.
 I sent a manned scout into Delta system to find out how things were going and he returned reporting that Smith was experiencing moderate resistance, but that it looked like the Cacks were moving all their ships to the back gate. At least something is going right, I thought, as I ordered my ships back into the Alpha system. The Phoenix leading, my fleet had just transited into the Alpha system when I discovered the unseen flaw in my plan. When we had left, The Swords, apparently feeling they had gathered sufficient numbers of ships, had transited behind us and were racing across the system towards us. I couldn't see how we could take the gate to Gamma while defending ourselves from The Swords's attack behind us. While my mind whirled, trying to calculate odds and likely outcomes, I just went with my gut and ordered my battle cruisers, to go back and support Smith. Taking only my fastest ships, we raced for the gate hoping that at least a feint would pull some of the pressure off of Smith as he tried to transit the back gate. We made it to the transit station just ahead of The Swords. They pulled up short and got in attack formation, outnumbering us nearly ten to one. Behind us, the Cacks defending the gate saw us appear to take the near gate while Smith broke through the far gate to Delta, turned and ran away. I would have loved to have chased after them, but The Swords would have fallen on us and cut us to pieces as we tried to make the transit. Seeing we were in trouble, Smith sent his FACs to assist us. When they were within range, I sent a message by com laser, telling them to wait out of site behind the transit station until I ordered the attack, then to come through like a sudden wave of reinforcements. The Swords, despite their advantage, took some time to work up the courage to attack us. But the moment they began their advance, we launched our attack. Our ships leaped forward while Smith's FACs poured through the gate behind us. We didn't even get within weapon's range before The Swords turned and ran. We stopped and let them get a good distance away before turning back and plunging through the transit station.   * * *   For six days we traveled in wide-open space through Cack systems left sparsely populated from The Swords' ravaging attacks. It was almost like a pleasure cruise after the hellish week of constant fighting. On the seventh day a small group of Cack ships appeared and requested that we talk. We agreed. A Cack with Ovebearing's ideographs appeared on the display. "Being the under-director of the district of The Sons of the Archer, I am called Servant of Angels. "We are the united Solarian fleets," Smith said. "Why are you here?" "I desiring harmonious agreement." "And what would be the terms of this agreement?" Smith asked.   "You harm not us. We harm not you." "We are still going to need to re-supply." "Be taking only the most needful. Harm not our people or that which is unnecessary." "Let me speak to my commanders." Smith killed the connection. "What do you think?" he asked his fleet commanders. "I've been enjoying the peace and quiet," Abrams said. "I'd rather not start any fighting if we can avoid it."

"Agreed." "But can we trust him?" Maxwell asked. "Of course not," Smith said. "But that doesn't mean we should declare war on him right now. Dr. Hindmost?" The oracle's eyes swayed back and forth on their stalks in a rhythmic pattern taking in the 3d projection of our meeting. "Necessity makes us forward striving. Standing hindrances must be disallowed." The commanders paused silently trying to re-interpret what he'd said. Smith turned to me. "Ken, what do you think?" I had been sitting quietly during the meeting, staring at Smith's image, trying to detect any trace of his supposed Pelosism. I thought I had seen some strange subtle emotional changes over the months, but that wasn't often a symptom of Pelosim and was more likely a sign of stress. I also decided Newman was full of crap and wondered if he'd managed to finagle an invite to spectate the meeting. "I've been having the AI do some digging through the Phoenix's records. Servant of Angels appears to be a very close personal friend of The Ruler. I say proceed with extreme caution." "Well then we'll proceed, but tell your ship commanders to stay on the alert and increase the scouting drones." We agreed to the truce. We traveled on for three more days, keeping a sharp watch for Servant of Angels but he stayed carefully out of site, relying on his scout craft to watch us while apparently following along other routes. When our supplies began running low, we stopped in a group of systems to resupply. No one system was populated enough to provision the entire fleet, so we spread out over several neighboring systems. We even took an extra day off for rest and repairs. When our drones detected a gathering of Cack ships nearby, we sent manned scouts and a squad of FACs out to investigate. They returned with a captured Cack scout.   * * *   "It seems you were correct in distrusting Servant of Angels," Smith told me in our daily commanders' conference. "The scout has informed us that Servant of Angels is gathering his forces, supplementing them with mercenaries, and intends to block us at this point." A map of the neighboring systems appeared in v-space. They lay spread out like a net which abruptly narrowed down to a single point. Beyond that a thin trail of scattered systems led from The Archers to Solarian space. "We should leave at once," Maxwell said. Dexter shook his head. "We've got a number of ships who have taken their engines off-line. It's going to be several hours before everyone is ready to boost." "I doubt their commanders are sharing their strategy with their scouts," I said. "I suggest we send some of our own out with the FACs and light cruisers to the bottleneck to see if the Cacks are in fact planning on turning on us." "I think we should include at least a wing of battle cruisers as well," Smith added. "If they do in fact run into a large force, they could be overwhelmed before they get back." I shrugged. "Very well, but I believe speed is most important here. Let the battle cruisers go, but the faster ships shouldn't wait for them."  Before the shift had ended, a task force had been detailed and sent off. Smith decided to lead the wing of battler cruisers while Chris led the FACs and light cruisers. Hours later, they returned bringing with them a couple of captured FACs. "It seems our captured scout was correct," Smith said once we were able to communicate again. We found a bunch of support ships near the choke point as if they were pre-positioning supplies. We didn't actually find any warships other than these two FACs which had been left for repair and resupply, but it looks as if Servant of Angels is preparing for action."  

"We need to leave," Abrams said. "Now." "It's still going to be a few hours before the fleet will be ready to leave," Dexter said. "We need to at least prepare to leave as soon as possible," Solomon offered. "We've already begun." I looked toward Smith. "I hope you left scouts behind to watch for the Cack's return?" "Of course." I called up our navigation data. "Judging from what navigation data we've been able to obtain, none of the transit paths will take us directly where we want to go. Rather than going hundreds of gates deeper into Cack space, zigzagging through The Sons of the Archer's territory, we can take a few short-cuts through open space. This will require some weeks of travel under H-drive, so I suggest that we stock up on as many parts and supplies as we can get before we go." Maxwell grimaced. "I didn't particularly enjoy our last long boost through the nebula into the inner sphere." "What does the oracle think is the best course?" Solomon asked. "Yes," Smith said, "What does the kairogram say?" Dr. Hindmost looked at something off camera for a long minute before his eyes turned back toward us. "Between two points, the shortest distance is also the fastest." Chris, who normally preferred to skip these meetings, laughed. "I believe I actually understood that." Smith smiled. "We can go back and hit the Cack supply ships on the way out. We weren't able to grab everything and I doubt they've gone far."   * * *   With the H-drive and Cack transit stations, it is easy to sometimes forget how big space really is. Even traveling at a relative speed of eight times the speed of light, it was going to take us nearly a month to reach the first system, assuming the QWEGs didn't give out first. We ran the engines well past their approved run time, though we were occasionally forced to stop for maintenance. Our engineers, having been told to try to maintain them while running or at least to monitor them carefully, were all pulling their hair out.   Our crews were also being pushed to their limits. Strange sporadic system failures caused by the matter degradation as a side effect of the Quantum Wave Effect Generators, kept the entire crew busy with inspections and repair. In addition, the long days with too many people crammed in small spaces without relief, dwindling food supplies that forced the cooks to try desperate experiments with vat-grown yeast and the usual friction of personalities all took their toll. We were only a day or two away from the first system when we lost our first ship. Bringing up the rear, the Phoenix came across the North Wind floating dead in space. It seems that no one had bothered to stop to help them, and though we tried, we didn't have the parts they needed. Since the next system was nearby, we told them to manage as best they could and we would go get help. The system was nameless and uninhabited. It had a single habitable planet whose only indigenous life forms were algae, various planktons and moss. In desperation, some ships sent shuttles down and after testing declared the local plant life edible, or at least non-toxic. We set up a parts exchange as we had before, and I made sure a ship went back for both the North Wind and a couple of other stragglers. We only stayed a little over a day before taking off for the next system which, fortunately, was closer. It was an inhabited system connected to the Cack transit network. But as the Phoenix prepared to leave, we noticed that one ship, the Leroy Kelso had broken formation and remained in orbit about our moss planet. I told Commander Brennon to remain in orbit until I had dealt with the Leroy Kelso then I flash messaged their commander. Their coms officer replied instead.

"Are you having drive problems?" I asked. "Do you require assistance?" "Problems? Of course we're having problems," came the irritated reply. "Nothing works." "Do you need help with the repairs?" "No!" "How long do you think it will be before you are able to break orbit?"  "Never."  "Are you saying your drive is irreparable?" "No, it works. We're just not going anywhere." "I—let me talk to your commander." "Commander Riley hasn't come out of his quarters for nearly a month." "What have you done with him?" "We haven't done anything to him. He just refuses to come out."  As I puzzled over a reply, I got an urgent message from Brennon's tactical officer, Mia. Attached to it was a real time feed from the gravimetric sensors. A small fast-moving group of ships were racing towards the North Wind and something in my gut told me they weren't racing to help. "I take it those aren't our ships." I said to Mia. "No, and I don't think they're Cack's either. I think they're locals, probably pirates." "Locals?" "We've passed near a number of small colony worlds off the main path. None of these worlds are on the transit network and have to transport goods the old fashioned way. This means lots of opportunity for pirates. "Bring the ship to Alert Stance Gamma and tell Brennon to return to the North Wind at full speed. I only sent a light cruiser back to help get them moving and they may need more firepower." The Phoenix overflew the North Wind and dropped out of FTL between them and the approaching pirates. Commander Brennon began launching the remote fighters, the rail launchers causing the whole ship to tremble as they shoved the small craft to relativistic velocities. I flash messaged the commander of the North Wind. "What's your status?" "My engineers tell me we're almost ready," Commander Christina Tomberlin said, "but they're still going to need a couple of hours before we can go FTL." I messaged the commander of the light cruiser NSS Steakley. "Can you break away from the North Wind for a moment?" Commander Jack Crow replied, "I've got people over there, but it won't keep us from fighting." "Good. Line up next to us. We're going to go chase away some pirates." As I expected, the pirates didn't stop to fight but turned aside. They also didn't leave, only lurked nearby to see if we would abandon the apparently crippled ship. I know we had left a scattered trail of broken support craft behind in our long retreat and I can only assume that these pirates or others like them had been picking their bones. It took nearly an hour to decelerate the remote fighters, return and reload them. In that time the North Wind had got their H-drive back online and was ready to leave. They accompanied us back to the nameless moss planet and the reluctant Leroy Kelso. I flash messaged their ship, but got no response. I probably filled their message queues with requests then, in frustration, messaged Kouvaras. "How would you like to stretch your legs?" I asked. "I hope you're not sending us down to fight moss." Kouvaras smirked. "No, not down. Over to the Leroy Kelso." "They have problems that require my sort of solutions?" "I think we may have another passive mutiny on our hands. I'd like you to go over with a few of your men and find out what's up." "Very well, I'll grab a few guys and head over right now." "And take someone with you who knows environmental," I said, realizing it might not actually be mutiny but some sort of problem caused by a tainted air supply. "I don't imagine you'll need the armor, but you should at least wear pressure suits." "If it's all the same with you, sir, I'd feel naked without the armor." I chuckled. "I guess you know best. You've been doing this longer than I have." "Actually, sir, I haven't." "Haven't...what?" "I haven't boarded more ships than you have." "You mean the two we boarded together...." He nodded. "Huh! I just assumed you had more experience in military service." "Oh, I have. I'm a twenty-year man. It's just that most of my assignments have been ground assignments; weapons master, training instructor..., once I made it into the senior NCOs, well, they don't like us getting out in front of the guns, sir." "Really? If I'd known that I wouldn't have asked you to personally do all this, just have you send your men, but after that incident with Sherman, I guess I just assumed...." "Oh, I've enjoyed our little jaunts, sir. In fact I'm looking forward to this one." "Very well, handle it as you think best. Just get someone over there who can force them to tell me what's going on." "Right away, sir." I disconnected then waited impatiently for Kouvaras' telemetry feed data to appear on the trooper's combat data server. When it did, I opened the data stream and got a live picture of the troopers launch deck. "Com check," Kouvaras said. "Are you there sir?" He had guessed I would be. I smiled. "Of course." "What's the POA?" "Let's try not to leave any holes in the ship. "We'll try to go in through the hanger, or one of the airlocks." "Secure the ship as usual." Kouvaras pointed at several pairs of men. "Bridge, drive, power plant, CA." "And make the captain's quarters a priority. His sub said he hadn't left it in days. Find out if he's being held against his will or just hiding in there."            "Right. I'll take care of that personally. Anything else?" "Not at the moment. I'll be following along on your feed in case you need to pull rank." "OK, team, load up." The troopers took a breaching pod over. I heard Cruze's voice say, "Leroy Kelso flight control, this is Tango Bravo Zero One Six requesting permission to dock." They waited a moment then repeated their request before an irritated voice said, "Go away." "We're going in," Kouvaras said.

 

Chapter 33

The breaching pod swung around toward the hanger deck. The hanger doors were open and as the pod pulled in, I could see a boarding tube hooked up to an atmospheric lander and people loading plastic crates inside.
 Once the pod had docked, the troops moved inside. The passages outside the spinning habitat portion were deserted, but once in among the crew cabins, they saw people packing crates and stacking them in corridors littered with empty containers and packing filler. Kouvaras stepped in front of a young spacer who startled and looked up in shock at the powered armor standing before him. Kouvaras waved an arm towards the crates in the hall. "What's going on here?" "We're abandoning the ship," the S2C said. "Abandoning it? What's wrong with it?" The spacer shrugged. "I just heard from one of the NCO's that the commander ordered it." Kouvaras' gauntleted hand clamped on the spacer's shoulder and pulled him out into the hall. "Show me where his cabin is." They trudged up to executive row and Kouvaras pounded on the commander's door. Most cabin doors were thin plastic barriers designed more for low-mass privacy than security. Not so with the executive cabins. But neither were they designed to hold up to the powered gauntlets of Kouvaras' armored suit. His fingers punched through the metal door and his servos whined as the door, groaning in protest, tore loose from the frame. Kouvaras leaned the door up against the corridor wall and entered the cabin, trudging through piles of dirty clothes and discarded food containers. Riley lay sleeping in his bed. Kouvaras gently shoved the man. "Commander Riley?" Unwashed and unshaven, Riley opened his eyes then jerked back against the cabin wall. "Who are you? What do you want?" he shouted. "The fleet commander would like to know why you are abandoning your ship." "You can tell him I'm not doing anything." "He's listening to our conversation right now. Tell him yourself." "Go away!" Riley grabbed his blanket, flung himself down on his bed and threw the blanket over his head. "My XO is in charge. Go bother him." I switched on my microphone. "I think we can accept this as his resignation." A grunt of disgust was Kouvaras' only reply. "How would you like to command a war ship?" "Don't even joke about it." "I'm not—at least not entirely. Go find the XO, or if he's uncooperative, the most reasonable of the ship's senior officers and put him in charge. Then go find whoever is in charge of the troopers. Use them however you must to enforce proper military discipline. A simple show of force may be sufficient; I'll leave that up to you." In a very short amount of time, with a little help from the troopers on board who were waiting for someone with some authority to start issuing reasonable orders, Kouvaras got the Leroy Kelso ready to boost. A group of junior officers and NCOs, who had already shuttled to the planet's surface and who were waiting for more evacuees to come down with additional supplies, refused to return to the ship insisting they would no longer participate in our "death march." They refused to listen to reason. I was tempted to send the troopers down to force them back on board, but we didn't have any combat landers. The fleet had long ago left the system and the pirates were closing in with greater numbers, so in the end I simply wished the mutineers luck and gave the order to break orbit. The nameless system of which our moss planet was a part had a single transit station connected to a network of small inhabited worlds. By the time we made the transit, the fleet had already divided up and claimed what supplies they could. Chris Knight had, on my behalf, claimed a world for me and not just any world but the political capital and trading hub of this part of the district.

"You're not going to believe it," he said once I had tracked him down. "These guys make racing craft and luxury yachts for the Cack elite. I captured about ten ships that were ready to be delivered." Surprisingly enough, for a system group so small and isolated, they had extensive space docks and fabrication facilities. I had the engineers pull together a fleet-wide wish list for repairs and servicing and put Chief Master Engineer Droemer in charge of coordinating the space dock activities. As we dealt with that, my coms officer sent me an urgent message. "What is it?" I snapped. I had been fielding dozens of disputes between my ship commanders over everything from docking and leave quotas to the distributions of critical parts. I was preparing my "tell them to work the chain of command first" speech when the coms officer said, "It's the planet below. I think it's their governor. I think he wants to surrender." I couldn't believe the local government had not been dealt with. "OK. Transfer him." The governor appeared on my screen. The inhabitants of the system were of the Iron Workers species, who looked a lot like The Swords except their heads were a little broader and prickly looking scales covered their skin instead of The Swords' downy fluff. "By what price of your ceasing to make war on us?" "We're not here to conquer you. We are only passing through your system on the way home. We may need your help, but we will repay you as best we can." The governor was reluctant to believe me. It seems that when Commander Smith first entered the system and was asked where he had come from and where he was going, he had replied that the fleet had just left The Ruler and was traveling to the district manager. When his ships had entered the system and begun seizing equipment saying "bill The Ruler", he realized they were not on official Cack business. But by then the rest of the fleet had arrived and it was too late to try to resist. I told the governor our story, convinced him we were not his enemy and invited him to visit me on the Phoenix. There, as host, I presented him with one of our FACs as a present. The engineers had told me it wasn't worth repairing, but I thought it had technology he'd appreciate. Afterwards he volunteered a small army of engineers and machinists to help us repair our ships. Either he appreciated the gesture or he had just decided the sooner we got our ships in shape, the sooner we would ship out. While our engineers were overseeing the repairs, I took him on a tour through his district. At every occupied system we visited, the Solarian crews seemed relaxed and happy. They were enjoying their leave and largely behaving themselves. When we caught up to Smith, he greeted us like old friends and fell into telling stories of ex-wives, old girl friends and adventures from his younger military days as if he and the governor were old drinking buddies. Before we returned to the capital, however, he elicited the alien's advice on how best to get back to Solarian space and, before he was through, the governor had even agreed to personally lead us to the edge of his district if he could only stop and pick up his son who was visiting one of the systems we had occupied. Everyone agreed and only a week later, we were ready to leave. The governor transferred to Smith's ship to help set the course for the fleet while his son, preferring the amenities of the Phoenix stayed behind with us. For three days we traveled through empty and abandoned systems that had once been mining centers. On the fourth day, the fleet missed its scheduled boost time. I flash messaged Smith. "What's the hold up?" Smith glared back, his face so red that his flushed scalp even shone through his thinning white hair. "We've lost our guide." "What do you mean, lost?" "Lost as in stole one of those expensive racing yachts you were handing out and fled.

I had given the captured ships away to the other fleet commanders and my subs. I wondered which he was more upset about losing, then I wondered why this had happened in the first place. "Why would he flee? He seemed to want to help us out of his district as soon as possible." "That's just it. He's trying to protect his worlds. He's deliberately leading us away from his inhabited worlds and we still haven't finished resupplying." "He admitted this?" "No! Of course not. I confronted him and he denied it. We argued. I lost my temper and hit him." "And then you let him escape." "I didn't let him do anything! I had already assigned him an attendant who seemed to think he was the governor's personal valet. The man who let him go is now working in waste reclamation." "One moment," I said as he paused in his ranting. I was already texting the trooper and security forces specialist I had assigned to guard the governor's son, asking her where he was and what he was doing. I had instructed her to accommodate him as best she could while keeping him under watch at all times. She responded saying he was in trooper country drooling on the armor but not causing any trouble. I looked back up at Smith. "It seems we still have the governor's son. He might be able to step into his father's role. I could send him to you if you like, but you have to promise not to lose him."  Smith growled. "Send him." He disconnected. I texted the governor's son's guard and told her to prepare him for transport to the Battle of Kuzikos. As I did so, I worried that perhaps Newman had been telling the truth about Smith's illness. * * *  Nearly ten days later, we came to the edge of The Archer's space. The last few systems were all within another nebula which forced us to travel in a slow column while our scout ships searched the gas and debris ahead for enemy ships. As we transited into the last system that stood between us and Cack-free space, Smith brought the front of the column to a halt. The fleet automatically formed up in a defensive sphere and reseeded the EPRs. Ahead of us, hidden in the clouds of the nebula, an armada of three local races, the Iron Workers, the Son's of Heaven, and The Speakers waited for us. "What do you think?" Smith asked in the commander's conference. "Think we should come up with a plan for this?" He chuckled.  It certainly wasn't a new challenge. It was almost like being back in The Swords's territory. We were now so experienced at digging out native defenders that the process had become routine. Smith also seemed to be in an unusually good mood. "Since we'll soon hit the run-time limit," Smith continued, "I've already ordered the engineers to quickly service the drives while we prepare." "Just as long as they don't take too much time," Abrams warned. "The longer we wait, the more time we give the locals to gather their strength. We should attack as soon as possible." Smith gave me a questioning look. "If it comes to fighting," I began, "obviously we'll hold nothing back. But if the objective is to get past them, I think we should try and find a way that will cost us the fewest ships and causalities. Though going through a nebula is slow and hazardous, it's still easier and safer than going through enemy ships." I called up a display of the system, our projected path between the gates and highlighted a narrow gap in the nebula. "According to our scouting drones, the enemy seems to be concentrated at this choke point. If we act as if the fleet is going to meet them head on, they'll be even more likely to concentrate there. Then we can have the FACs and light cruisers slip into the nebula, sneak up on the enemy positions and take them from behind."

"But look at me talking about sneaking up on men's behinds. I hear that's the kind of thing they train your Spartan special forces to do. Perhaps this is a chance, Commander Smith, to show us your stuff." Smith's mouth twitched as he smothered a smile. "I don't know about all that, but I hear your Martian politicians are especially skilled in stealth. By twisting your tax laws and giving your money to their cronies and special interests they've managed to screw an entire world. Perhaps you should lead the way and show us your moves." I laughed. "I'm already prepared to go. I've even caught some of the local pirates who have been preying on our support craft and I've learned of a number of paths that wind through the nebula." "There's no reason you should abandon your command. Send that Chris Knight with his FACs. He seems to like to play fighter pilot." "I'm sure he would be happy to go." * * *  Though both were regularly cleaned by spacers, my crash pod had acquired a musty smell rivaled only by the smell of my pressure suit. I leaned back in my seat, accidentally knocking my pressure helmet loose and munching on yeast cakes as I watched our fleet slowly advance toward the nebula. As we entered, the FACs peeled off and accelerated through the cloud while we kept our speed slow and steady. I took a sip of some flavored water someone had called tea and waited for explosions to follow. When the FACs found the ships lurking in the nebula, it took several minutes for the light to reach us. I popped another yeast cake in my mouth and chuckled, watching the confusion and indecision ripple across their ranks. The ships at the edges turned aside to deal with the attackers while the rest of their fleet spread out trying to block the passage. As the rest of our fleet came within missile range, our light cruisers leaped forward, withholding their missiles except for point defense, and readying their beam weapons for a decisive blow. Our FACs burst out of the nebula, having chased off the ships lying in wait to ambush us. The defenders scattered and our battle cruisers strolled through into the system unchallenged. The handful of worlds within was undefended and we gathered all the supplies we needed. We traveled through the territory of The Sons of Heaven for the next five days unopposed yet unable to catch so much as a merchant ship unaware. Our supplies had dwindled rapidly as every system we came to had pulled their fleets in tight around their home worlds. We had plenty of firepower to defeat them, but it did us no good as we would have had to destroy anything useful in the fighting.  Finally, at the far edge of their territory, we came to a system with no ships to defend it. What it did have was an endless supply of relativistic missiles which they manufactured for the Cack military and a single battle station to launch them. Our first ships had barely transited through the gate when a storm of missiles flew at them so thickly that the inaccuracies of the enemy's gravimetric sensors was more than offset by pure fire power. When we caught up to the fleet, the sheer number of ships waiting before the gate prevented us from transiting. We resynchronized communications and I found a meeting request waiting for me from Smith. "Ken, you're just in time." "What's the problem?" Smith outlined the situation to me and concluded, "We can't get past them, we can't even get near them, and while we're running from the missiles, we can't stop long enough to fire back at them without being hammered by a million of those things." "That's exactly what we want," I said. "However many missiles they have, it's a finite amount. They'll have to run out sometime." Smith frowned thoughtfully. "That may be, but even when their propellant runs out, they continued to drift as active mines. We've had several ships crippled running into their anti-matter payloads." "Send me the tactical reports." I opened the file that appeared on my data panel and studied a three-dimensional map of the system. All the outer planets had been smashed to asteroid-sized pieces to make them easier to mine. The battle station and all the interesting fabrication facilities orbited a shepherd planet just inside the ring of debris. As soon as our ships got more than a couple of degrees of arc above or below the plane of the ecliptic, the missiles started flying. It might be possible to get a few ships through the debris field, but it would be slow and dangerous and highly unlikely for the entire fleet could make it through intact. On the other hand, if the ship were small, like a FAC or even a breaching pod.... "I've got an idea," I told Smith. "I'd like to split the fleet into two divisions and have you approach the battle station above the plane just above the debris to draw their fire, then circle around behind the battle station. I will do the same, approaching beneath the plane of the ecliptic, but the Phoenix will pause here," I highlighted a large planetoid near the battle station. "We'll launch a full complement of breaching pods and enough fighter drones to cover them as they thread their way through the debris, using it for cover." "You'll have to stay sub-light," Smith warned, "to stay in touch with the drones." "Yes. We'll either turn back on reaction drives or just hide in the planetoid's shadow while the attack takes place." "I would recommend the later. You'll be less of a target." "Agreed." Smith squinted at me a moment from my monitor, then gave a curt nod. "Very well. We'll play decoy for you. Will you have any trouble getting your troopers to do this?" "No. Keeping them occupied seems to be my biggest problem. I'm sure they'll jump at the chance."  * * *   "When do we go?" Kouvaras asked once I explained the situation. "I would prefer you directed the operation from the Phoenix." Kouvaras shook his head in contradiction. "Do we have schematics for the station?" "No. We could send in micro-machines, but cybernetics tell me it would take longer than we'd want to wait for the intel and we still might not be able to get the key information we need." Kouvaras shook his head again. "It's going to take multiple teams to secure the station and that's going to take close coordination on site. I will have to go." I took a deep breath, held it while I tried to think of a reason for him to stay behind. I hadn't thought of anything by the time I was forced to exhale. "Do as you think best." "When do we boost?" "As soon as your team is ready. The last ship should transit in-system in minutes." "Give me five minutes to pick and prep my teams. I'll finish briefing them as we boost." "Huh! Your briefings must be much shorter than mine." Kouvaras smiled. "My job's easier than yours."

 

Chapter 34

Smith led the first wave. His fleet stayed low, just above the debris field, then veered sharply upwards only when a wall of relativistic missiles flew at them. Even with their greater speed, some of Smith's ships barely cleared the expanding arc of missiles.
 Our fleet followed them from beneath the ring of debris, drawing additional fire and covering the Phoenix as we slid in behind a planetoid-sized rock. "Tell Kouvaras to launch when he's ready," I told flight control. Less than a minute later, a dozen breaching pods and an escort of remote fighters threaded their way in three winding columns through the asteroids.   With our EPRs cut off from the other fleets, we could only communicate with our own attack force. I sat back in my crash pod and surveyed the empty C&C. Empty meal packages littered the floor and one of my spare flight suits lay draped over Chris' pod. The cleaning crew hadn't been in here since I had practically moved in. It suddenly seemed empty without Phil, Cathrin and Chris. I even missed Harlow. We had come a long way since that first meeting on Biggs or Dark wherever it was that Sherman joined us, or even the nameless system where I first talked to Kouvaras when I helped put down the mutiny on Sherman's flagship. A lot had changed since then. The trooper's breaching pods surprised the battle station, slipped past their point defenses and latched onto the outer hull. I followed their data feeds, watching the troopers as they flowed through the corridors of the station like water, appearing as nothing more than ripples in the air due to their optical-mimetic camouflage. Their conversation came in short clipped bursts as each team identified itself, announced its location and status. They identified and secured key parts of the station as they brushed past startled technicians and support personnel without resistance. Something like a security force did surprise one team, but they were effortlessly eliminated.   "Team Leader, this is Team Five. I think we found the main power plant."  I glanced at the data feeds and saw that Redburn led the team. They stood on a platform inside a large space filled with variously sized pipes, conduits and cables. Catwalks overlooking the confusion led off in every direction. A group of alien technicians stood poking excitedly at a control panel set up at one side of the platform.   "Acknowledged, Team Five," I heard Kouvaras say. "What's your status?"  "No resistance, just a handful of technicians."   "Secure the plant and secure the technicians. No one comes in or out until we've secured the station."   "Acknowledged." Redburn moved toward the technicians and raised the speaker of a Cack translation device. Troopers followed him, weapons at the ready. "Step away from the panel." The click and hisses of the translation echoed from the nearby piping. The technicians glanced back at Redburn and continued jabbing furiously at the controls.   "I said—"   The display flashed white and the signal cut off. All my displays showed red broken link icons.   "Holy Crap!" Chris' surprise came across the command channel. I glanced up at my main tactical display wondering if a signal router had somehow been hacked and noticed a ring of ship icons flashing ugly damage indicators. Assuming it was a hit-and-run attack, I expanded the field of view looking for the attacking ships. We must have missed someone hiding in the debris field, I thought. "It's gone!"Chris said. "It just blew up."   I search the tactical display and found no space station.   * * *    "Who screwed up?" Smith demanded later in our regular commanders' meeting in v-space. "Do we know who's responsible?" 

I sighed. "Our data analysts believe the Sons of Heaven themselves are responsible."   "They blew up their own station?" Maxwell said. "On purpose?"  I opened the report with the troopers' videos attached as thumbnail clips. I watched through their eyes as they moved with swift purpose through the corridors and felt a nauseating sense of loss. I listened to their confident and efficient voices as they checked in, knowing that trooper country on the Phoenix was almost completely empty now.   "None of the troopers were firing weapons are altering any of the station's systems." I expanded Redburn's video clip. "Our engineers haven't completely deciphered their controls—they may not have enough video to do so—but they currently believe the aliens deliberately collapsed the magnetic fields of the anti-matter containers."   "Is it possible our troopers disrupted their systems with their boarding action or prevented the aliens from correcting an unrelated problem?" Solomon asked.   "Our engineers feel that is extremely unlikely," I said. "A number of critical fail-safe systems had to all fail at the same time, including the one that would jettison the antimatter into space if the magnetic fields collapsed."   "But why? Maxwell asked.   I shrugged. "We can only speculate what they thought would happen if we captured the battle station. We just don't have any idea of what they were thinking."   "This should have been anticipated," Smith said. "Their commander should have ordered them to secure the power plant first." I think I successfully hid my shock as I cast a questioning glance at Solomon. Though Kouvaras commanded the troopers, I commanded Kouvaras. I couldn't believe that, in the midst of disaster, Smith would suddenly start pointing fingers at me. "And just what would you have done differently?" I asked Smith.   Smith stiffened. "I would have had them shoot all the technicians on sight so they couldn't sabotage the station."   Maxwell and Dexter exchanged puzzled glances.   "That would be a complete abrogation of standard boarding protocol," I began. "Current doctrine emphasizes speed and surprise. What you're proposing has been shown to only instigate the desperate measures we see here."   "I'm still saying you should have anticipated this," Smith said, giving up any pretense this wasn't a personal attack.   Solomon rubbed his temples and grimaced. "We can leave the historical analysis for the experts in the war colleges. For now, we need to finish our damage assessments for the ships damaged in the explosion and finish our survey of system resources."   Smith gave him a dirty look, but said nothing.   "I have all my engineering crews on twenty-four hour duty rotations," Solomon continued, "I suggest you others do the same if you haven't already. I don't want to spend more than a day in this system."   * * *   It took us another week of cautious fighting to make our way through the systems of the Iron Workers. They were not as aggressive as The Swords, but they were more professional and nearly as persistent. They continually followed behind, attacking our slowest and most damaged ships and I was constantly forced to send Chris off with groups of FACs and light cruisers to chase them away. By the time we left their systems, are supplies were nearly completely exhausted.   Afterwards, we came to the systems of the Harvesters. Once we were through their perimeter defenses, we found a number of relatively wealthy worlds from which we were able to resupply. A week into the Harvesters' territory, we came to a large trading world called Agile. Smith sent his FACs and light cruisers in first to secure the gate for the battle cruisers. Once in system, they were greeted by an armada, not of war ships, but traders.   "Proper nearings sons of He Who Looks Up," the alien's ambassador said. "Pleasing us in being in your presence. We were continually pursuing your narrative among the information array of Those Who Dwell Within."   "Thank you for your kind greetings," Smith said while the rest of the commanders watched in v-space. "Why have you come to meet us?"  "We are having sent exchanges of supplies and seeking your friendship. I am to also possibly be serving in guidance to you through hostile spaces."   "You are to be our guide?" Smith asked. "Where would you guide us?"   "If following me you will seeing He Who Looks Up's suns' lights in four hundred thirty two intervals."   No one in v-space said anything, as if fearing they had misheard our potential guide. I did a quick calculation. Assuming he was using Cack time unites and assuming I understood him correctly, he was telling us he could bring us home to Solarian space in five days.   * * *    "I think our new friend is using us," Abrams said four days later during our regular commanders' conference.   "What make you think that?" Dexter asked. "The fact that he's repeatedly claimed unarmed trading ships were planning on attacking us or the way he's begged us to annihilate largely defenseless worlds."   Abrams glared at Dexter. Our initial enthusiasm over nearly being home had begun to wane over the last few days as our trust in our guide ebbed a bit. No one had said anything yet, but his promise to get us home tomorrow was looking a little thin.   "I've been studying the systems we've been traveling through," I began, "and I'm certain some of them are multiply connected on the transit network. I can't prove it, but I'd say our guide is zigzagging us through his enemy's territory, hoping we'll cause as much damage as we can."   Smith rubbed a hand across his unshaven face. I could hear the bristly scratch of his chin on the audio pickup. The months of traveling at high alert had taken a toll on his health and his gaze looked vague and uncertain. "Either our guide has kept his promise and we will reach Solarian space by the end of the day, or he has lied to us and will pay the price before tomorrow's first shift." Smith seemed to drift off in thought, then brought himself back with a heavy sigh. "I am tired of all this endless speculation. You know what you need to do now. Just do it. Tomorrow we will do whatever the circumstances require, then again the day after and the day after that until we either reach home or die trying."   * * *   We swept through system after system, met at each gate by desperate defenders convinced we had come to conquer them and take everything they had of value. Though our ships were patched and Jerry-rigged and continually low on missiles and other supplies, our crews were veterans a hundred times over and well drilled in combat procedures. "Danger is Likely" was our new normal and we rarely bothered raising the alert status in actual combat. As we proceeded, it seemed as if we had left the entire Sagittarian arm of the galaxy blazing behind, drawing a growing swarm of vengeance-seeking ships after us.   At the end of the day, as we orbited our last scheduled transit station and waited patiently for our turn through the gate, I was already expecting some sort of attack when I noticed the first ships through had begun to drop off the network. Only a sudden jump to the H- drive or their sudden destruction would cause that. I checked what I had left of my ship-to-ship network and flagged one of the tac officers of a ship preparing to transit.   "What is it? What's going on?" I demanded.   "Solaria!" came the startling cry. "We're home!"   I opened a video feed the tac officer had tagged and saw a distant star shining through the far gate. The navigational computers flagged it as Black Mesa, a Solarian colony.   "Solaria! Solaria!"   All the channels were full of people cheering and crying.   "We're home!"  

 

Part Four:The Second Cack War - Chapter 35

The Black Mesa system had first been colonized by the Black Mesa Research Consortium. It sat on the furthest edge of Solarian space, surrounded by The Iron Workers and other independent races with which it had built a successful trading alliance.
  Like the people of Agile, the human colonists had eagerly followed our exploits in the Cack media so that our arrival was welcomed as if we were a victorious ZGB team returning from a championship game. Our biographies were the top file links on all the local portals and video clips of our battle with Righteous Ruler had been cached on every server in the system. When our crews went on leave, they were treated like heroes and one of our fleet commanders, Maxwell, even signed a soft-drink endorsement for enough money to completely replace his flag-ship if he had wanted to.   We stayed in system a month living on gratuities and easy contracts which the locals had arranged for us with their alien neighbors. As we moved into our second month however, the money began to dry up, the aliens began complaining about the burden of supporting us and even the Solarian naysayers were commenting on the growing anti-Solarian sentiment in the Cack Moirarchy. Some interviewers began to ask how we felt about our responsibility for the growing Cack opinion that the Solarian species was dangerous and should be eliminated.  Our arrival had turned the Black Mesa Colony into a regional power overnight, but unless they began conquering their neighbors, they couldn't afford us. Realizing we would soon outlive our welcome, we held a meeting of the Consolidated Solarian Fleet shareholders which, since the reorganization, include everyone from the lowest- maintenance worker to the fleet commanders. The discussion in v- space ranged all over the map with some arguing we should set up an Moiarchy of our own right there, to others arguing passionately that we leave immediately for the nearest transit station and not stop moving until we saw our home worlds.  Hundreds of side conversation followed that theme on various discussion boards, but the overall sentiment was best summarized by a fighter service technician named Leon. He said, "I for one am tired of all the traveling and fighting, of emergency duties, emergency repairs and emergency rations. I just want it to end. Since we're in a Solarian trading port, I say we grab a jump ship, or a luxury passenger liner and let others worry about getting us home. Heck, I don't even care if you have to freeze me and put me on a corpsicle transport. My contract was up months and months ago. I'm ready to go off-duty."  A clear majority agreed with him so a vote wasn't even necessary. Smith, who had largely been silent during the meeting, spoke up. "If that is how you feel, it so happens that the head of the Spartan military transport and logistics command is a close personal friend of mine. If you wish, I can take a jump transport back to Sparta where I'm confident I can arrange for transport for all of us back home."  This, of course, was the best idea any of them had ever heard and everyone immediately agreed to Smith's plan. I felt like a kill-joy as I signaled my intent to speak. "I know you are all thinking about what you want to do when you get home, but there are a few practical matters we need to discuss first." The side conversations died down on the message boards and I could feel the excitement drain out of v- space.  "Even if Commander Smith finds a jump ship tomorrow and jumps directly to New Sparta, I don't have to tell you that the wheels of military bureaucracy turn slowly. It could well be months before he gets here with any jump ships so we need to plan how we're going to support ourselves while we wait." The messages had nearly ceased, though I saw a few comments agreeing with me.  "First I'd like to suggest we set up a central contracting authority to help us look for work. We've nearly exhausted our local support so we're going to have to turn to systems further out. Also, you may come across opportunities on your own. I think everyone who finds their own contracts or finds an opportunity to turn privateer should at least notify contracting so we can provide logistical support or, if necessary, come rescue your butts if you get in over your heads." 

This brought a few chuckles, and while there was some grumbling on the message boards about us setting up our own useless bureaucracy, most of the comments were in agreement. This was confirmed with a quick vote from the shareholders and then I continued.  "Secondly, we need to consolidate our forces and pick, at most, two or three systems in which to set up a base of operations. We have intel suggesting The Iron Workers are gathering warships in a nearby system because they fear we intend to stay. I don't think they are presently a threat, but we can't afford to give them a chance to launch a sneak attack, so we need to set up regular patrols and preposition defensive forces near critical gates."  This brought even more grumbling. No one liked patrol duty. They were long, boring and potentially dangerous if you found yourself faced with a surprise attack. But they were necessary and in the end the votes agreed with me.  "Third, bureaucrats are bred to be as unhelpful as possible. It is possible that New Sparta may not send enough ships back for all of us." I didn't want to say out loud that I thought it possible New Sparta might only send for their own ships. "This being a trade port, I know Cack jump ships sometimes come here. I suggest we seize them and keep them on hand in case we need extra transport. We may not need them, but I'd rather have too many than too few. In fact," I added as a new thought came to me, "we can load a few light cruisers and FACs in the first few we catch and use them to raid ports we know the Cack merchants like to frequent."  This caused quite a commotion on the message boards. Some were all for splitting up the fleet to seize what jumps ships they could and leaving at once. Others were afraid they'd get left behind and didn't want to seize any jump ships for fear they'd be stolen by other parts of the fleet. In the end, it was agreed to take what jumps ships we could, but to ensure that no one left until the whole fleet could travel.  "Finally, since we must prepare for every possibility, in the event we cannot provide enough jump ships for the entire fleet, I suggest we contact all the system managers and ask them to send out their security patrols to clear a path for us through the gates as I hear there are many pirates and raiders here in the outskirts of the colonies. I'm confident they'll help speed us on our way in order to see the last of us."  I had gone too far with the last proposal. The message boards exploded and there were so many requests to speak that the v-space servers began to drop connections thinking they were under attack. The crews didn't even want to think about the possibility of trudging back home through the gates. In the end we never voted, but I contacted the local managers personally about the matter and they assured me they would do everything in their power to help us and oh, by the way, when were we leaving?  I hated to tell them I didn't know.  * * *  We loaded Commander Smith on the first jump ship that came to port and convinced its commander to take him straight to New Sparta. A week later we commandeered the next jump ship. After that, they stopped coming to port, so we put Commander Dexter in charge of a squad of LCs and FACs, loaded him into our captured jump ship and sent him to go capture more. We never saw him again.  For the next month we were forced to go further and further out from our base of operations to find work. We had mixed success, including one idiotic sub-commander who managed to get himself and his entire squad of ships wiped out, but for the most part we survived. The locals, unable to pay us, started providing guides to lead us to raid the systems of their enemies and seize anything we could find of value.  I was manning a forward command post a day's boost from our main base of operations where half our ships had remained behind, when an urgent message flashed on my data panel from a returning scout ship. I opened it. 

"Phoenix command, this is the Artful Dodger. Task Force Sigma is trapped and urgently needs reinforcements."  "Acknowledged, Artful Dodger." I alerted a couple of wings we had kept back for this purpose. "Do you have data for me?"  "Transmitting now."  A gravimetric scan appeared on my display, the nice clean lines of the geometric symbols belying the fuzzy guesswork of mass and trajectory plots. "By the Maker," I muttered, taking in the debris field disc and the lack of all planets outside of the goldilocks zone. My stomach twisted in a knot as I thought of how Kouvaras and his men had been lost. "This is The Sons of Heaven all over again."  "Come again sir?"  "What's Task Force Sigma's situation?"  An icon flashed next to the smaller member of the binary planet. "All the space-based assets of the surrounding systems have been collected here near this large moon. Battle stations have been towed to all five Lagrange points and the moon itself has heavy defenses. Finally, they have collected ships from all the surrounding systems and amassed a fleet equal to Task Force Sigma and that fleet is growing as more ships come in.  "The problem is that before their defenses came online, we were able to slip in and land several compliments of troopers on the moon."  "Without landers? You didn't use drop pods did you? How did you plan to get them back?"  "No. We didn't use drop pods. We had captured some transports capable of landing on the moon and got the troopers in before the aliens had figured out what was going on."  "But now their defenses are up," I prompted.  "Yes. Our plan was for the troopers to seize control of those defenses by capturing the base on the moon. They got a foothold, but the aliens have managed to isolate their main control center and our troopers can't break through without additional firepower."  "Which Sigma can't provide because of the orbital defenses and the growing alien fleet," I concluded.  "Exactly, and the troopers can't evac in the transports for the same reasons."  I shook my head. "This is undoubtedly the worst plan I've ever seen. It's almost as if you'd planned to strand your troopers there." I paused and the scout didn't reply, but then it wasn't his fault and there wasn't any point to berating him. "Stand by."  I contacted the other wings, sent them the data and my attack plans and gave them their thirty-minute warning. After that, I waited and distracted myself by heating some tea. It had all seemed so simple when I had just been one of dozens of fleet sub-commanders. Now Smith was gone and I was in charge of everything. I had other commanders I could call on, but they already had their assigned roles and responsibilities. I couldn't just run to them when things got tough. I could delegate actions, but not my decisions. I was basically alone now.  The acceleration warning chimed and I returned to my crash pod with a zero-G thermos of tea and sipped it as the two wings navigated the transit station. My task force formed up on the other side and accelerated again, this time building up delta-V so that when we dropped out of FTL we wouldn't be stationary targets. We couldn't let it go too long because we needed at least a few seconds on target before we flew past. We didn't know if they had gravimetric sensors or how accurate they were. If they didn't, it would take thirteen hours for the light from our current position to reach them. The battle would be long over before they saw us come in through the gate.   We went FTL, skirting the debris field disc and approached the battle station at Lagrange point three on the far side of the planet from the moon. They seemed completely unprepared to receive us as we dropped out of FTL well within beam weapon range. Our particle emission weapons carved their battle station into tiny pieces and they made no response. Secondary explosions tore the rest of the structure apart before our momentum had even carried us to it. I pinged the two wings, checking the com-laser network, then gave the thirty seconds warning to proceed to the next target.   Less than half of a second from the H-drives and we had cut across a third of the moon's orbit to Lagrange point four. They were prepared for us this time and fired a combination of missiles and directed energy weapons. Our point defenses launched counter missiles and blew prismatic chaff to defuse the beam attacks. Our offensive missiles had scored significant hits on the station when the Phoenix shuddered and the lights flickered as damaged circuits rerouted power through alternate pathways.  I called up the ship's status panel and saw minor to moderate damage indicators all along our right side. All the nearest ships on that side were similarly damaged except for The Xerxes. The Xerxes did not appear at all. As I watched, The Westerfeld, covered with damage icons, disappeared and was replaced with a "signal lost" icon.  7

 

Chapter 36

The Phoenix trembled from the force of our missile launchers. Our point defense systems were running them on full auto. Enemy missiles, too small to show up in the gravimetric haze of the long range scanners, appeared as if by magic only seconds from hitting our ship. Our Defense Ranging And Targeting System could barely keep up with them. It seemed the battle station at L1 had joined the fight.
 I flash messaged Mia, my fleet tactical officer. "Have the ships move in and concentrate our fire on L4."  "Sir, won't that put us outside the D-RATS response safety margin?"  "Slightly. But we can't stay here and get hammered on both sides. We have to end this fight now and, if we're lucky, L1 will help us finish off L4."  "Acknowledged."  I waited a tense minute, feeling the Phoenix shudder around me while the tac officer calculated and relayed the fleet's movement. I glanced at my pressure helmet strapped to the inside of my pod, making sure it was available if we got hit, then heard the acceleration alarm.  The fleet moved in closer, staying on the station's equator to avoid the concentrated fire at its polar regions. While the attack continued, I planned the fleet's next move. I don't know if L1 helped us out or not, but L4 soon stopped firing and, seconds later, fell apart under our assault.  I flash messaged my tac officers, "stand by for course change," then called up the 3D navigation display. Our momentum was carrying us away from the moon at an oblique angle. We would have to turn toward the moon and burn off our momentum with the reaction drives, but first we had to get out of the range of the battle stations' missiles.  I rotated the display, lining up L2 and L5, determined the angle we'd need to approach, the length of burn to get the speed we'd want and worked backwards to our next destination. I sent the data to the fleet tac officer. "Boost as soon as you've crunched the numbers and get your confirmation from fleet," I told him.  The attacks from L1 continued, but we were now able to concentrate our defenses on them. The missile launchers quivered another minute then stopped as the fleet went FTL. We dropped out of FTL well beyond the moon's range, turned, fired up the reaction drives and began accelerating back. I was tempted to turn the optical sensors on L4 and watch the last minute of our fight as its light caught up to us, but instead I trained my sights on the moon.   I found the enemy's base burrowed into the side of a crater. The Shattered remains of the troopers' landers outside its front entrance had given it away. Someone, most likely L2, had blasted them on the ground.  I messaged my coms officers.  "Yes, sir?"  "Can we reach the troopers on the ground?"  "I'm talking with specialist Lesko right now."  "Add me."  The com officer paused. "OK, you're in."  "Specialist Lesko, this is Commander Phon. Can you hear me?"  "Yes, sir."  "What's your situation?"  "We've secured module A, but cannot access the interior modules."  "Is your position currently threatened?" "Not at the moment. The aliens sent an assault team out through a secondary entrance to attack us from over the moon's surface earlier. We destroyed them and sent a team to go find the other entrances when the battle station overhead attacked."  "Well, we're about to make a flyby of L2. Hopefully we'll keep them busy."  "What do you want us to do?" 

"Wait until we engage the battle station, then if it not too hazardous, send your teams out to destroy any of the surface defenses you can reach."  "We can do that."  "We'll have to turn the fleet around to come back and get you. When the surface guns start firing a second time, get your troops back to the base. We'll take them out from orbit."  "You do know they destroyed our birds, right?" Her voice had a worried tone.  "Yes. I'm working on your transport next. Hang tight."  "Acknowledged."  I messaged Chief Master Engineer Michael Droemer. "Chief, would it be possible to remotely land a breaching pod on the moon, load it with troopers and launch it again?"  Chief Droemer frowned. His gaze drifted upwards and he leaned back in his chair as he made quick mental estimates. "You should have enough thrust. The landing will be a bit rough. I don't know how stable the thing will be on the ground, especially heavily loaded...."  "Good enough. I want you to get together with the remotes commander. Have him pick out five pilots and get them hooked up to five pods in the next ten minutes."  "That's not a lot of time," Droemer said. "It might be better to just have them jump off the moon and pick them up in space. I think their armor could probably accomplish that and they even have maneuvering jets for zero G."  I found the mental image of two dozen troopers leaping off the moon startling, but then, even with their cooperation, gathering them all on board would be a nightmare. "We'll save that as a last resort. The enemy fleet is probably headed toward us right now, we need to snatch them up as quickly as possible." * * *  Once we had increased our velocity towards the far side of the moon enough, I confirmed the receipt of the flight position information and the targeting assignments with my tactical officers. I also assigned one of them to log the firing positions of the moon's defenses during the attack on the station. Since we were now moving in the right direction, I started the thirty second countdown. The wings acknowledged and when the countdown hit zero, the H-drives kicked on and suddenly the moon swelled large beneath us.  We stopped at close beam range to the battle station at Lagrange Point Two. Our particle emission weapons sliced through their support structures with robotic precision. Glowing drops of metal sprayed out in a burst of atmosphere and a large section of the station tore loose and drifted away. A single missile platform fired off a volley of undirected missiles in the feeble spasm of their dying defense grid. Warning icons flashed on my display. The moon had launched a wave of relativistic missiles mixed with surprisingly powerful directed energy weapons. Had their targeting been more accurate, or if we had given them more time, they might have seriously hurt us.  The automatic point defenses kicked in, shooting down those missiles coming toward the Phoenix even as others slammed into the battered remains of the battle station and sprayed us with the shrapnel of its corpse. The missile swarm grew thicker. I signaled the fleet. "Proceed to next target."  Battle station L5 had already launched their missiles at us, forcing us to swing wide and come in at an oblique angle. The end result, however, was the same as with L2. We carved it up and left it a venting ruin as we swung towards L1.  During our assault, the alien ships had tried to turn in toward us. Task Force Sigma switched from pursued to pursuer and pushed back, forcing them into ever widening spirals, buying us the time we needed to destroy the remaining station. 

A short burst of the H-drive and we were in energy weapon's range carving up L1. The moon's planet-side defenses lashed out at us, overwhelming several of our ships' point defenses and inflicting significant damage. I signaled the S.S. Hudson and the S.S. Medved, our two most damaged cruisers, and waited in mounting frustration during the slight delay of the communication laser network. "You two head back to L4 and look for survivors from the Xerxes and the Westerfeld. I want you finished by the time we recover the troopers."   "Acknowledged."   "Yes, sir."  I transmitted the new attack plans to my tactical officers. We hadn't burned off our momentum when we jumped to L1, so our momentum had been carrying us away from the near side of the moon. When the countdown finished, we were back on the moon's far side, our momentum once more carrying us toward the moon.  The moon's defenses barely had time to fire before our gunners, working down their list of last known firing positions, systematically destroyed the enemy's weapons in a spreading ring of destruction that billowed out from the base. The remote pilots launched the breaching pods and I watched, praying I had given the troopers enough time to get back to safety, praying the pods would survive the landings and praying the troopers would get back alive. The gunners stopped firing, having reached the end of their target list and waited for possible return fire. I'm sure they were scanning the moon's surface looking for missed targets or mobile units that might have been hiding.  At the edges of the system, more alien ships had trickled in through the other gates, formed up and moved in to support the other alien defenders. Together, they forced Task Force Sigma to withdraw. I estimated we had less than ten minutes before the enemy ships were upon us.  I tapped into the optical scanners, found the base and watched the troopers running out to their pods. I waited for an uncomfortably long period, waiting until I saw the dust clouds of their engines firing. They didn't seem to move at first and I feared, their engines couldn't handle that much mass under gravity, but then they started moving. As they neared the Phoenix, they seemed to accelerate until they shot toward us like missiles.  I flash messaged Harlow. "Have the rest of the fleet go hide behind the transit station."  "Hide? I don't understand."  "While we load the breaching pods, have the rest of the fleet position themselves on the far side of the station. Leave the fastest craft just barely visible from this side as if we were trying to set up an ambush, but have the other ships go ahead and transit."  "Do you think it will really hold them back?"  "They've been pretty cautious so far and we've just stripped their orbital defenses. I think I'd be careful in their place."  "What if they don't fall for it and catch us while half of the fleet is transiting?" Harlow asked. His voice held a slight note of accusation.  I shrugged. "If they don't back off, the FACs and LCs can launch a feint attack as we did escaping The Swords' territory. We only have to buy time for the slower ships to get a decent head start."  "Very well. I'll pass it along to the other tactical officers."  "Tell them to boost immediately."  Harlow disconnected and I sat staring at the data panel, scratching my chin thoughtfully and wondering if I'd lost his confidence. He almost seemed to blame me for our lack of better options. How different from the first days after our commanders were betrayed and murdered. Then everyone eagerly looked to me to rescue them. Now that we were back at the edge of Solarian space and they imagined themselves safe, I couldn't keep them from running off into danger. More and more of my commanders were questioning my orders as if I'd suddenly gone stupid.  The fleet disappeared. I tracked them on the gravimetrics with one eye as I waited for the breaching pods to finish loading, while keeping the other eye on Task Force Sigma. I had no way to communicate with them while they were playing tag with the aliens. I could only hope they would figure out what we were doing and respond accordingly.  Finally the flight deck master signaled to Commander Brennon that all the breaching pods were loaded and he gave the order to race for the transit station. I watched Task Force Sigma, waiting to see if they would follow, or if they would go back to the moon for the troopers and, likely, be trapped there. The rest of the fleet disappeared behind the transit station, invisible even on gravimetrics, except for a few LCs just visible beyond the station's edge. Behind us, Task Force Sigma scattered and raced toward the gate.  Was our trap too obvious, I wondered, or was it obvious enough? The alien's gravimetrics didn't seem to be as sophisticated as ours. They might not even see our ships waiting in pretend ambush.  The Phoenix whipped around the station and slipped into the queue behind those few heavy cruisers that had not yet transited to the next system. The rest were already racing to the next gate. Task Force Sigma slotted in behind us and some of the waiting LCs and FACs had to move aside, exposing themselves to the enemy to make room.  From our recon drones, it appeared the aliens dropped out of FTL and formed up in a forward-pointing cone within a funnel. It was an offensive formation within a defensive one. I could only assume their commander was hedging his bets, ready to attack at the first sign of an opportunity, but fearing to be caught off guard if we attacked first. Either way, he gave us the time we needed to slip through the gate. But as the FACs and LCs transited, he surprised us by chasing us into the next system.  Our trailing ships violated about a hundred spacing laws and vented raw anti-matter behind them. Given the vastness of space, it was a long-shot, but it paid off when one of the leading alien ships ran into a clump of antimatter and was destroyed. The rest of the aliens dropped out of FTL and we escaped.

 

Chapter 37

I had just finished the after action debriefing, which had turned into a dressing down of my wing and ship's commanders, and was trying to decide what policies we would need to enact to restrain them from doing something so stupid in the future, when my netpiece alerted me to my regularly scheduled commanders' meeting.
 Maxwell appeared in v-space looking disheveled and exhausted. Chris wasn't even in uniform. Only Abrams and Solomon appeared ready for inspection, though Abrams eyes were glazed with fatigue and Solomon's looked unfocused as if he were in a daze. Newman however, having taken over Smith's fleet in his absence, sat looking excited to be a part of the meeting and ready to offer all kinds of helpful ideas.   "We just don't have any more parts or funds to continue repairs,― Solmon said.   Maxwell rubbed his forehead as if it hurt. "Some commanders have confiscated war prizes for parts and given their crews IOUs."   "How are the drives," I asked. "Do we have any ships that can't go FTL?"  "No," Solomon said. "They'll travel, but we have several that aren't ready to fight. Quite a few are suffering intermittent failures of key systems and we have a critical fleet-wise shortage of missiles and no raw materials to fabricate more.   I turned to Abrams. "What's our contracting situation like?"   He sat up straighter and took a long, slow, deep breath. "Contracts have fallen off precipitously. Our last new contract was six weeks ago and it was only a short-term transport guard job. Most of our recurring contracts have given notice of their intent to not renew. I don't have to tell you what that's doing to our cash position."   Chris sat tapping a data crystal on the table and turning it over in his hand.   I caught his eye. "What about the surrounding systems? Can we find any supplies further out?"   Chris shrugged. "We have either raided or made deals with every system in a two day radius. Beyond that, things thin out a bit. If you want to go any further out, we're going to have to move the base of operations."  "The Locals would be glad to hear that," Maxwell muttered.   "What of Sparta and the jump ships? Surely they'll be arriving soon?" Newman asked.   "I've spoken to Smith, but the Spartan military are dragging their feet. The Cack media is agitating for war and the Spartan politicians are afraid of doing anything provocative like large fleet movements or taking responsibility for the force that nearly killed the Cack ruler. Plus, if war does break out, they may prefer we were here at the front line. Smith tells me some Spartan commanders have even referred to us as pre-positioned assets."   Chris continued tapping his data crystal. "If they want to garrison us here, they could at least send us some funds and supplies."   "That's not legally possible without a contract," Abrams said. "And that doesn't seem likely given the political situation. No, I'm afraid we can't count on Sparta to help us."   Newman gave Abrams an accusatory look. "I disagree." Apparently no one felt like arguing with him for no one responded.   "What does the oracle say?" Solomon asked.   "I've already discussed this with him since he said he would be too busy to attend this meeting. He's still studying the situation but fears we may have already delayed leaving too long. Some-thing about diminishing probabilities of opportunity." I shrugged. "Which means," I added, "given our situation, that the only course of action left to us is to get the fleet moving once more."  

The other commanders stared down at the virtual conference table or shook their heads regretfully, but no one challenged my conclusion.   "I disagree," Newman chimed in again. "We have to have faith that if Smith says he can get the jump ships, he will. We certainly can't go running off when he may return any day."   I gave the other commanders a chance to respond before I broke the uneasy silence that had followed. "I suggest you meet with your chief officers and make sure they're on board. We'll hold a shareholders call tomorrow."  Chris sighed. "The crews aren't going to like this."   Newman started to object and I gave him a don't bother look. "Tell them Smith won't have any trouble finding us when he comes through with the jump ships."   "If he comes through," Maxwell grumbled and logged out.   * * *   Where our arrival had been greeted with fanfare, our departure, when it was noted at all, elicited little more than sighs of relief. The local authorities, learning of our intentions to leave, suddenly found food and supplies to send us on our way. They couldn't supply us with everything we needed to get back up to full fighting strength, but we scavenged some raw materials from their shipyards and began the tedious process of fabricating what we could as we traveled. Once again, I found myself missing the large factory ships and other support craft we left behind in our trip into the Cack middle sphere, but at least we were moving and the way had been cleared ahead for us.   We traveled quickly to the edge of Black Mesa's territory and the frontier of a race whose name translated as Those Who Dwell In Strength On High. The aliens, anticipating our arrival, sent a delegation in fast transports to meet us at their border. We sent over a man from Black Mesa by the name of Timmons who was something of a trade representative between the humans and aliens. We were hoping he'd work out an understanding with the aliens and signal us that all was clear to proceed. Instead, he came back and requested a private conference with the commanders.   Timmons appeared in v-space, a tall skinny man with narrow head that had only a short fringe of hair at the sides. "They said no."   I dropped back in my chair, stunned.   "You did tell them we intended to pass through their territory with or without their permission?" Abrams asked, sounding incredulous. "Yes."   "You assured them that we would prefer to be their allies and would even help them if we could?" Maxwell asked.   Timmons nodded. "They've heard stories that, when it comes to non-Solarians, the fleet doesn't really distinguish between friends and foes."   "Where would they get an idea like that?" Chris demanded.   "They also assured me their super-heavy battle cruisers could deal with our fleet."   "Super heavy?"   "What?"   Timmons sent an image of a massive sphere the size of a large battle station with the long rear projections of a Cack grav-drive.   Chris whistled. "Does that drive work?"   "Yes," Timmons said. "It will reach 1C."   "Not too fast for a battleship," Maxwell said, "But unimaginably fast for a battle station."   "They've got a dozen or so of these things which they use to protect and hold the systems in their sphere," Timmons said. "Do you have any idea what weapon compliments it has?" Abrams asked.  

Timmons shrugged. "I'm a merchant. I assume all the usual missiles and guns, but I can tell you each ship carries swarms of fast attack craft and a handful of light cruisers."   I gripped the arms of my chair in growing irritation as I resisted the urge to put a fist through my data panel. How could these aliens be so stupid? We only wanted to go home! We had no desire to fight them, yet their paranoia would ensure the one thing they were trying to prevent. I took a deep breath and forced myself to relax. "Mr. Timmons, you know these people. Is there any way they can be made to see reason?"  He glanced at the table and looked a little embarrassed as he shook his head. "No, sir. I don't think so. They seem convinced that you're not to be trusted and they are quite confident in their mobile battle stations. However..." he squinted up at me thoughtfully. "We might be able to get some of them on our side."   "Oh?"   "The Strong High Dwellers are a coalition of competing political units. Recently one unit rose up to seize power over the others, leaving a number of enemies who might be willing to help us."   "Can you talk to them for us?" I asked.   "Yes. I still have free passage as Black Mesa's representative."   "Good. While you speak to them, we'll withdraw to the previous system. Hopefully the locals will think we've given up."   * * *   Three days later, Timmons returned with the leaders of a number of the rival political units. We invited the aliens to a rare face-to-face meeting of the fleet command staff where we explained our situation to them. The Strong High Dwellers were the size of human pre-teen children, with short wide heads and large widely-spaced eyes. Short fur-like hair covered the backs of their arms, legs and their heads down to their cheekbones which gave them a vaguely racoon-ish appearance. I couldn't help glancing down to look for a tail and found one extending from beneath each tunic, wrapped around a leg.   They grasped our situation and eagerly agreed to help us in our passage through the territory. On their part, they committed to sending us some ships and launching an attack from their territory to open up a second front. We sealed the agreement by crossing our wrists and grasping both hands. Afterward, they left and we waited impatiently.   On the second day after the meeting, late into the third shift, the jump ships appeared. There were thirty of them and each were a strange cobbled together mixture of technologies from Cack to Solarian to who knew what. No two were exactly the same though each were little more than a web of support struts, sensors, exposed power plants and engine casings wrapped around a pair of LCs.   I flash messaged Chris who came online after a long delay. "Asleep?"   "I hadn't intended to be," Chris said. "What's up?"   "Our allies have arrived. Looks like about sixty LCs. Coordinate with their commander and see if you can integrate them into your wing."   "Will do."  I brought the fleet alert status up as the alien LCs unloaded and notified my wing commanders that we would be moving soon. The alien ships formed up and boosted straight for the gate to the alien system we were preparing to invade. They passed through our own formations, but instead of joining in, they kept going.   "Chris, get your ships in line," I messaged.   "They're not responding to my signals."   "Stupid Cack translators," I muttered. "OK, let's go ahead and transit. Chris, contact their commander and make certain he's got their slot assignments."  

The alien LCs led the way through the transit station into the nearest enemy system which, we later learned, was their central governing world. Our own LCs followed while the battle cruisers queued up with well-practiced ease. We had long ago begun ignoring the transit station's navigational requests. Our own navigation officers, bending many safety protocols, had learned to cut the transit to one-tenth the usual time—and that was before one counted the time savings of seizing the in-bound lanes and turning them into out-bound lanes. I smiled, imagining their control officer's consternation as we transited. The entire fleet would have swept through before he could find the station director and get him to fire off a formal complaint.  The battle cruisers formed up as they exited, but the gravimetrics told me our alien escorts had already gone FTL and were heading straight for the home world.   I flash messaged Chris. "What's going on? I thought you instructed the aliens to join your wings?"   "I did! I gave them each their slot assignments and I thought they understood, but—oh crap!"   I glanced at the gravimetrics display. Thirty or forty of our own LCs had taken off to join them. "Chris! Get a hold of your command!"   "Yes—"   I cut him off and smashed the icon for the command emergency communications override function. "Attention all ship commanders! This is a direct order from the fleet commander. Do not break formation. I repeat: do not break formation—or I will have your command!" I slammed the "end" and "transmit" icons and sat back in my crash pod and stewed.   The alien super-heavy battle cruiser had placed itself between the attacking ships and their home world. It would be hours yet before the light from the battle reached us at the transit station. The battle itself would likely be over before the fleet could join in. While we prepared, all I could do was watch the little dots on the gravimetric displays indicating mass and velocity and wonder what was happening.   I looked around the C&C at the stray trash scattered about and decided it was past time for environmental to start cleaning the place again. I fired off a terse message to the e-tech supervisor and returned to my watching and fretting.   The little dots representing our attacking ships neared the big dot of the super heavy battle cruiser. As they closed the gap, a cloud of tiny dots sprayed out of the bigger ship. At this range, only the LCs and FACs would have shown up on the scanners, but hundreds of missiles and remote piloted attack craft must have accompanied them.   The engagement lasted only seconds. Then our ships did something no Solarian ship had done since leaving Solarian space. They and their alien allies turned around and ran away from the enemy. "Commander, the fleet is ready," Harlow announced.   I glanced at my data panel. All our ships had transited and reported ready for combat. I quickly calculated an intercept point at which to meet our fleeing ships, still pursued by the enemy, and flashed the coordinates to Harlow. "Tell the commanders to boost immediately."   "Yes, sir."  The pursuing aliens turned and fled back to their super heavy battle cruiser as our fleet caught up to them. We stopped to rejoin the returning LCs and FACs and assess their damage.   I messaged Chris. "Chris, contact all the ships that broke formation. Inform their sub-commanders that they are now in charge of their ships. If their former commanders want a job, they can be the subs until they learn to follow orders."   Chris looked shocked. "Uh, you know many are owner-operators, right?"   "I will not have people commanding ships in my fleet who cannot follow orders," I snapped.   Chris stared at me in silence.   "Tell them they can have their ships back when we get home." I started to log off, then added, "And make sure the aliens know what is expected of them!"   I logged off and set up a data feed for the engineering repair estimates. It turned out that most of the repairs that could be made outside of a space dock could be made within twenty-four hours. As this would return a number of LCs and FACs to active service, and the Strong High Dwellers seemed to prefer to stay close to their home world, we gave the mechanics the time they needed to repair the ships while we prepared our commanders.   I flash messaged Harlow. "Do we have any gunships left?"   "We still have the handful Sunshine used to practice planetary bombardment with. They haven't seen a lot of use because of their limited range. Why? You're not going to bombard their home world are you?" He replied nervously.   "No. I'm going to use them on that cruiser. It's pretty much stuck in place trying to defend that planet. Have the gunships prepare their mass-drivers for their heaviest load."   "Isn't that overkill for one ship?"   "There's no such thing."   Having done all I could do, I went to bed while the engineers worked round the clock to repair our ships. I didn't think I was tired, but I dropped into sleep immediately. I even overslept the next morning, and started the first shift five minutes late. Two hours later, the attack began.  

 

Chapter 38

The fleet approached in a concave lens with the intention of englobing the battle cruiser. A fountain of attack craft erupted at us from the target. Our own FACs, having been slotted in between the heavy battle cruisers darted forward, forestalling their hit-and-run tactics. They either drove the aliens off or held them in place until our battle cruisers could finish them. We turned back wave after wave of attacks as we approached and began surrounding the battle cruiser. Then the aliens piloting the attack craft, fearing entrapment, all fled back to the planet.
 Even without their escort, that one battle cruiser had the power to threaten the entire fleet. A stunning number of missiles lashed out in all directions, nearly overwhelming the D-RATS system. As our point defenses struggled to keep up, the remotely piloted attack drones slipped in to rake our ships with energy weapons and smaller ship-to-ship missiles.  Our own FACs and LCs boosted toward the cruiser on reaction drives, providing cover for our handful of gunships who accelerated towards their target to add extra momentum to their payloads. They approached from opposite directions, pinning the battle cruiser in place. After blasting through the enemy's defenses, the FACs and LCs separated and the gunships fired their payloads of depleted uranium. When those same payloads punched through the cruiser and flew out the far side, the FACs and LCs were forced to swerve away sharply to avoid being hit by their counterparts' projectiles.  The lights of the super heavy battle cruiser flickered and died. The energy weapons stopped firing and the missiles stopped launching. Even the remotely piloted drones ceased their attacks and continued accelerating away into the distance along whatever vector they had been following.  "Do you want to send boarding parties?" Harlow asked.  It would make a good prize, I thought. But then there would likely be other opportunities for capturing one of these. "Have they offered to surrender?"  "Not that we can tell."  "Then destroy them."  Perhaps they were too busy trying to repair critical systems, but not a single escape pod launched. Our missiles slammed into the hulk perforating it into fancy lacework, almost certainly killing the crew well before their anti-matter storage failed and vaporized the rest.  "Have the fleet form up in a defensive sphere," I told Harlow. "Let's check out this home world."  The planet surrendered immediately.  The new owners were generous with their newly acquired supplies and soon we had half the fleet in dock performing long-neglected repairs and resupply. The docking clamps had just locked down onto the Phoenix when the alarms sounded and FAS-Delta flashed on the alert panels. While Commander Brennon howled at the station's pilot master to release his ship, I flash messaged sub-commander Debbie Fowler who had C&C duty at the time. "What is it?"  "Another of those super heavy battle cruisers just transited into the system."  "Is he headed this way?"  "He's gone FTL and will be here in about ten hours."  "Recall all the crews and let's get into a higher orbit."   * * *  The new battle cruiser turned out to be loyal to the new rulers of The Strong High Dwellers—or at least it's commander decided to pledge his loyalty to them.  We stayed several weeks, our engineering crews working round the clock to repair all that they could. The Strong High Dwellers had a strange mix of technologies from a variety of worlds, supplying some rare parts we needed and, inexplicably lacking other more common items. We mostly traded technology for the supplies we needed when we weren't fighting their enemies. 

After repair and resupply, we continued our journey towards home, escorted by a delegation of the new rulers. We fought their enemies and shared in the tribute of new alliances. When we came to the edge of their territory, they introduced us to their neighbors and helped us negotiate our passage through. This allowed us to travel from system to system without having to fight along the way. Even so our supplies, which were never abundant, were running quite low by the time we came to the next territory.  That region of space was ruled by a race whose name translated as From the Stars. The local aliens who greeted us with gifts of supplies and offers of peace were from an offshoot race called The Learned Ones. Later that day, at the commander's meeting, we discussed the appropriate response.  "I think we should attack them," Newman said. "We have nothing to trade and they don't seem to need our particular services."  I wish I could say I was shocked, but all the commanders had felt a simultaneous reluctance to accept their offer. Our situation reminded me of the truce after the war with Righteous Ruler where they offered to sell us the supplies we needed and slowly starved us to death.  I turned to Chris hoping he'd suggest something else. He sat staring thoughtfully into the distance while tapping a data crystal on the table. Noticing my attention, he shrugged. "They don't appear to be a very warlike race. I don't think they could stop us from rolling over them. They might not even resist."  Abrams looked stiff and uncomfortable from across the virtual table. "Attacking The Learned Ones, being allies of the Solarian colony of Legion who we are hoping will aid us, could complicate things."   "So could not having any food to eat or air to breath," Maxwell said.  "Then there are From the Stars to consider," Solomon offered. "They may not be particularly warlike, but they control a large region of space. One doesn't accomplish that without being able to defend oneself, and they have the resources of a hundred worlds from which to draw."  My commanders being divided, I turned to Dr. Hindmost. "What does the oracle say?"  Dr. Hindmost had sat listening to the whole exchange, his eyes withdrawn and cowering under the edge of his carapace. "Trending indeterminate, we follow a dark path. More time collapsing the uncertainty is required."  I sighed. Surveying the faces of my commanders, I could tell they thought we'd need to take the supplies we lacked, but none were ready to stake their reputation on the consequences. "We'll delay our reply until we hear the oracle's conclusions. Ask The Learned One's to please be patient while we seek to learn The Maker's will for us."  Hours later, the oracle told me he could "find no way through" by violence and suggested we accept the peace offering. We did and soon we were on our way toward the next Solarian colony, Legion.   * * *    "What do you mean, they've denied us docking rights?" I asked Harlow.  His expression appeared uncharacteristically nervous on the display. "The system manager says the decision came down from the Regional Director at Red Rock. The thing is, we've just signed and paid deposits on several private dock rentals at Legion's main space port."  "If they've taken our money, go ahead and dock."  "Traffic control won't give us permission to approach."  "Ignore them. Take the ships that need the most work and make sure they each have a full complement of troopers in case the local authorities decide to get stupid and impound our ships or something. Confine everyone to the dock areas until we get this straightened out."  "Yes, sir."  I spent the next day overseeing negotiations, trying to get access to the space port while, at the same time, telling my NCOs I didn't know when the crews could begin going on leave and yes I did know the state of crew moral.  We stayed several weeks in a tense state of not-yet-but-maybe-soon-to-be-declared hostility, repairing our ships and scrounging supplies where we could. On discovering several wealthy subsidiaries of companies that technically owned some of our ships, we confiscated whatever we needed from them and told them to send the bills to HQ. Other than that, we restricted our piracy to cargo ships belonging to From the Stars exempting only The Learned Ones.  As our repairs neared completion, my communication's officer messaged me. "Sir, we've got a request from that fast transport that came in from Red Rock. They claim to be a delegation from the Regional Director sent to negotiate a ceasefire."  I stared incredulously at my communications officer. "A ceasefire? What do they think we're doing here?"  "Apparently we're laying waste to Legion and the surrounding territories of From the Stars."  I sighed. "Set up a meeting of the commanders and link these delegates in."  Within two hours our fleet commanders had all logged into v-space and were staring at a group of nervous bureaucrats. Their spokesman however, a man named Phineas, oozed the slick charm of a man confident of his ability to sway others. I looked up his public profile and got the distinct impression he thought rather highly of himself.  We began with introductions all around and then Phineas took over. "Warriors of Sol, Red Rock applauds your victory, glad to see once again that humans can defeat their alien foes. We congratulate you on persevering through your terrible ordeals in alien space and coming home safely again. As your fellow humans, we call on you to remember your duty to protect humanity and not attack our colonies like Black Mesa and Legion. We have had to fight the aliens to win these systems and are contractually bound to protect them.  "We have heard that you have seized the main space port here at Legion and are continuing to raid all the ships that pass by. We have come to ask you to stop this right now. It would be a terrible shame if we were forced to ally with From the Stars or any other aliens against our own species."  I glanced from the smug quirk of his poorly concealed smile to my commanders' clouded expressions of stunned outrage. Chris sucked in a lungful of air as if to shout, but I cleared my throat before he could begin. "It is true we were lucky to escape with our ships intact, but it seems you are unaware of the events following that. When The Sons of Heaven or The Swords opposed us or failed to trade with us, we fought them. Not because they were aliens, but because we were forced by necessity to get supplies where we could. If the aliens were friendly, as in the case of the Iron Workers or The Strong High Dwellers, we helped them, even attacking their enemies as if defending human space. At Black Mesa we were greeted warmly and so we paid good money—money we had little of—for everything we needed. But coming now to Legion, how were we treated? Like heroes returning from war? Like defenders of human space?  "No. Your administrator denied us access to the space port and violated our paid contracts with private space docks, forcing our exhausted crews to remain confined in their ships while alien traders came and went. We've tried for weeks to negotiate a solution, but they insist they are following orders directly from Red rock.  "And now you threaten to side with From the Stars and attack us...." I paused and looked into the ashen faces of the delegation. Even Phineas, with frightened raised eyebrows and all trace of smug cleverness lost, seemed to understand how badly he'd screwed this up. I shrugged and gave them a rueful smile. "If that is the case, then I say bring it on! We've already defeated many times your number. Your threat, frankly, bores us. As for From the Stars, I suspect they might actually pay us good money to destroy you and hand their systems back."  The elder member of the delegation quaked and the others exchanged frightened glances. They glared at Phineas who looked ill. Then the lead delegate in a cracking voice said, "One moment please," and both the audio and visual feed cut off. 

 

Chapter 39

                    I leaned back in my chair chuckling while most of my commanders stewed in the remains of their indignation. After a brief moment, the audio and visual signal came on with only the lead delegate present.
 "I apologize for our negotiator's remarks." The delegate said with a slight tremble. "I assure you it was not our intention to threaten you, but to welcome you to our colonies. If you will come to Red Rock, we will supply your ships with all the resources they need. In the meantime, I have ordered the system's director to extend full hospitality to your ships and crew.  * * *  The authorities from Red Rock made good on their promise and our crews were welcomed at the spaceport like long lost friends. They even released some supplies and sent technical experts to help repair our ships. When they answered our questions about the surrounding systems with updated navigational databases and system-by-system security reports, the commanders decided to invite them to participate in a planning session. The commanders linked into v-space chatting amiably on the command channel. Abrams leaned back in his chair at the virtual conference table, looking relaxed. He even chuckled at something Maxwell said when he leaned over and whispered in Abram's ear. Solomon looked at ease and well rested as did the other commanders waiting for the Red Rock delegation to link in. Chris's avatar slid into a chair next to me. "Think we'll make it back in time for the ZGB championships?" "Is the regular season over?" I honestly had no idea the championships had even started. On the few occasions we had seeded our EPR transceivers from the gate communication network, I'd been too busy with fleet headaches to worry about local events back home. With a twinge of guilt, I suddenly remembered my promise to keep in touch with Dr. Powers, then pushed the thought aside. "Because Mars made the finals again this year, a bunch of Earth teams are complaining the Martian team had an unfair advantage from Mar's reduced gravity," Chris continued. "Of course it's ridiculous. Everyone knows it's actually a hindrance in training for zero-G ball, including them, but those whiners will try—" A chime sounded and the com officer announced to the room, "The delegation from Red Rock is ready to join you." I gave Chris an apologetic look. "Link them in." The delegation's avatars appeared in the virtual conference space and a sigh of disappointment hissed across the private command channel as everyone saw Phineas among the delegation. I began the meeting. "Thank you for joining us, ladies and gentlemen. The fleet commanders have been discussing how best to proceed, whether we should continue by way of the transit system or obtain jump ships to carry the fleet. Either way, your knowledge and assistance would be most helpful. What would you advise?" Before anyone else could speak, Phineas rose. Placing both hands to his heart, he smiled apologetically to the rest of the conference. "Let me begin by first offering my deepest personal apology for our little misunderstanding. I assure you I had no intention of threatening you. Instead, I merely sought to assure you that though we had a good relationship with our alien neighbors we would of course, if forced to choose, prefer to side with you our fellow humans over From the Stars. Here he paused and looked at us as if expecting some sort of reassurance. I glanced at my fellow commanders sitting in stony faced silence before I replied. "And do you have some advice that might help us?" Lifting his hands, Phineas broke into an unexpected prayer. "Great Maker who guides His children, guide my words right now. Speak your wisdom to them through me so that in helping them I might be blessed as well and lead them away from disaster lest I be blamed." He paused, lowering his hands and smiled down on us as if expecting some sort of reaction on our part.

We just stared wordlessly at him. Phineas' smile faded and stood straighter, tugging down his tunic. "I think it goes without saying that it would be best for Red Rock to let you find your own way there. The expense of ferrying the entire fleet by jumpship will be enormous, yet that is my recommendation. Though you have an alliance with The Learned Ones, you have angered the rest of From the Stars by seizing their ships. To get from Legion to Red Rock, you will have to pass through nearly every system of From the Stars." "That's not impossible," Abrams said. "Certainly not for the fleet that has faced the Ruler of the Indweller's and his massive armada, still From the Stars know how to defend their transit stations and have even held off the Indwellers' ships. If you go that way, I suggest you transit your ships backwards because they will have ships waiting in ambush at each station. "But why squander your resources and damage your ships further when you can lie back in ease and be carried to Red Rock? From there it is an easy journey to New Home and from there you can go anywhere you like in the Solarian Sphere." I surveyed my fellow commanders' expressions and several nodded thoughtfully. I questioned the other delegates and, though less enthusiastic, they agreed with Phineas. The head delegate assured me that if the commanders wished to go by jumpship, they would take our logistics people back with them to Red Rock to coordinate the effort. "Thank you for your time and your comments," I said, wrapping up the meeting. "I think the fleet commanders have enough information to reach a decision now. We'll let you know as soon as we've decided." Once the delegation logged out, I turned to the other commanders. "So, what do you think?" "I think that Phineas is a conceited little twit," Abrams said. "I wonder if he's hoping for a bribe to talk Red Rock into supplying the ships?" Maxwell said. Chris rotated the 3d projection of From the Stars' systems looking first at Legion then at Red Rock on opposite sides of their lumpy sphere of control. "He's already taking money from From the Stars. I bet their paying him to keep us from wading through their systems and smashing their stuff." "That may not be far from the truth," Solomon stared at some search read-outs. "I've done some data mining of the local branches of the converse. It seems Red Rock is under tremendous pressure from both the aliens and some of the Solarian companies we represent to stop our raiding. They may even be helping to fund our removal." "I don't know why that can't just jump us back to Sol, or wherever," Maxwell added with a quick glance at the Spartan sitting next to him. "Operationally, distance is not a factor and one destination is no more expensive than another." "Operationally, no." I said, remembering a lecture I had nearly slept through in the academy, or at least the heated discussions afterwards. "Legally, the transport special interests have paid lots of money to the transport commission to carve up the shipping lanes and limit competition. They say they need the individual monopolies to cover their huge operational costs and risk assessments. New Home may be the closest any ships traveling to Red Rock can legally take us to where we want to go." "Maybe we should just commandeer their ships," Chris suggested. "If we were talking about Cack ships, I'd consider it. However we don't need to antagonize any more Solarian authorities." "It might be hard to find a Cack ship since they've begun pulling out of Solarian systems." Newman said, reading his data feeds as he spoke. "All the infotainers are predicting war and all non-defense stocks are tanking, though your father's stock is doing pretty well." He said the last with a trace of a knowing smile. A cold shock ran through me. The last thing I needed was even the suggestion whispered about the converse that I had engineered this disaster to drive up TLS stocks. I quickly changed the subject hoping no one else would even think of this. "All of this still leaves us with a decision to make. How do the commanders wish to proceed?" Abrams spoke first. "If there is any chance of going by jumpship, we need to pursue it." "Agreed," Maxwell chimed in. Chris nodded. "Fighting our way through is always an option if things don't work out." He smiled. "We have nothing to lose by trying the easier route." "The problem is finding enough ships," Solomon said. "I can't see how they'd be able to find enough jump ships to do more than ferry a few wings at a time between Legion and Red Rock," Newman added. "No," I said. "We've already decided the fleet must not be broken up. I recommend we accept their offer, on the condition they transport the fleet intact. In the meantime, I suggest they provide the fleet with a minimum of financial support if they don't want us raiding their neighbor's ships.  * * *  In the end, the commanders agreed to send representatives back to Red Rock with the returning delegation to hammer out the agreement and coordinate the fleet's need for jump ships. Red Rock released funds for the fleet's maintenance and with nothing much for the crews to do, the ship commanders approved a generous leave rotation. The crews all breathed a sigh of relief and enjoyed being back on a human world again. With the ability to reconnect with family and friends through the converse, it was almost like home. As I sat in my cabin looking over months of unanswered messages in one of my old com accounts feeling overwhelmed, I just closed the data feed. Instead, I re-opened my star charts and browsed through all the systems nearby. Red Rock sat at the outer-most edge of the sphere of human worlds. That sphere extended out fifty light years from Sol in all directions. Along its edge hundreds of habitable and largely unoccupied worlds lay scattered. Flipping through the fleet status reports with their green ready icons, I realized a surprising truth, that most new colonies spend hundreds of trillions of terra before setting out and weren't half as well equipped as our fleet. If we were to select one or more systems and set up a colony, we would instantly be the third most powerful political entity in the human sphere after the Solar Federation and the Spartan Alliance. The more I thought about it, the more excited I became. I recorded a message to Dr. Hindmost and attached my personal kairogram. "Please review this data for the possibility of the fleet establishing a new colony world." The timing couldn't be more perfect, I thought. I leaned back in my chair, staring up at the glowing smart paint on my ceiling. If war was likely between the Solarians and the Cacks, the Solarians could use the resources of another colony. With a few jumpships they could establish a colony off of the transit network, set up a few orbital shipyards and begin cranking out warships. The Cacks wouldn't even suspect the colony's existence until the jumpships began unloading entire wings of battle cruisers. An urgent message tone interrupted my musings and I acknowledged the com officer. "What do you need, coms." "Sir, a delegation from Black Mesa would like to speak with you about the fleet's attacks on their neighbors." "Attacks? We didn't authorize any attacks. What are they talking about?" "They're claiming that our ships attacked some of their allies as we were pulling out of Black Mesa." I started to explain that the people from Black Mesa must be mistaken when, with a nausea-inducing sense of falling, I remembered a passing comment about losses from raids from Fleet Sub-Commander Newman's status report. It had been soon after Smith had turned his fleet over to Newman. I had assumed at the time that our ships had been the victim of raiders, not the raiders themselves. "OK." I cleared my throat. "Link them in." "They would prefer to not discuss this over the transit's open network and they are not within com laser range." "Where are they?" "Back in the last system. They say they will only transit here with your personal guarantee of protection and, even then, they don't intend to leave the area of the gate." If their accusations were true, I couldn't exactly blame them. "Very well, please tell them we will meet them at the transit station and ask Commander Brennon to boost for the gate as soon as possible.

 

Chapter 40

  	 	 	 	    We approached the transit station and established a communication link with the representatives of Black Mesa by beaming a communication's laser through the gate. The delegation's avatars appeared in spotty pixilated form in the v-space conference room. "We assured them your fleet had not authorized the action," their leader said after we had exchanged brief greetings. "They were offering to return the bodies of your dead when a group of your ships attacked and destroyed them. We were only barely able to escape."
 I took a slow breath and forced myself to remain calms despite the angry pounding of my heart. "Were you able to identify the attackers?"   "Not much more than gravimetric logs and AM engine energy signatures. We did capture some long-range optical on a few of the ships though."  Several files showed up in my queue. I opened a grainy image of a ship which looked like a smeared time-lapse photo. "I'll give this to our signals processing people to see if they can identify the ships."  "Would you like us to send you your dead?"   "That would be very—"   An alert sounded. Our alert status jumped to FAS Delta, attack imminent.  "Do what you can for them," I said hurriedly, "We'll trust you to deal with them appropriately." I shut the com connection and switched over to the Situational Awareness Display, whishing I were in C&C instead of my quarters.   A handful of Solarian ships in attack formation had left Legion traveling at 8C heading straight for us. The merchant ships, which normally preyed on the traffic passing in and out of the transit station, apparently alerted by station security, began fleeing to the neighboring system. As I watched, one panicked ship collided with another trying to line up for the exit, spreading debris across the lane. The other ships ignored them, and traffic control, and hurried through the gate as quickly as they could.   I bypassed the tac officer and flashed Commander Brennon directly. "Commander, this is C&C. Put the Phoenix between the fleeing merchants and the attacking ships. Deploy all drones and FACs."   "Sir?" came the startled reply.   "Do not let them fire on the merchants or the station. If they fire missiles, take the missiles out. If they move in with particle emission weapons, take the ships out!" I killed the connection and stewed, wishing someone would invent an EPR transceiver that wouldn't lose connection when the H-drive was activated. I sent the gravimetric info to the communication's laser targeting systems. It wouldn't do any good trying to establish a signal until they dropped back into conventional reaction drives, but I wanted to lock onto them the second they did. After nearly half an hour of helpless waiting, the ships switched off their H-drives and began accelerating towards us at three gravities.   "This is Fleet-Commander Phon," I said the second I got confirmation of signal on the com lasers. "Cease your attack immediately!" I glanced at my SAD to confirm my FACs and drones were in place and ready. The attackers didn't answer and I tried to calculate the response time based on the distance and the natural surprise at finding me here.   "Commander Phon, is that you?" Commander West said.   "Yes! Stand down!"   "Yes, sir," Commander Wilkerson said.   "Are we sure that's him?" Commander Moulthrop asked.   "Check your transponder codes," Commander Hunsicker said.   "Didn't he order us to attack?" Commander Noss said.   "Who's in charge here?" I demanded, cutting into their chatter.  

"Well, we got Hunsicker's emergency rally signal and followed him," Wilkerson said.   "Newman's assistant had told us you had ordered us to secure the gate," Commander West said.   "Hunsicker and I were told that the merchants were seizing our transport as payment for defaulted contracts," Noss said.   I sighed and rubbed a hand across my face. I couldn't believe we had come so close to murdering hundreds of people due to a lack of discipline. Glancing at the external monitors, I saw the rescue tugs swarming over the two collided ships. Perhaps we hadn't avoided all bloodshed after all. "Turn around and follow me back to Legion. We'll deal with this there."   * * *  I read the riot act to every commander in those ships' chain of commander. I had to do it several times as most of them were on leave and proved hard to find. As I searched the communications network for my senior leadership, a bunch of messages began showing up in my queue with the subject of starting a new colony. A number liked the idea and assured me they would support my efforts while a majority was against it, some angrily accusing me of trying to keep them here against their will. As I sifted through these messages, trying to figure out how they had read my mind, a request from Abrams appeared in my message queue. I accepted and noticed a disapproving scowl on his face as we connected.   "May I remind you that you are only one fleet commander on the counsel and not authorized to make unilateral decisions for the whole fleet?"  "Of course," I said, stunned. "I know that. Why do you feel the need to remind me?"   "Dr. Hindmost has informed the commanders of your intention to found a new colony."   "What?"  "You should have brought this to the counsel for discussion before announcing it to the fleet."   "I haven't announced anything to anyone. I've been busy trying to keep our ship commanders from attacking passersby."   "Well it's pretty common knowledge you've decided not to return to Solarian space empty handed and intend to found a colony out here in alien space."   "And Dr. Hindmost has been saying this?"   "Yes. Sub-commanders Niva and Worthy have been using this knowledge to extort payments from all the surrounding colonies to get the fleet to leave. They've called for a meeting of all stock-holders and may be making a bid to take over the fleet."   "That duplicitous little crustacean," I muttered. "Shines Like the Sun gave him millions in Cack credits when his prediction of our unopposed arrival in the inner sphere proved true. He must be determined to get that fortune back to civilization so he can enjoy it in luxury."   Abrams cleared his throat suspiciously. "If it's true you do not intend to found a colony, how do you suggest we deal with Niva and Worthy?"  That was a good question. I thought about it a moment. "The fleet has heard these sorts of promises before. I say we wait and see what they actually accomplish. Who knows, if they can get us passage home with pay, I might be willing to give up this unruly command. It's not exactly doing our reputations any good back home."   * * *  "Spacers, don't even think about staying here in alien space. Keep focused on home and only that," Sub- commander Worthy said, addressing the combined fleet in v-space. "I've heard that one of our leaders has consulted the oracle and made secret plans along these lines. But if you'll follow me and leave at once for Solarian space, I can promise you full pay starting this month until we reach my home colony of Green where I know we can find contracts. From there, having campaigned with Sherman, I know a dozen nearby alien worlds anyone of us could conquer if we so wish."  

This brought a lot of positive comments and a very high rating from the unofficial instant polling. Several people requested to speak next but Worthy, acting as the official moderator of this session selected sub-commander Niva.   "I agree with Commander Worthy. Furthermore, let me remind you of the so-called Golden Worlds along the rim of Solarian space. They are all habitable and abundant in raw materials. Anyone who wishes to found a colony can easily do so there without opposition and with the full financial support of the Solarian Colonial Settlement Authority. Quite frankly, with all the empty worlds in the Solarian sphere I find it absurd to even talk of taking worlds away from aliens. But if you need more reasons to leave right now, I also will guarantee you full pay until we arrive there."   I knew she was talking about the same funding from Red Rock and New Home that she and Worthy had extorted. Still, if they could pull it off. I might not mind being out of a job.   The conversations continued and most speakers joining in the discussion—at least those who weren't merely talking to hear themselves talk—agreed with returning home. I ignored the casual references to my "deception" until two ship commanders named Valentine and Wolfe began suggestion my actions were criminal. I signaled my desire to join the conference and was promptly acknowledged.   "I don't think I have to tell you of all the long days and sleepless nights I've spent worrying about your welfare and how I would get the fleet home. Arriving at the edge of Solarian space and fearing you'd all arrive with empty pockets and broken ships, I began searching for a world to raid so we could have something to provide for our families. Then I thought how much more valuable possessing an entire world would be, with the idea that once it was established, anyone who wanted to go home could leave. So I consulted Dr. Hindmost as to whether I should even suggest this to the fleet and he assured me that though that future looked profitable, someone would betray me. Ironic, I suppose, since it was he who spread the lie that I was trying to trick you."   I glanced at Dr. Hindmost who stared down at the virtual floor, eyes cowering beneath his carapace.   "Now, however, as Red Rock and New Home are both sending you jump ships, and not one but two people are paying you to be carried safely home, the correct decision is obvious. I say we go home and I encourage everyone who formerly supported my idea of colonization to support me now in this. More important than our destination is the need for us to go there together. As long as we stay united as we are now, we shall not lack for supporters and supplies, but let the fleet be divided and we will not only not have supplies but we will have to fight just to get away. So important do I feel about this that I recommend that we take an immediate vote and resolve that as soon as jumpships are found the fleet will head straight for Solarian space and anyone attempting to remain behind or caught deserting before the fleet arrives safely at its destination should be tried and punished as a traitor."   Dr. Hindmost's eyes shot out in alarm and fixed on me.   The measure was quickly seconded and a vote was taken. As everyone punched in their votes, Dr. Hindmost tried to object that no free citizens should be held against their will, but no one listened to him. Many, laughing, assured him they'd be happy to space him if he tried to leave the fleet. I tried not to gloat too much.   * * *  Once it was known that the fleet had formally voted to go by jumpship and that I had proposed the plan, ships from Red Rock, New Home and even From the Stars began arriving and the logistical nightmare of organizing and loading the fleet began. In the middle of this, Worthy, Niva and a dozen or so wing and ship commanders messaged me requesting a meeting. I accepted it reluctantly.   "What is it? I'm busy."   Worthy licked his lips and turned to Niva who had a chin-up-before-the-firing-squad look of determination on her face.   I paused in my shuffling of data screens and gave them my full attention.   "Now that we have the jumpships," Niva began and paused to clear her throat. "We've reconsidered your prior proposal. We'd like the fleet commanders to call for a meeting of the shareholders for the purpose of discussing seizing a possible colony world from among The Speaking Ones."   "You're kidding."   Trembling beneath my glare, they shook their heads.   "No." I turned back to my progress reports from my transport commanders and tried to control my rising anger.   "Please!" Worthy blurted out. "They've reneged—"   "Don't tell him—" Niva snapped.   I paused and looked back at them. "What is it?"   "They've, sort of, failed to come through with the promised funds," Worthy said. "They're now saying those were credits to be applied to the cost of transport...."   I leaned back in my chair and smothered a smile before it had a chance to start. "I won't have anything to do with this, but if you want to call your own meeting, I won't stop you."   "They'll kill us after what happened in the last meeting," Niva muttered.  Worthy turned on Niva. "They'll kill us when they find out we don't have their pay!"   "Let's not talk about that now. Let's try with the other wing commanders before we bring this up before the rest of the fleet."   They logged off and I chuckled to myself feeling vindicated.   * * *  For the next few days, as the jump ships continued to arrive, I processed endless reports from a variety of ad hoc committee chairs on the plan to transport the fleet. Everything proceeded as well as could be expected under the circumstances until one of my lawyers warned me we had a sudden spike in threats by angry ship commanders to separate from the fleet. Such threats were usually little more than a negotiating tactic. The tangled webs of ownership and debt made the separation of a dissatisfied ship's crew nearly impossible, but from what my lawyers said, a bunch of them were ready to turn pirate.   Delegating my office work to Harlow and my subordinates, I investigated the cause of this uprising and found that news of Niva's and Worthy's proposals had leaked out and that Smith's sub-commander, Newman, was telling everyone that I was using them to trick the other commanders and was pushing my plan to colonize a world among The Speaking Ones. My gut told me Newman had orchestrated this as an attempt to undermine me and seize control of the fleet. What he didn't know was that the fleet was more likely to break up.

 

 Chapter 41

                    I requested a fleet-wide meeting in v-space in one hour, and half an hour later, everyone in the fleet had logged in and was waiting to hear what I had to say. I had chosen an amphitheater for the setting. As I walked out onto the stage in deathly silence, I scanned the first few rows where the commanders sat, looking for Newman before I began speaking.
 "I hear someone has accused me of trying to kidnap you all and drag you off to The Speaking Ones."  The amphitheater erupted into a rolling thunder of voices. I held up my hand and raised my voice. "I beg you, in the name of God, to listen to what I have to say before you judge me! If I have done anything wrong, then punish me as you see fit, but if I have not, then see to it that my accusers meet the justice they deserve."   I stood quietly in that circle of angry spacers waiting for the silence that would show I had their undivided attention. "I assume you know the difference between a human and an alien," I said in an ironic tone. I paused, hoping for at least a few chuckles, but got only hard stares. "—and between a human world and an alien world. Your ships, they all have navigators and star charts and the same transit station maps I have, right? Well then, is it not absurd to say that I intend to trick you into going anywhere you do not wish to go? Nor am I likely to force you. It will take nearly a hundred jump ships to transport the fleet and I can only be in one.   "But if I were, by some mystical mental powers, able to get you to a world belonging to The Speaking Ones, how long would I, one man against the whole fleet, survive once you saw you were not home?" I paused and smiled. "I assure you I could find far more dignified ways of committing suicide."   This time I got a few, if somewhat derisive chuckles. "No. The idea is absurd." Here I caught Newman's eye. "They are the paranoid fantasies of small-minded men, jealous of the honor you've shown me in electing me your leader."   I turned my back on him and surveyed the crowd around me. "This jealousy, however, is completely unnecessary. When have I ever denied any commander the chance to hold a conference with you or volunteer for a task or even suggest something helpful?"   I made a show of searching for a face in the crowd. "Did someone get passed over for promotion? Is this about a bad OPR?" I got a few more chuckles but, more importantly, the crowd's body language grew more relaxed. I swept the crowd with a smile. "Seriously, if you can find a more capable commander who is willing to work the long thankless hours on your behalf I will gladly step down as your commander.   "But I didn't call this meeting so I could talk about myself, but so that we can clear the air. If anyone feels I have cheated or tricked them in some way, let them speak now. Tell everyone here what I have done."   I waited until the silence became uncomfortable daring any one of them to say anything. I was ready for it. All I heard were some nervous coughs. "I'm willing to wait as long as you like, but after we've hashed this out, please don't log off until we've had the chance to discuss what I see is a greater threat than the Cacks. A threat that even now could turn both the aliens and even our own kind against us."   I walked over to an empty seat next to Chris and sat down as if I were turning the meeting over to the rest. Chris gave me a confused frown and I watched similar expressions spread across the faces of the crowd.   The silence grew painful, then someone called out. "What is it?"   "Yes," another said. "What is the threat?"   "Tell us."   "Yes."   As the murmuring rose, I stood and walked back out to the center of the amphitheater. "I'm sure you remember our stay at Black Mesa and how, when supplies and funds grew scarce, we would often trade with their alien neighbors. These aliens gave us free passage throughout their systems and treated us as allies—and why shouldn't they? 

 "However, as the fleet was leaving, this happened." I played a digital reconstruction of a group of Solarian vessels attacking an isolated station on an asteroid.   "The raiders apparently thought this unmanned remote research station was some sort of supply depot. Unfortunately for them, by the time they were able to regroup, the aliens were prepared for them."   The scene changed. A wing of Solarian ships moved into attack the main planet's orbital facilities, some racing ahead recklessly, others falling cautiously behind. They should have easily defeated the aliens, but they became separated and individually surrounded, unable to support each other's defense. Those who fell behind were driven off as their comrades were destroyed.   Everyone in the meeting watched the holographic reproduction with shocked expressions. I had embedded the gravimetric and optical info in the data stream, so that many heads bobbed up and down between the projection in v-space and the data pads in their laps.   "What follows next is an even greater outrage. The aliens sent their most revered leaders to talk to our friends at Black Mesa under cover of diplomatic immunity. Black Mesa assured them the attack was not sanctioned by the fleet and they accepted this. They did not ask for damages and had even offered to return our dead when some of the surviving attackers found out. Then this happened."   I played the next recording. A small group of alien ships were parked near the Black Mesa transit station at com-laser range from a Black Mesa government transport. The view of the display rotated and a handful of Solarian warships swept in and fired missiles at them. The aliens were destroyed before they even had a chance to respond.   I paused the video. "To make matters worse, this incident was nearly repeated only a few days ago when representatives of Black Mesa came here and asked to speak to me."   I played a recording of the near attack on the black Mesa ship and the merchant vessels. I stopped it at a scene where two merchant ships had collided in their haste to get away. The spreading fan of debris paused spinning in place.   "If this is going to be our operating procedures going forward, perhaps we should consider the consequences?   "First of all, if anyone can lead any group of ships off on one of these little excursions at any time, the fleet will no longer be able to decide who it will fight and who it will ally with. Our forces will be too scattered to deal with large threats and if someone comes to offer us a lucrative contract, they're as likely as not to be attacked before they can even make the offer. Secondly, our fleet commanders will be powerless to command the fleet. Anyone who provides target selection and can convince even a few ships to follow them can kill whomever they want, alien or human, ally or even a fellow spacer.  "And what have these self-appointed commanders accomplished for you? Whether they have cheated you or not, the merchant ships have all fled leaving you neither supplies nor justice. Back on Black Mesa, where humans and aliens come and go freely, we alone cannot even approach for fear of being attacked. Can you blame them? Who in their right mind would allow us to negotiate for free passage through their system when we've killed ambassadors with diplomatic protection?   "If this is how we are to proceed, then let us put it to a vote and make it official so that each ship's commander can prepare how best to defend themselves from the others. But if, as humans and a supposedly advanced species, you think this is crazy, then we must find a way to stop this before we turn both the aliens and our fellow humans against us and leave ourselves defenseless while we hold our guns at each other's heads!"   I had to stop speaking. Those last words came out at a near scream and I feared if I continued they would descend into raging gibberish. I returned to my seat and waited, silently daring them to solve the problem they had created. I knew if I or any of the other senior command staff imposed a solution, we'd end up back in the same situation we were in now—or worse. Still, there was no guarantee the whole fleet wouldn't degenerate into a mob of pirates.   Commander Tereshkova who had once threatened me for lack of payment was the first to insist on investigating the commanders responsible for killing the alien ambassadors and bringing them up on murder charges. Ultimately, a legal commission was formed and a senior commander that everyone could agree upon was found and placed in charge. After that, the meeting began to veer off into lists of personal grievances and other unrelated suggestions, but at least it didn't seem likely the fleet would lynch me, or break up.   * * *   "Ken, you got to do something before they get out of control."   I paused from my paperwork and looked up at Solomon's worried face on the display. "Who?"   "This truth commission! Anyone can accuse anyone of anything and they launch a full investigation."   "That's kind of the idea." I turned back to my work sorting through everyone else's complaints.   "But they've got me on the case list!"  This time I was genuinely surprised and I leaned back in my chair and gave him my full attention. Solomon was a solid commander and a trusted ally in holding the fleet together. "Why ever for?"  Solomon rolled his eyes. "It's over the cargo from the jump ships we captured back on Black Mesa. Someone's accused me of theft."  "You didn't, did you?"  "Of course not!"  "Well, I wouldn't worry too much then. If you didn't do it, they obviously can't prove anything. Just turn over your records and ignore them."   "Er, that's the thing...."   I leaned in toward the camera. "You did keep records, didn't you?"   "Yes! But, you know how things were back then. Everything was in chaos. We were still trying to figure out how to organize the fleet."   I looked at him, unable to think of a response.   "I have signed inventory control records from all my control officers."   "But there are discrepancies?"   "Yes."   "Have they asked for a report of survey?"   Solomon sighed. "Yes."   I shrugged. "I don't think there's anything I can do. Just cooperate, don't give them any reason to think you're withholding anything and at worst you'll get a fine."   "You seem to have a lot of faith in this commission," Solomon said with a note of bitterness.   I glanced at the commission roster. "Commander Ashbless is a pretty reasonable man. I don't think he'll allow this to become a witch hunt."   "I hope, for your sake, you're correct."   "Why is that?"   "You're on the list too; piracy and murder."  M1���#+0�

 

 Chapter 42

                    I didn't sleep much that night, or the next. I tried to find out who had filed the accusation, but that information wasn't released until the preliminary hearing. My first thought was that Newman was trying again for my position, but then as I lay not sleeping, I thought back to the incident on the Battle of Kuzikos when I had boarded Sherman's flag ship and shot the spacer who claimed he was being held against his will.
 I went about the next few days with a numb sick feeling. I found it hard to concentrate on the logistics reports and though the number of jump ships arriving had nearly grown sufficient to move the fleet, I couldn't feel excited about going home. The hearing was going to arrive even sooner.  When the day came I showed up in my best uniform with the best legal counsel I could arrange. When my name was called, a trooper led me into the courtroom. After confirming my identity I was sworn in before a panel of three judges of which Commander Ashbless was the head jurist.  "This is only an inquiry," Ashbless began in a calm almost friendly tone. "No formal charges have been made. Any spacer may make an accusation, but only the court may formally charge someone with a crime and then only if the preliminary evidence warrants a trial. The accused is not required to make a formal response to the charges at this point but may, if he so chooses, offer exculpatory evidence. The court reminds all parties they have been sworn in and that everything they say is a matter of court record and may be used in any further court actions. Are there any questions?"  Standing at attention before the court, I looked at sub-commander Jennings, my lawyer, who poked a data pad calling up files. She quickly looked up at the judge and said, "Not at this time." "Very well. Fleet-commander Kenneth Phon now stands before the court. Does anyone have an accusation to make?"  I glanced around the room. It was fairly large by shipboard standards but, packed with observers, it seemed quite small. The whole proceedings were being recorded and made publically available, so I knew many more were watching around the fleet.  "Er, we do." Two men and one woman, all wearing stained duty coveralls rose and stood at the court clerk's table.  "And what is the nature of the accusation?" Commander Ashbless asked.  "Piracy," said the first man. He was an unshaven middle-aged man with a pear-shaped body and a ring of hair around his bald head that reached nearly to his collar.  "And murder, or manslaughter," said the taller man next to him. He was a skinny guy with a ferret face and short sandy brown hair and patchy mustache of the same color.  "Criminal negligence at the least," added the woman who looked a lot like the first man, but with less hair on her face and more on her head.  "These are serious allegations," Ashbless said. "When did this happen?"  "Back on that moss planet just before we entered the territory of From the Stars."  I rose.  Ashbless acknowledged me. "Commander Phon?"  "May I ask a question?"  "You may, but I remind you that everything said here remains a matter of court record."  My lawyer paused in her prodding of her datapad and gave me a worried frown.  "Is this about the Leroy Kelso?" I asked.  The shorter man raised a defiant chin. "You know it is."  "And the murder—homicide—negligence charge, is that about the people left behind?" 

"We lost some good people!" the tall one shouted.  "One was my fiancé," the woman said.  "And my brother!" the other man said.  "Ah." Relief flooded through me as I realized this wasn't about the Battle of Kuzikos. I addressed the court. "Your honor, I believe I know what this is about and can explain."  Ashbless glanced at my lawyer who had risen with wide warning eyes. "I don't think it's..."  "It's already a matter of record." I shrugged.  "Continue," Ashbless said.  "Approaching the system in question, we came across the light cruiser North Wind which had broken down. Lacking the needed parts we ordered the Leroy Kelso in orbit about the planet to go back and help them, but they refused because their commander was indisposed and their sub was down on the planet."  "Our yeast strains were dying," the pear-shaped man blurted out. "We'd had nothing to eat for days."  "And the algae," the woman said. "Our O2 levels were critically low."  I paused until they were finished with their interruptions, and continued. "Another ship was sent back to help, but when the fleet later started to leave, pirates moved in to attack the North Wind and I was forced to take my flagship back to drive them off. Once we got the North Wind moving, the pirates pursued us to the planet where I found the Leroy Kelso had remained behind. I tried to contact them, but they refused to respond. Fearing a mutiny, I send Force Commander Kouvaras over to secure the ship."  "It wasn't a mutiny," the tall one objected. "The ship's sub- commander had ordered the crew to abandon the ship."  "Once we had obtained control of the ship, we ordered the crew on the planet's surface to return and prevented others, such as these, from leaving."  "You had no authority!" the woman began.  "You weren't even in our chain of command," the tall one said.  "The crew on the planet refused to return and, with the number of pirate ships growing, we were forced to leave them behind."  "Who gave you the right?" the woman demanded. "Who gave you the power to decide whether we go or stay—who lives or dies?"  The injustice of these coward accusations became too much. "You did!" I snapped. "When the fleet voted to treat everyone who tried to desert as traitors. And before that, when Sherman and the others were murdered, you followed me eagerly enough then! Who was it that prevented the fleet from surrendering? Who did you look to when we fought our way through The Swords territory? Who had to get you past the blockades and out of the traps? Did any of you complain then?" I glanced up at the cameras recording the trial. These weren't the only spacer who had been complaining.  "But now that you imagine yourselves safe, suddenly nothing I do is good enough! And, I've noticed, the most cowardly in battle then are the most aggressive with the accusations now. I swear I have never seen such an ungrateful group of people. By all rights I should be back on Mars in a nice cushy job. I wasn't even officially a part of this expedition when it started. I came as an observer, as a favor to a friend. I could have just left when Shines Like the Sun was killed. I would have been home months ago. But I stayed to rescue you. I'm wishing, now that I hadn't, or that I'd left you on that planet. Then you wouldn't be here to accuse me, though I'm sure you'd have complained to the pirates that I hadn't come back to save you."  Their eyes slowly dropped to the floor during my tirade or turned away. As I stopped and stared at the tops of their heads or the sides of their faces, Commander Ashbless cleared his throat. 

"Are there any other accusations to be made?"  Only the whisper of the air handlers could be heard.  "In that case the court finds insufficient evidence to charge Commander Phon with a crime. At this point we'll take a fifteen minute recess before we hear any more complainants."  The room filled with the bustle of people standing up and moving about. I turned to Sub-Commander Jennings. She smiled. "Congratulations."  I didn't feel like celebrating.  * * *  "You're a popular guy," Chris said a few days later as the last of the jumpships came in and I made final preparations for moving the fleet.  "Why do you say that?"  "The whole fleet watched your performance in court. They agree those three accusers were idiots."  "And that makes me popular?"  "Not by itself." Chris chuckled. "But it did get people thinking and talking about how you saved the fleet. They all agree that you are the one commander everyone can count on to know what to do and to see it done."  "Great. That and two terra will get me a cup of coffee."  Chris laughed. "Some of your most ardent supporters have started debates in the converse about whether or not you're a better commander than Sherman."  This time I had to laugh. "With my luck I'll probably get exiled as well."  Finally the day came when the ships were all slotted into their carriages. Most of the crews traveled in their respective ships, but the command staff, along with an honor guard of one or two troopers each, all carrying side arms, traveled in the cabin with the jumpship pilots. No overt threats were ever made, but it was understood that if the pilots were under orders to split up the fleet by jumping them to different locations, they would die most unpleasantly.  How these jumpships worked, I'm not sure anyone but the crawdads knew. The pilot said something about beginning the jump sequence and nothing happened for a really long time. I sat staring out of the complex carbon windows of the cabin for what seemed like an hour when suddenly the whole universe flew away in all directions. The stars shifted to red then black as they raced away into the darkness. Then, just as quickly, a new set of stars faded in from a dim dark blue to a normal bright spectrum. A new star burned below us and somewhere nearby Red Rock orbited.  Red Rock welcomed us nearly as enthusiastically as Black Mesa had. Monetary grants, free use of shipyards, endorsement deals and easy contracts covered our operating and refit costs, but we weren't getting rich and as our home worlds seemed suddenly within reach the realization that despite all our time and trouble we'd be arriving home with broken ships and empty pockets began to weigh on everyone's mind. People from the lowest spacer first class to my fellow fleet commanders asked me if I thought there might be any alien system within reach that we could raid or any lucrative escort jobs that might earn them some money to take home.  We'd been in system a little over a week when mil-net nearly exploded with the news of Commander Smith's return. A spartan military transport jumpship arrived with a shiny new state-of-the-art battlecruiser—but only the one. The local nodes of the converse buzzed with speculation about when the rest would arrive to take us home, but when I saw the one, I knew that was all we were going to get.  Smith had only returned to his command a few hours, just long enough to get a quick brief on the state of affairs from Newman, his sub, before sending me a request for a secure communications link. I had to return to my quarters and secure it in order to connect.  His face popped up on my screen looking healthy, though his gaze wasn't as sharp as I had remembered. "I see you couldn't wait for me."  "Well, you know how it is with this crew. They run up some mighty big bar tabs. We can't afford to stay in any one place very long.  He gave me a wan smile. "I'm sorry about not coming sooner. You know how bureaucracy is. Spartan command is divided about their future course of action. I just wanted to let you know, before I said anything publicly, that the jumpships are not coming—and I wanted to talk about some things."  "I figured the ships weren't coming when I saw your battlecruiser. What did you want to talk about?"  "The subject of the military's disagreement."  "And what would that be?"  Smith paused and looked at the lower corner of the screen as if verifying we had a secure connection. "Whether or not Sparta is willing to sacrifice the Earth." 


 

Chapter 43

  	 	 	 	    "What?"
 Smith took a deep breath, closing his eyes as he gathered his thoughts. "We didn't hear much while we were wandering through the badlands of the Moiarchy, but the Cack media has been going nuts. The major shareholders have all taken vows of honor to personally wipe out the human race and the common holders are all egging them on to do it. Only the crawdads and the non-Cack races of the Moiarchy are urging restraint, but nobody is listening to them. In the entire history of the Moiarchy, only one other species has been sentenced to extinction and they were so genetically xenophobic that they were compelled to kill or be killed."   "But the Earth? Sparta is willing to sacrifice it?"   "Not everyone at Command, but some fear we don't have the forces to help defend Sol and defend Sparta and others are still bitter about the colonial wars."   "Do the Cacks look like they're acting on this extermination plan?"   "Not yet. They're still debating. There is some indication they may be increasing ship production, but nothing like what they're capable." Smith fixed me with a suddenly intense stare, more like the old Smith I remembered. "Ken, if the Moiarchy takes it time and gears up for full production, we don't stand a chance. If this becomes a contest of economic strength we won't even be able to compete." I sighed. "We're right back where we were in mankind's first encounter with the Cacks and we're going to have to do the same thing. We're going to have to scatter colony ships out among the stars and hope some survive. I doubt we'd even be able to save a tenth of our populations."   "If they really decide to exterminate us, even those may not survive," Smith insisted. "They'll be hunted down across the galaxy." I leaned back in my chair. "Space is a pretty big place. The Moiarchy, even as big as it is, has limited resources. If this becomes some sort of potlatch, some sort of contest of who is willing to sacrifice the most, the more desperate contestant usually wins."  Smith waved away my objections. "With enough forewarning, we might send some colonists off towards the rim. They'd either be forced to spend the rest of their existence in hiding or remaining on the run. Either way, life as a hunted species would be pretty tenuous, lonely and grim."   The conversation died out and we sat for a moment in horrified, contemplative silence. "I take it all this bares on the reason why Sparta hasn't sent jumpships for us?"   "Yes. They're going to need all their jumps ships for either colonizing or ship movements, whichever they decide. At this point, they would prefer we head for the Golden Worlds."   "Lots of habitable worlds there," I said. "One could easily found a number of colony worlds."   "Except that's where they expect the fighting to start."   "So they want us to stop them?" I asked, incredulous.   "The plan—or at least one of them—is to use us to set up a forward base in the Golden Worlds. We establish it and they send us supplies and reinforcements. Unless the Cacks want to go through The Swords territory as we did, they'll have to all go through that first gate into the Golden Worlds. It's our best chance to stop them. If we're forced to fall back, it's far enough away from the Solarian worlds and has enough systems for us to fall back into to try and grind down their attack."   "Sounds desperate."   "As are all the options we have left."   * * *   The funds available in Red Rock didn't hold us long. We held constant planning sessions trying to find ways to earn money and long debates on whether we were going to do the bidding of the Spartan military. The Cack threats were not taken too seriously in the local media which reported them as if they were nothing more than political posturing for the shareholders. It seemed that some of Righteous Ruler's political opponents were trying to take advantage of Shines Like the Sun's attack and were attempting to gather a controlling interest in the Moiarchy. While the Ruler struggled to maintain his grip on power, we struggled to simply gain a consensus of where the fleet would go next.  

The fleet commanders were still wrestling with this when I got a message from Chris. "Ken, I've been asked by the ship and wing commanders to invite you to an urgent meeting. They have a proposal they want to run past you."  "Everyone seems to know what to do, it's just that no one can agree on what it is."  "We've got a pretty broad consensus here."   I continued clicking through my reports. "What? A wing? Maybe two have gotten together and decided where the fleet should go?"   Chris paused, looking upwards as if calculating something in his head. "It's more than eighty percent, less than ninety."   "You've got more than eighty percent of the ship commanders to agree on something?"   "I think you'll want to hear their proposal."   "I've always wanted to see a miracle. When are they meeting?"   "They're in session right now. I've been asked to invite you to join them if you have the time."   "Send me the link."   * * *   The conference was on the moon. Someone had selected a crater on the earth-facing side as a sort of amphitheater for our meeting in virtual space. The Earth hung overhead, a beautiful, bright, blue reminder of our ultimate objective and a not-so-subtle statement rejecting any thought of colonization or pursuing any other destination.   I stepped over the crater's lip, kicking up holographic dust as I walked down into the bowl. Hundreds of commanders sat along the rim and a handful stood in the center moderating the discussion. Chris called them to attention, greeted me and directed Ship Commander Christina Tomberlin to continue the meeting.   "Thank you for coming, commander, especially on such short notice. We've been discussing the challenges ahead and some of the lessons we've learned. We are very concerned about the lack of fleet discipline, especially now with funds running low. We've already seen how, with the wings acting separately, they're more likely to get into trouble and how one bad decision, even by a single commander, can harm the entire fleet."   I stood nodding my head but saying nothing.   "The commanders," she took in the rest of the group with a gesture, "Have agreed that the fleet should proceed with a more military bearing. We can no longer afford to operate as a loose coalition of mercenary fleets. We have largely integrated many of the wings, but we need to integrate the leadership." She paused and gave me an odd look. "It is the opinion of the ships commanders that we need a single commander in charge of the combined fleet." I continued nodding my head as I listened. "If you've invited me to ask my advice, I agree with you entirely and for the reasons you've stated."   Christina looked a little embarrassed. "But we didn't invite you to offer your advice. We've invited you to offer you the position."   I'm afraid I may have gaped at her. I scanned the surrounding faces and saw a mixture of smiles of encouragement and amusement. I turned on Chris. "Did you know about this?"   He shrugged. "They called me in after they made their decision. They thought I would be able to talk you into it."   Suddenly speechless, I cleared my throat. "Well, this is a very great honor. I don't know what to say."   "Hopefully, yes," Christina laughed. "This is a big decision. Until now I've only ever considered what was best for the fleet. I'm afraid I may need some time to think about it."  

"Of course," Christina said. "But I do hope you'll let us know before the fleet leaves Red Rock."   "I will."   * * *   The more I thought about the possibility of being the commander of a unified fleet, the more excited I got. I had largely been the de facto leader for a long time. Now, at last, I would finally have a chance at the recognition I had already earned. I could lead the fleet in its triumphal return and everyone back home would see me as the one who had defeated the Cacks. Assuming I could keep the fleet together.   The fleet already had something of a mixed reputation. We had detractors who considered us a dangerous group of lawless pirates. If I couldn't keep them together, there was a real chance that we would live down to that reputation and there was no telling how much damage that would do to my father and Trans-Luminal Systems.   I tossed and turned late into the night, then finally got up and found a local oracle whose prices weren't too outrageous, withdrew a ton of funds from my account back on Mars and sent him my kairogram. I told him about my situation and asked a simple yes or no question. Should I accept or not?   I finally got to sleep and found the answer waiting for me the next morning. "Acceptance is negatively indicated." The oracle had included some standardized charts which indicated the likely impact of either option on love and finances and career and similarly broad categories. About all I could tell was that neither option was more likely than the other to kill me, though my chances of survival were close to fifty-fifty in either case.   As the time neared for the fleet to leave, Commander Tomberlin and others urged me to accept the position. They fill my message queues with pleas for me to take the job and dire warnings that I would let the fleet down if I refused. "I'm sorry, but I'm afraid I'm going to have to decline the offer," I told Commander Tomberlin in voice chat. I was sitting in my quarters/office and couldn't bear to face them in v-space.   "But why?"  I had been trying to puzzle that out myself. "Now that we're back in Solarian space, we're going to need help from the colonies and that means earning Spartan favor. I think it would be best if a Martian weren't in charge."   "Nonsense! Will the Spartans get angry if they are not first in line at the chow hall? If they were as petty as that, they wouldn't allow any of us Solarians to command a ship."   I'm afraid my little attempt to bow out gracefully only backfired. Even more spacers began to demand that I take over the fleet. When word came to me that the commanders were meeting with the intent of passing a resolution forcing me to lead the combined fleet, I asked to speak at their meeting.   "I cannot tell you how honored I am that you think so highly of me." I said. "It is my fervent prayer that The Maker will find some other way of allowing me to serve you. I promise I will faithfully follow the orders of whomever you appoint. But, to convince you that it cannot be me, I must confess that when I learned of your intention of making me your leader, I sent my kairogram to an oracle and asked him if it would be better for you if I were to lead or not. The answer was an unequivocal no."   Their disappointment was so profound that I felt as if I had betrayed them. I almost recanted and told them I would lead them anyway, but they accepted the oracle's judgment. In the end they chose Smith.    "I assure you," he said, "that I also would have followed whomever you had chosen, but really you did Commander Phon a favor by not choosing him. Even now, though I tried to silence him, Dexter is slandering him before the Spartan commanders. He's been telling them that, during my absence, Commander Phon would only share command with those from Earth or Mars but refused to share command with him because he was from New Sparta."   I wish I could say I was surprised to hear this. I could only hope Spartan command could see through his self-aggrandizement. "But I want you to know I have not been idle on your behalf," Smith continued. "So prepare your ships to boost immediately. I've secured jump ships to take us as far as New Home. From there we'll decide on where to go next."   This motivated the crews and for a few days, everything proceeded like a regular military organization. We jumped to New Home but there we received a less enthusiastic welcome. Merchant ships came out to take our money, but the local government would have nothing to do with us. Our contracts department complained that we were shut out of all the local short-term contracts and soon we were only three days away from bankruptcy.   Determined to make it home with some sort of profit, or at least enough to pay their expected legal expenses, the ship commanders met and tried to appoint, first Smith, then me, to a delegation to force New Home to trade more favorably. Not wishing to extort money from a colonial world, Smith and I refused, so they selected Commanders Lucas, Watanabe and—I'm sorry to say—Commander Solomon, to deliver their thinly veiled threat. It was, of course, a disaster.   The governor's negotiators said they would take our request under advisement and then they recalled their merchants, their war ships and activated their orbital defenses. When it became clear we would get nothing from New Home without laying siege to the planet, Lucas and his followers blamed us for sabotaging their efforts. Their commanders resigned from the fleet en mass saying they refused to follow a Spartan and a Martian who had contributed no ships to the fighting and left it to the colonials to suffer all the losses.   And so the oracles advice turned out to be wise. Within the week, Smith's supreme command over the fleet ended and the fleet broke up. 


 

 Chapter 44

                    Alone in my cabin, I began the task of gathering up my few belongings. Aside from my clothes, I could have packed most of it in a shoebox. I commandeered a spacer first class and sent him to the C&C to collect anything I had left behind and to see that my clothes were cleaned. He came back with a surprisingly large pile. As I packed them away, I got a message from Commander Brennon.
 "Commander Phon, the flight deck master technician informs me your ship, the Argippus has been serviced and is ready."  "Thank you."  "When do you plan on leaving us?"  "Right away. Now that the fleet has ceased to exist, there's not much reason for me to stay." Noting his dispirited expression, I paused in my packing. "Have you decided what you're going to do?"  Brennon shook his head. "What's left of the old Solarian/Pentaminc fleet is still debating where to go next. The colonials have gone off to raid the Golden Worlds. The Spartans are pursuing a rumor that Sparta is sending supply ships to the depot at La Roca de la Salvación. Many of the owner/operators like your idea of running off and founding a colony somewhere out on the rim. As for the corporately owned ships, Shines Like the Sun technically purchased them, though the corporations retained the right to buy them back from him at drastically reduced prices when the contract expired. Some commanders are thinking of claiming them as spoils of war and keeping them, or possibly selling them back to the corporations. Needless to say, the corporations' lawyers will disagree. It's a legal gray area."  "What about the Phoenix? That really is a spoil of war."  "Perhaps, but being a Cack ship with Cack technology, it's even more valuable than the ship we lost. That will only ensure Pentaminc's lawyers will try harder to claim it. I don't think we could afford to defend our claim if we go back."  "Well if you decide to head back to Sol, let me know and I'll talk to my father. I'm sure Trans-Luminal can make you a better offer for the Phoenix than Pentamic's lawyers. We can probably even set your crew up in new ships and get you all work much closer to home."  Brennon gave me an appreciative nod. "Thank you. I will definitely consider the offer."  I snugged my netpiece over my ear and tapped it on. Awakening the Argippus' cybernetic awareness, I told it to start its preflight checklist. A mixed group of officers and enlisted of all ranks met me at the boarding tube, including the Chief Master Engineer who might have been angling for a job contact at TLS. They wished me farewell and I shook their hands and boarded the Argippus.  It felt strange floating into the ship's cabin. The air was a little musty from having been sealed up, though I detected the faint citrus smell the cleaning crew left behind when they prepped it. The ship was, however, just as beautiful as I remembered. It seemed almost delicate after living in a big military machine for so long. The military style manual controls, made the Argippus' control interfaces seem like magic when they lit up at my thought.  Lori Seaward, the flight deck attendant released me, gave me permission to depart and wished me a safe voyage. I felt a strange tinge of nostalgia as I watched the Cack warship recede on my monitor. No more racing through transit stations or seizing the inbound lane, I thought ruefully as the transit authority took control of the Argippus and slotted me in between two freighters. I spent my long wait times catching up on the news and trying to care about what else might be going on.  Between the gates I pushed my engines to their limits and, after a long day of travel, came to Empire, the first major trading hub in human space. Empire had been founded by the, now-defunct, Star Empires trading company. It went on to become the political and cultural capital in that region of space. 

I booked a hotel and got a reservation at a nice restaurant that served meat. As I said before, I've never learned to hate the yeast-based ramen that so many others love to hate, but after long months in space with no fresh food, I could see why many do. I checked into my hotel from the spaceport, sending my bags on ahead, and headed straight for the restaurant. I normally hate dining out alone and have often bought meals for random cute girls for the sole purpose of keeping me company while I eat, but this time as I sat at my table and ordered a little of everything from the menu, I didn't even notice the other diners. Five minutes into the meal, I got my first call.  It was a vendor who worked with my father's company. I set my status to busy and noticed another call already waiting and then another request queuing up. Mason, an old pledge brother and a writer for the media drama companies popped up in the list. We had been close during college, but our relationship cooled when my family's lawyers made him remove me from the video adaptation of our exploits. I connected out of curiosity.  "Hello?"  "I see you're back."  "How did you know?" I demanded. "I've been in port less than ten minutes. I haven't even landed planet-side yet!"  "No. I mean I see your back. You're on live feed."  "What?" I looked around the restaurant. I noticed most of the dinners were engaged in quiet excited conversations and they were all either snatching glances my way or openly gaping at me. Several held small video cameras the size of playing cards upright on their tables aimed my way.  "It's a little weird," Mason continued. "There's a slight delay in the signal processing so the video is out of sync with the call."  "Great Maker." I groaned. "I had hoped the public interest would have died down by now."  "Are you kidding? OK, maybe a bit while you guys were lost in the Cack badlands—I mean one can't put Elaina Lovejoy's drunken brawls with the superstars on hold forever—but your absence has only made the public curiosity stronger. What happened out there anyway? We'd heard the fleet had been wiped out three times, but then we kept getting rumors of you popping up here and there, turning pirate, switching sides and working for the Cacks...what really went on out there?  I sighed. "I'm going to have to call the family's PR company again, aren't I?"  "Speaking of which, have you sold the rights yet? I want them. You can't give them to anyone else, you owe me!"  "You know who to call." I disconnected then turned around and waved to the couple behind me with one of the cameras. I flagged a waiter, asked that my food be boxed up and sent to my hotel. Somehow it beat me to my room, but it wasn't alone.  I noticed the stiff suits lurking nonchalantly in the hall. They wore conservative dark business tunics but there was no mistaking the uniform in their bearing. They all studiously ignored me except for the one who must have been the team leader who gave me a too-casual nod of the head. I walked past them, looking around and verifying that all the exits were being casually watched before slipping inside my room the second my netpiece unlocked the door.  A man stood in the main room with his back to me, staring at the live feed of my virtual window. "I appreciate these executive suites. Corporate executives liked their privacy. Makes them easier to secure."  I paused in the entryway. "Obviously not secure enough."  He turned an indulgent smile on me. "Quite." He had a square face on a square head and he extended a big square hand toward me whose fingers looked like they were comprised of modular, government-issued, snap-together equipment. "My name is James Sharkey, Director of Spartan Interplanetary Defense." 

He looked to be in his mid-sixties, though with state-of-the-art anti-aging treatments he could be twice that. His grip, as I shook his hand, still had the I-could-crush-your-bones-if-I-wanted-to firmness to it. "I bet I can guess what this is about," I said.  "And if you guessed the Cacks, you would be correct." He made a gesture and a female version of Harlow entered from one of the bedrooms with a holgraphic projector. She set it up on a table and turned it on. An enormous globe of stars filled the room and, when she dimmed the room's lights, I recognized the Cack Moiarchy. "I presume you can read a gravimetric plot?"  The display rotated, zooming in on first one section then another. I very quickly got the big picture. "I see a lot of heavy battlecruisers collecting in one spot."  "Our intelligence says that Righteous Ruler has managed to consolidate his political power over the Moiarchy and is gathering his forces for retaliation against us. Our own governments have been quietly gearing up for warship production and hope to have a sizable force ready by the time he is ready to attack."  "And you want to debrief me about their possible strategy and tactics," I said. I had been expecting this would come.  Director Sharkey shrugged. "Perhaps, eventually. We've already collected all the data you're likely to know and most of that fell out of date while you and your fleet were wandering lost in the Moiarchy's back-country. No it's your fleet we're interested in." He pointed to the display and it zoomed in on the gate to the middle sphere of the Moiarchy.  "My fleet?"  "See this cluster of ships? That is what's left of Bright Fortune, Most Noble and the other major Cack shareholders' fleets you've embarrassed. We don't know if they are acting under orders or just trying to redeem themselves in the eyes of Righteous Ruler, but they appear to be launching some sort of pre-emptive strike."  I stared at the vector maps. They were definitely converging on the gate to the Golden Worlds. "Do we know the target?"  "No. But given the current state of our military readiness, they can take out any single system they want."             "And if you could only destroy one human system, which would it be?" I asked.  "Precisely. We strongly suspect Earth, or rather, the entire Solar System."  "So what are you doing?"  Director Sharkey sat and spread his arms across the back of the sofa, crossing one leg over a knee. "The question is not what are we going to do, but what are you going to do."  I shrugged. "What can one man with no warships do?"  "You can go back and gather up your fleet."  "There is no more fleet. It's broken up. It was never much of a fleet anyway. It only functioned as well as it did because the ship commanders were all facing extinction. They've all since turned pirate."  "Not all of them." Sharkey tapped his netpiece and the display zoomed in on the Golden Worlds. "What's left of the Solarian fleet has apparently decided to go home. If you boost in the next twenty-four hours, you should be able to catch them before they leave the Golden Worlds at a little system called Two Worlds. From there, I suggest you find the colonial ships lost among the Golden Worlds and join Smith's fleet at La Roca. We are already loading supply ships to meet you there."  "Why don't Sparta and the Colonies do this? Between all the worlds, you should have enough ships."  Sharkey shook his head before I had even finished the sentence. "We haven't the ships or the crews to both protect our worlds and defend Sol. Even if we did, we wouldn't have time to collect them and get them out to the Golden Worlds. No. You and your fleet are the only ones who can stop this attack."  "You keep calling them my fleet," I said, growing more irritated. "They've no reason for them to follow me. What makes you think I can convince them to do anything?"  "Earth has offered billions of terra which should make a nice incentive for your crews. If that doesn't work, tell them that the entire human race faces extinction." He gave me a severe look as though I were an insubordinate junior officer and not a civilian being volunteered for a suicide mission. "If you agree, I've got five light cruisers standing by right now for your use to go recover your fleet."  I closed my eyes and took a deep breath. I'd done the impossible before. Could I do it again? With nothing but death and destruction before and behind, whether I stayed or left, I might as well try and take some part of my fate into my own hands. I opened my eyes and let out my breath. "Tell me about the officers commanding the LCs."  I thought about the take-out meal cooling in the suite's kitchenette. I should probably order a bunch of meals to go tomorrow. 


 

Chapter 45

                    I knew we were closing in on our missing ships when the local authorities greeting us grew increasingly hostile. A rumor spread that Kenneth Phon and his fleet had turned pirate and had set all the Golden Worlds ablaze, venting and looting every transport they came across. I was very glad to have my escort of cruisers then and let Commander Gautier handle the conversations with the locals, though if they had stopped to ask themselves why a handful of Spartan light cruisers were allowing what looked like a private custom-built racing yacht to follow them around, things could have gotten more difficult for me.
 We found what was left of the Solarian/Pentaminc fleet at Two Worlds as Director Sharkey had said. I located the Phoenix and sent Commander Brennon a request to talk. He responded immediately.  "Commander Phon! I can't tell you how glad I am to see you!"  "Requesting permission to dock, commander," I said.  "Absolutely. You're timing couldn't have been better. We really need you right now."  "Why is that?"  "The locals have basically put the entire fleet under house arrest. Not long after we got here, news of the colonials' raids got out and, though we were obviously not involved, they refused to give us permission to leave for fear we would go off and join them."  "Well, fortunately, I just spoke with the director of Spartan Interplanetary Defense, I'll see if I can't pull some strings to get the fleet released. Go ahead and have your crews prepare to depart. One way or another, this fleet is leaving."  Commander Brennon gave me a relieved smile. "So, you're returning to take command?"  "If your commanders will follow me. Please schedule a meeting with them in two hours. I'm going to need to brief you all on the situation."  "Are we working for the Spartans now?"  "Let's just say we're allied with them, but first we have to go join up with those renegade colonials ships.  * * *  The race which had colonized the local worlds called themselves The People and reminded me of sloths. They had sloping foreheads, shaggy body hair and a dopy expression similar to the animal's. The local governor, who had been too busy to take any of the commanders' many calls, responded immediately to my request to talk.  "Directly please be answering yourself, Citizen Kenneth Phon, to the entrance security forces," he said the minute we connected.  "And why would I do that?" I asked.  "Numerous and various crimes and piracy complaints others have charged against you."  "If that were true, that would be quite a trick as I only entered the Golden Worlds 15.35 STU ago."  "A court of adjudication will have to determine that."  "I'm afraid we don't have time for this nonsense. I'm under direct orders from the Spartan military to collect those Solarians causing you trouble and remove them from the Golden Worlds."  "Say you the Spartan military?"  "You can check with Director James Sharkey of the Spartan Interplanetary Defense yourself, if you like. In the mean time, I suggest you dismiss these obviously spurious charges and assist our fleet in its departure."  "Please leave not the system while we consult."  The connection ended while, no doubt, the governor made frantic calls to the Spartan ambassador. Meanwhile, having docked the Argippus in the Phoenix, I brushed past a startled flight deck attendant with a casual "good afternoon." I made my way straight to C&C, which was being used for temporary storage, and booted up the com panels in one of the pods. 

"Commander Phon? Are you already onboard?" Commander Brennon sputtered when he saw me log onto the network. "I apologize for not being there to greet you, my protocol officer should have—" "Don't worry about it. We have work to do and not a lot of time for ceremony."  "What is this about? It must be serious to drag you back."  "It's about the Cacks and, yes, it's serious but I'd rather wait until the commanders' conference before I say more."  "Well they're ready to go now. As soon as they heard you'd returned, the commanders all wanted to speak with you. They're logged into v-space now."  "Very well, let's begin." I had to wait a moment while my avatar reloaded into the system, but a minute later I stepped out into what I thought of as generic conference room number one. A couple dozen senior commanders, Harlow among them, all sat around a staid conference table while the rest lurked invisibly in spectator mode. "Well, ladies and gentlemen, I'm afraid I'm back."  "Welcome back sir," one young commander said earnestly. "It's good to see you."  "It's good to see you all too, though," I paused and searched the faces of my commanders. "I don't see Commander Knight here."  "Chris was out with the LCs and FACs scouting when Two Worlds went into lockdown," Harlow said. "He's been playing cat and mouse with the local authorities ever since."  "Can we communicate with him?"  "We get regular updates from him through some carefully placed recon drones." "Good. We're going to need what's left of his wing, but before I tell you why I've come—and I know this is without advance notice—please give me a quick update of the fleet's status."  My commanders stirred uncomfortably. The traditional conference presentation was made with mind-numbingly boring charts and graphs prepared before hand by an army of media specialists, the topics laid out and everything scheduled well in advance. It was a safe way to bore one's commander into thinking one had been busy.  "Commander Brennon has already apprised me of the situation with the locals. How combat ready are we?" I asked.  "The ships are all repaired and ready for combat, sir," Commander Debbie Fowler said, sounding much more authoritative than she had when I had first promoted her. "Things are still somewhat bolted together so I can't say they're as good as new, but they're as good as they can be short of a complete refit."  "How are supplies?"  "Short as always," Commander Mike Williams said. "We're nearly out of missiles and drones and we are lacking spares for many critical ship systems."  "And why is that?"  "We have no funds," Harlow said. "The locals won't let us leave port much less sign any work contracts. They won't give us any money either, though they'll give us all the loans we can ask for. We're currently leveraged up to our eyeballs."  "Well, I have one bit of good news then," I said. "Earth has given us billions of terra which I am releasing to get this fleet ready to fight."  Expressions of almost rapturous joy flitted across their face only to be replaced by suspicious and puzzled frowns. No doubt they realized this was an unthinkable amount of money and only a truly desperate government would hand over that much at once.  "In addition to re-equipping ourselves, I'd like to gather all the supplies we think the other fleets might need."  "Sir? What other fleets?" Debbie asked.  "The colonials."  "Sir...according to the local media...nearly all the colonials have been destroyed. The fleet split up to raid separate worlds and after some initial success, were overwhelmed by the locals. What's left of them are trapped in a system designated AIV0454 where they are trying to negotiate a surrender. The only reason they haven't surrendered yet is that the locals demand their surrender be unconditional."  "That is most unfortunate." I fumbled with the media controls, loading Director Sharkey's maps and gravimetric plots. "Because we're going to need all the help we can get." I laid out the size and scope of the pending Cack offensive. When I had finished, my commanders just stared at me in stunned silence. "This is now an existential struggle. We are the only ones standing between the human race and extinction. We're going to need all the ships we can get and if any Solarian starts surrendering now, it's only going to make our job that much harder.  "I don't know if we are going to win this struggle. I guess survival is never guaranteed for any species. But if the human race is to go extinct, I would rather the other races remember us as courageous and determined, not as weaklings who died begging others for the right to live. Who knows, we may yet win. We've faced these odds before."  I paused to gauge their reactions and realized my little speech was unnecessary. Whereas before I might have seen the blanched faces of barely concealed fear, I now saw only grim determination. These weren't the inexperienced vac-suckers they had started out as. They were now hardened and experienced veterans.  "I've read somewhere that God humbles the proud but gives grace to the humbled. I think our prouder brothers in arms have now been humbled and by God's grace we may now lift them up and humble the Cacks."  I paused and smiled at them. Surely no finer force had ever served their people so faithfully.  "Prepare your crews. As soon as they're ready, we're going to rescue our friends, unite the fleet and kick the Cacks collective butt one last time.  * * *  Once I began paying the fleet's long overdue bills, the local authorities decided I really had come to take charge of our wayward ships, dismissed the charges against me and sent us on our way. Using Chris's wing of LCs and FACs to scout ahead, we began our search of the Golden Worlds to find what had happened to our missing colonials. We knew we had arrived when, the local authorities began attacking us on sight. A couple of captured pilots confirmed the remains of our missing fleet were trapped in system AIV0454. They had not yet surrendered, but the locals knew that if they could keep a large Solarian force from rescuing them, the alien's victory was assured.  "We have to make them think every human ship has come to rescue them," I told Chris during our planning session.  "I understand." Chris looked skeptical. "But do you think my wing can pull that off?"  "You'll have to be careful not to get too far ahead and be cut off. The main fleet will attract most of their attention, but I want them to hear reports of our ships attacking nearly every system simultaneously."  "We won't be able to take out the hard targets," Chris warned. "We're mostly talking hit and run tactics here."  "Yes. We're looking for chaos and confusion. If you can't take a target out, don't engage it. I'd rather you fly by and wipe out every civilian ship and station than get involved in a slugging match with a military cruiser."  Chris smiled. "A single cruiser is no problem, but I understand what you're saying."  We advanced upon AIV0454 leaving entire systems burning behind us. Chris did his job so well we split the fleet in order to approach from multiple directions. But as we transited into the system, we found no sign of either friend or foe. Chris sent his ships further and further out, looking for our missing fleet, but the entire area had been deserted. We found no survivors and no wreckage, or any sign they had ever been there. 


 

Chapter 46

  	 	 	 	    
 "I don't get it." Debbie Fowler shook her head and waved an arm in an irritated slash at the conference display. "Were they here or not? Were we lied to or did something happen to the entire fleet?"  "Every spaced-based asset has been stripped to the bones," Mike Williams said. "It could be the result of the colonial fleet desperately searching for materials or it could just as easily be the aliens seeking to deny us access to the same."   Commander Harlow transmitted a series of images taken from inside several space stations in orbit around the main habitable planet. "Some of these weapons and power system look as if they've been altered. The alterations are consistent with someone attempting to adapt them to Solarian power and weapon systems. Whatever equipment that might have been installed has since been removed, but it does look as if our fleet had considered attempting to dig in and harden their position here."   I tabbed through the various scouting reports quite at a loss to explain what had happened. "So were they destroyed, captured, or did they find a way to escape?" It was obviously a question with no answer. "Whichever it was, we can't stay here. I suggest we head for La Roca and try to join Commander Smith's crew.   Lacking any other suggestions, the other commanders agreed.   "Brian, is there anything left on these stations we can use?"   "Not a thing. Someone tore out of here in a hurry and took everything, including the kitchen sink."   "Chris widen your searches at least two systems out. Question any ships you run across. Perhaps we'll get lucky and meet up with colonial survivors along the way."   "Yes, sir."   "Everyone else, talk to your wing commanders. I want the fleet moving out of here within the hour."   We tightened our formations and sped through the remaining systems as quickly as we could. The alien forces had largely pulled back and we all held our collective breath as we slipped unchallenged from station to station. We occasionally passed systems with wrecked ships or damaged stations that looked recent. Chris caught a few alien ships claiming to be merchants hoping to sell us supplies. They might have been spies, but under questioning, confirmed that a group of Solarian ships had passed through these systems a few days ago in the direction of La Roca.  * * *   I was enjoying a rare moment of peace in my quarters listening to soothing music when the alert status jumped to FAS Delta: Danger Imminent. I flash messaged Mia. "What's happening?"   "A squad of alien ships is approaching; looks like an attack."   "How big is it."   "Not very. Commander Knight is on it."   "Let me know if they capture any prisoners." I hurried to C&C and booted up my data panels.   The approaching squad was dealt with quickly but it was hours before the intelligence started coming in.   "I think we've found our missing colonials," Chris said. "They appear to be trapped in a system designated E58059C. Looks like they've got every alien battle cruiser in the Golden Worlds surrounding them."   "Send me the intel and set up a meeting of the fleet commanders in twenty minutes." I started pouring over the data and had formulated a loose plan by the time the conference started. "Chris, do you think the locals know we're here?"   "They're not organized at all. It's just a collection of a lot of little local defense forces. They don't seem to have any designated scout ships. The ones we've run into so far were just stragglers late in joining the fight."  

"That's good, because we're going to try to surprise them." I called up a map of E58059C. The system has five gates, so we're going to divide up the fleet into five wings and hit them from all sides. My hope is, with an aggressive surprise attack, we can force them to withdraw without a protracted fight."   "Chris' wing is all LCs and FACs," Debbie said. "They're not going to have the stopping power of our battlecruisers."   "Yes, I know. That's part of the plan." I turned back to Chris. "When you enter the system, I want your wing to spread out and leave an opening for the locals. We'll try to drive them to you and your job is to funnel them through the gate."   "Got it."   "Do you think you can get a messenger drone in there without it being detected?"   Chris nodded. "Their gravimetrics don't seem to be sophisticated enough to detect something that small on H-drive."   "Good. I want to give the colonials a heads-up. Even if we're successful in chasing the locals away, there's no guarantee they'll stay chased. We need the colonials ready to move as soon as we put in our appearance." I paused and looked at my sub-commanders. "Any questions?"   "Do we have a designated fallback place if we get separated?" Mike Williams asked.   I sensed a slight hesitation as if he were going to say in case things get screwed up but changed his mind. "Yes. If things go south and we have to scatter, we'll all meet back up at La Roca."  * * *   Our attacks were launched in a closely staggered fashion in order to catch their attention and start pushing them the direction we wanted them to go. I don't know if it was a lack of technical ability or discipline, but they didn't seem to see us coming until Debbie's wing dropped out of H-drive and began pouring missiles into that portion of the enemy opposite the gate to which we were attempting to push them. Brian's wing and mine attacked next, while the colonials attacked from within the circle, trying to break out in Debbie's direction. Many of the locals were already moving toward Chris' gate when Mike's wing attacked adding some urgency to the beginning of their retreat.   Chis' wing came last, only using the inbound lane, launching a swirling hit-and-run assault on the outlying ships. He drove the rest into the funnel like a sheepdog herding sheep through a gate. I sent a command out to my subs via com laser to back off a bit as I feared the bottleneck my cause the enemy to accidentally destroy the gate. In what only seemed like moments. The fleet drifted alone amid the swirling wreckage of ships.   "Ken! I can't tell you how glad we are to see you," Commander Lucas said when we synced our com systems.   What a change of tone, I thought, but just smiled. "We would have been here sooner, but we had some trouble catching up to you."   "Catching up to us? We thought you had passed us by. We heard you had returned to the system, and when the locals laying siege to us at AIV-whatever-fled and you didn't show up, we thought you had gone on to La Roca. We were racing to catch up to you!"   I laughed. "Well, we were intending to continue on to La Roca eventually."   At this point Solomon joined in our conversation. "Ken! What are you doing here? You retired."   "I thought I had, but Sparta believes they have learned of a threat to the existence of the human race and we may well be the only ones who can stop it."   Lucas' face sobered. "Let me guess. It's the Cacks, isn't it?" "Who else? I'll brief you all later. Right now, I suggest we get moving before the locals come back. Is your fleet fit to travel?"   Solomon nodded. "We're doing damage assessments now."   It turned out many of their ships were severely damaged, however all but three had functioning H-drives and minimally functional life support. One we were able to patch up enough to move, the other two ships had to be gutted and destroyed. Mike and Debbie alternated sentry duty at the gates and Chris scouted while we prepared the colonial fleet to leave. It took a full day of non-stop shift work to get ready, but we were at last able to leave.   Over the course of the next several days, the locals sent continual small forays and probing attacks at us, trying to wear us down. It kept all of us busy with constant alerts, especially Chris. Each system would appear to empty out before we arrived, but then sneak attacks and booby traps would take their toll. One of our most damaged ships was destroyed by a booby trapped docking port at a space station. The whole station had been rigged to blow which could have taken out dozens of ships, except that the charge on the one port malfunctioned and blew early.   Finally, after passing through a buffer zone of truly unoccupied systems, we arrived at La Roca. It was a minimally manned supply depot. Once intended as a staging area for mankind's expansion into the Golden Worlds, accidents of politics and shifting fortunes had put the great project on hold. Smith's ships were docked in the orbital stations, intact and still waiting for the rumored transport from Sparta. We seeded the Phoenix's EPR transceivers and I put in a call to Commander Smith, but got no reply. When the fleet finished transiting through the gate we formed up, still lacking a reply, switched on the H-drives and headed for La Roca.   Once in orbit about the planet, the fleet was forced to deal with us. As they demanded we assume our assigned parking orbits, I demanded to speak with Commander Smith, only to learn he had died days before.   


 

Chapter 47

                    "Commander Phon, it's good to see you again. I hear you've been trying to contact me," Newman's smug face joyfully disfigured my monitor. "My congratulations for coming out of retirement, or should I offer you my condolences?" He smiled as if enjoying his own barbed humor.
 "Newman, what's going on and what's happened to Smith?"  Newman's smile dropped away. "He died. It was his Pelosism."  "I'd like a copy of the autopsy report."  Newman's expression grew defensive. "We didn't do one. There was no need."  "It's standard operating procedures when someone dies in a command position."  "There was no need and we were busy trying to keep the living alive."  I stared at him but aside from turning him over to the troopers, I could think of no way to force the truth out of him. Of course I had no idea what the truth was. Newman's rise to command might have simply been innocent opportunism, but I couldn't help but feel he was guilty of something. "My chief medical director will be in contact with your chief medical director. Please ensure his full cooperation."  For a moment, Newman looked taken aback. Something that might have been guilt or fear of discovery flickered behind his eyes before a greasy smile stole across his face. He leaned forward into the camera pickup with one eyebrow raised. "No offense...." His smile widened. "But who the Hell do you think you are?"  "Ah, one moment please." I blanked the monitor and pinged my communications officer.  "Yes, sir?"   "Please establish a connection with the command AI of the Thales."  A moment later she replied, "Connection established."  I inserted a data crystal into an I/O port. "Please transmit these security certificates to the Thales."  "Transmission complete."  A new interface appeared on my data panel.  COMMANDER KENNETH PHON
 SECURITY CERTIFICATE REGISTERED
 COMMAND LEVEL ACCESS GRANTED I switched my com back over to Newman.  "What did you just do? My XO says the command AI was just activated."  I smiled back at him. "Let me present my orders from the Spartan Alliance Command. You'll find Director James Sharkey's authorization included.  "That's not possible! How did you go over my head?"  "Trust me, this wasn't my idea," I said. "Spartan Command insisted I take this assignment. But now that I've accepted the job, I must have your cooperation or I will have your command." Newman glared at me.  I'm calling a meeting of all commanders in half an hour. We only have a few days to save the human race. I don't know if you qualify, but I expect you to be there anyway.  * * *  I gave the commanders all the information Sharkey gave me and directed them to prepare their ships for what might possibly be their final battle. Considering the challenges ahead and the disasters caused by breaking up the fleet, the commanders passed a resolution reforming the United Solarian Fleet and appointed me its commander. I consulted Dr. Pathfinder, one of Shines Like the Sun's former Oracles and this time the results were less dire.  The Spartans, who had snatched up all the useful supplies from the outpost before we had arrived, even suddenly started sharing. In a few days our engineers, who had had plenty of experience with makeshift repairs, had used the space dock to overhaul nearly the entire fleet. Our only problem was, as usual, our food and oxygen supplies. We desperately needed to replenish our yeast and algae stocks and none were available at La Roca. 

"Do you see any possibility of success in finding supplies in the surrounding systems," Maxwell practically begged Dr. Pathfinder, during our daily Commanders' conference.  "The passes are narrow and predators await us on all sides."  This had begun a daily ritual for the last two weeks. The answer had always been effectively the same.  "Well I don't care." Newman's avatar made a gesture as if slamming his fist down on a table. I heard the distant thud through the audio pickup. "If we wait any longer, we'll be even more certainly dead. We have to go."  I closed my eyes and wished I could tell him to go. In truth, I agreed with him. Our environmental systems would start collapsing in days if not hours.  "Surely we've faced worse than a bunch of primitives like these," he continued. "Now is not the time to start running or hiding. I mean we defeated the Cack Ruler!"  No one said anything.  After a while Solomon sighed. "Perhaps Sparta will come tomorrow.  * * *  The next day, the oracle's projections were particularly dire. Neman had been absent from the meeting and, before it had finished, Chris had dropped out as if suddenly called away. As I listened to the recitation of our failing supplies and environmental systems like a chanted dirge, the Fleet Alert Status suddenly jumped to Delta: danger likely. I had begun calling up my tactical screens when Chris sent out an alert.  "An advance force of Cack light cruisers have been spotted in the area."  "Where?"  "I'm sending the system coordinates out now. It seems that Newman decided to go out raiding after all and ran into them."  System information began to appear on my data panels and ship icons lay scattered all over the place.  "What's Newman's status," Abrams asked.  "He's lost fifty ships—"  "Fifty ships!" Maxwell shouted.  "—and the survivors are scattered over these systems."  A dozen systems lit up on the data panels.  "Dr. Pathfinder, please consult your kairograms now. Unless you see imminent disaster, we're leaving to rescue Newman's surviving ships. Commanders, have the SCs of our most intact ships prepare to boost in twenty minutes. Solomon, your ship is still in dock. I want you to take charge of the ships staying behind and try and guard our support craft."  Solomon gave me a resigned nod of his head. "That's all, people. Time to move."  * * *  The Cack ships turned out to be a forward operating group sent to support the locals in their fight against us. They appeared to be hoping to use them to clear the way for the invasion fleet and weren't prepared to face us directly. Newman stumbling across them had actually been fortuitous, though it had come at a high price.  We raced from system to system falling upon both Cack and local ships without mercy as we sought to gather up our lost ships. Chris was forced to carry the lion's share of the work as he cast his scout craft like a net across dozens of systems trying to ensure none of Cack LCs made it back to report on what had happened.  We found Newman surrounded by a mixed group of Cacks and locals ships. He was making his last stand in a dead-end system. We collected him and the other survivors and limped back to La Roca. When we arrived, we found Solomon's damaged flag ship surrounded by a handful of shiny new Spartan warships, sensor pods and fighter drones deployed and missiles ready to fire.  * * *  "Stand down! This is a direct order." I sent the message out on com laser while the rest of my fleet caught up to me and began forming up in a sphere around the Spartan ships.  A signal came to me from one of the new Spartan ships and I accepted it. Dexter's face appeared on my display.  "I do not accept orders from you, Martian."  "Dexter, you traitor, how dare you show you face here," Maxwell blurted out.  Dexter sniffed. "You're not a Spartan, I don't expect you to understand."  "I am a Spartan and I agree with him," Abrams said. What are you doing here?  "I am enforcing the law and arresting Commander Solomon for treason and piracy."  "On what grounds?" I demanded.  "On the grounds that I came here to collect the Spartan fleet for the defense of Sparta and Solomon here prevented me from doing my duty."  "It's no longer the Spartan fleet," Solomon replied defiantly. "It's now the United Solarian Fleet. You have no jurisdiction here."  "I have a commission from Sparta that says otherwise. If anyone tries to stop me, they'll be arrested too."  "I also have direct authority from Spartan command," I said. "I have signed orders from Director Sharkey to command these ships in defense against a pending Indweller attack. If you try to stop me, I won't bother with arresting you. I'll just blow you out of the system."  "You wouldn't dare."  I flash messaged my fleet tac officers. "Target the Spartan flag ship. If he does not stand down in thirty seconds, open fire."  "You wouldn't!" I wasn't bluffing. I was so angry I hoped he try and call it though. At the ten second count he gave the order to stand down and their targeting systems switched off-line.  "I demand you give me access to the EPR transceivers on La Roca," Dexter snapped. "Be my guest."  "We'll see how you feel about that after I get authorization to take command of these Spartan ships and arrest you."  


 

Chapter 48

                    "What's this I hear about you commandeering Spartan ships?"
 I stood up straight in my battle dress uniform and stared straight ahead at Director Sharkey's avatar. "That is not correct. The only ships I took command of were the ships you sent me to collect."  "And threatening to fire on Spartan ships?"  "I only targeted that traitorous Dexter's flagship and then only when he threatened to board one of my ships."  "This is outrageous," Dexter exploded. "How dare you call me a traitor, I have always been loyal to Sparta."  "Did Sparta order you to steal that jump ship and run out on us, leaving even your fellow Spartans trapped in alien space?"  "It was a human colony," Dexter said plaintively.  "Look! I don't care about your past," Sharkey said. "This is war and I can't have Commanders running around making up their own orders. What's this I hear about you trying to found a colony on La Roca."  I groaned. "Found a colony? We were trying to escape it!"  "You know you were trying to hide out there from the fighting," Dexter sneered. "You tried the same thing at Red Rock."  "Sir, the only reason we were stuck at La Roca was that the Oracles wouldn't let us leave."  "Hmph," Sharkey grunted. "I've had my suspicions about those oracles."  "Look, Director Sharkey, you know I didn't ask for this assignment. I was looking forward to going back to a normal life. I only took this job because you said lives were at stake and I was the only person in a position to do anything about it. If you want to run the show, I will happily turn this fleet over to you, I only ask one thing. Don't let this jackass have anything to do with it."  "How dare you."  "I have half a mind to accept your offer and take personal command," Sharkey said. "One moment—" His avatar suddenly blinked out and left me standing in the virtual office with Dexter's avatar.  Minutes passed while Dexter paced back and forth. I considered opening a diagnostic panel to see if we had lost connection when Sharkey's avatar reappeared.  "There's been a change of plans." A holographic model of a Cack warship appeared in the middle of the room. "It seems that the group of Cack LCs you encountered was indeed an advance group that had been Operating in the Golden Worlds for some time. They were preparing the way for this."  A strange ship appeared in the display. I walked around it noting the large engines and a strange lumpy projection along its spine. "I take it this is some sort of assault ship?"  "It is. It's an anti-matter powered gamma ray laser. It's capable of putting out the focused equivalent of a small nova and sustaining it for hours."  A grey planet suddenly appeared in its place. "This is AJX4050 A month ago it looked like this." The gray ball was replaced by a brilliant emerald gem.  I wouldn't have thought such a thing were possible. "The weapon did this?"  "Sterilized the whole planet. It was test fired the day you left Empire. We fear the Cacks have moved their schedule forward. It may, even now be entering the Golden Worlds on its way to Earth."  "Then we don't have any time. We need to get the fleet moving." "Agreed. You should be able to intercept it at AIV0454." 

Great. Back to where we didn't find the colonials, I thought.  Then I wondered if perhaps it was the colonials' presence that had triggered this.  "Dexter, turn your ships over to Commander Phon along with any supplies he needs and return to Sparta."  "What? You can't be serious."  "I assure you, I am. I expect both of you to be out of La Roca in less than twelve hours."  "But! But!" Dexter sputtered.  "And no screwups! Spartan Command out."  Sharkey's avatar disappeared and Maxwell turned a stunned expression on me. I just smiled and logged out.  * * *  The fleet sat at AIV0454 for three days. Chris sent his scout ships out to the very edge of the Golden Worlds and pushed his drones further into Cack space. Finally his scout ships signaled the approach of the Cack fleet.  We broke orbit around the main planet in AIV0454 and boosted for the transit station, building enormous amounts of momentum. On arrival, the fleet turned in wide spherical orbits, setting up kill-zones on either side of the transit station. The local transit administrator had made us swear not to endanger the gate, which we had considered destroying anyway, but there was another bottleneck in the transit network if things grew that desperate. Destroying the gate would cut off both the Solarian sphere and the Golden Worlds from the rest of the transit network, trapping us inside, while only delaying the inevitable invasion. The more time the Cacks had, the greater the force we would face. Time was not on our side. Their FACs and LCs came through first, spreading out and aggressively attacking our cruisers. They were trying to keep us too busy defending ourselves to stop the battle cruisers following behind. Our tremendous momentum, however, made us hard to target. Seconds after they had dropped out of FTL, we had already flashed past their ships under reaction drives. I smiled, watching the Cacks copy our tactics and transit the gate using both lanes. It did them little good, for as each of their ships entered, the next of our circling ships broke formation and charged toward them at faster-than-light speeds. Our ship would drop out of FTL long enough to unload a compliment of missiles, adding its massive momentum to their propulsion, momentum which carried our battle cruisers out of range before the Cacks could defend themselves and hope to counterattack.  Their ships transited through the gate one by one, exploding in a fountain of fire and debris. As the field of debris grew, it became harder to target the arriving ships so that an increasing number made it through. Sitting in C&C, I hardly had to say anything. I just monitored the situation, assigning targets, and marveled at the quiet efficiency of our fleet. The communication channels were all silent except for short acknowledgments of targets received and targets destroyed.  Our encircling sphere of ships began to thin out as more and more broke formation to chase down the Cacks. We had chewed through nearly two-thirds of the Cack fleet, taking no serious damage, when I heard Chris call out on the all-ships channel, "Get it! Get it! Stop that ship!"  Hiswing converged on a single ship.  It transitedthe gate and darted away as if by magic. I opened the optical feed's recording and scrolled backwards, zooming in on the ship's image. A little larger than a light cruiser, it was all engines and had a strange formation along its spine. I had no doubt this was the planet-killer Director Sharkey warned us about.  I sent an emergency com override to Mia, Brennon's tactical officer. "Catch that ship and destroy it!"  Seconds later the Phoenix wheeled about and pursued it at full speed. In the few seconds it had taken us to turn around and pursue it, it had already traveled nearly ten astronomical units—ten times the distance between the earth and the sun. A little more than an hour and a quarter later, we had crossed the diameter of the solar system and I grew hopeful as the far gate approached. 

"Commander Brennon, when he slows down to transit, I want you to take that ship out." Brennon cleared his throat nervously. "We're likely to be well within the safety margin. That could endanger the gate."  "Yes. I know, but we can't let that ship get away. The existence of the entire Solar System is at stake. Use the beam weapons if you can."  "Acknowledged."  We were only seconds behind him, practically right on his tail, when we suddenly dropped out of FTL and the acceleration alarms sounded. The enemy ship continued on at close to 10C. I flash messaged Brennon. "What are you doing? He's getting away!"  "We're carrying too much momentum. We can't go through the station at this speed."  "We don't have time for this!"  "And if we don't start decelerating, we'll take out the gate and our own ship. Hold on."  The reaction drives kicked on and what felt like a suit of lead armor wrapped itself around me. I wanted to message the chief engineer, to find out if this deceleration was really necessary, but I couldn't raise my arm. I estimated our deceleration at least around five Gs—possibly more, but as we slowed down, the Cack ship pulled away.  We approached the transit station at a speed we had never dared before. The gate flashed past us and the Phoenix went superluminal. Brennon was obviously giving it all he could, but the Cacks were nearly half a system ahead of us and we were only matching their speed. At least, now that we were back on H-drive, we didn't have to continue to suffer the high Gs.  An hour later, the Cacks arrived at the next transit station. They dropped out of FTL just long enough to slip through the gate and took off again before we could catch up. An hour and a half after that, we repeated the process. It quickly became apparent they could keep this up all the way to Earth and we would never catch them.  I messaged Chief Master Engineer Droemer. "Michael, I need a solution. How can we catch that ship?"  He shrugged. "Catching it is easy. We just find a faster ship or missile."  Find a faster ship? Was he serious? "I've heard rumors the military has H-drive missiles, but we don't have any of those, and I don't think even our FACs could catch up to them unless you've got some secret way of boosting their speed."  "I'm afraid not. The better question is how do we stop it? At FTL speeds, I'm not sure what we could do to stop them."  "I guess the QWEGs would allow them to ignore a conventional explosive."  "It would literally slough it off."  "What about an antimatter explosion?"  Droemer scratched at the back of his head. "Maybe, if the energy output was big enough to overload the QWEGs. If you could get out in front of the ship, however, and drop raw antimatter in front of it, you'd have a better chance. But again, if it interacted with any normal matter before coming in contact with the ship itself—including the stray hydrogen the ship is scooping up as it travels, there's a good chance it would survive."  A sudden sick feeling came over me. I remembered one ship, at least, that definitely could catch it. "If we could catch the thing, I guess we'd be reduced to ramming it."  Droemer gave me a grim smile. "We've seen what happens when two H-drives interact," he said, referring to Shines Like the Sun's destruction. "Even that isn't guaranteed. Theoretically one of the fields could retain its integrity while the other collapses—especially if there is a large differential in size."  "Can you think of some way to stop a ship without destroying it?"  "Do you mean something like, just taking out the drive? Short of sabotage, no."  We both stared off into space thinking. I tried to recall every story my father ever told me about piloting disasters. He normally didn't talk about such things, but I went through a phase in my mid-teens where I was determined to be a test pilot for TLS. He'd drag up every story he'd ever heard of pilots getting burned, suffocated, squashed by G forces or exploded in an attempt to dissuade me. In the end I simply got distracted by a couple of girlfriends and ended up with a liberal arts degree.  In all those stories, some involving pilot errors others design oversights, none were the sort of thing a pursuing ship at trans-luminal speeds was likely to be able to induce. Until we had lost the tachyonic-cascade reactor in the Torchbearer, I had never personally experienced anything like a spontaneous critical ship failure.  Realization jolted through me and I sat up straight. "Mike, when we blew torchbearer's TCR crossing that nebula, we took out all the ships around us within a certain radius."  Chief Droemer's eyes widened. "Take out the engine, by taking out the power plant—of course!"  "Can we do that on purpose?"  "If we overload a powerful enough reactor, if we get close enough..." His eyes darted back and forth reading mathematic equations in his head. "Yes! We'll cripple both ships but we shouldn't destroy either one outright. Of course we'll be stranded in space until someone can re-light our reactors, but how can we get close enough?"     "The Phoenix can't, but we have a ship that can. Get down to docking bay twenty-one. I'll send the access codes." I logged off, feeling a little sick. I could barely make myself copy over the command codes for the Argippus. 


 

Chapter 49

I set the com system to alert me when Chief Droemer called me back. It woke me twelve hours later just before the start of the first shift. Droemer appeared on the monitor looking as if he hadn't slept since the day before, but he wore a look of tired satisfaction on his face. "I take it you've made the necessary adjustments?"
 "Yes. We were able to install the gravimetric sensors by ripping out some interior bulkheads to open the cabin space to the limited hull storage. Environmental is hopelessly compromised; it won't support a pilot or crew..."
 I rubbed my face trying to wake up,sickened at the thought of how they had mutilated my ship. "Please spare me the gruesome details. Just tell me the Argippus will be able to catch the Cack ship."
 "It will."
 "Good. Then talk to Mia and make sure it can be launched from the bridge."
 "Yes, sir."
 He signed off and I checked our location on the navigation charts. In the last twelve hours we had crossed ten systems and were getting very near the Sol System. If we were going to stop them, we'd have to do it soon. Not wishing to interrupt Droemer's work with our tactical officer, I took a shower, dressed, fixed a tea and grabbed something to eat. I sent Mia a request to talk as soon as she had finished with Droemer and waited impatiently watching the AUs go by. Minutes later, she sent me are quest and I connected. "I assume Chief Droemer has told you the plan?"
 "Yes, sir. It sounds like I'm going to fire a ship at another ship."
 "Pretty much. Once we 'fire' the ship as you put it, it's going to have to intercept the Cack ship before they can transit through the next gate. Our...weapon...won't drop out of FTL until its reactors overload and it won't survive a trip through a gate on H-drive."
 "Ah, I see."
 "That means we need to 'fire' it the moment we transit through a gate ourselves to give it maximum flight time to intercept."
 "I understand. Is there anything else I need to prepare for?"
 "Have a complement of troopers standing by. If this is successful, the Cacks won't be able to power their engines, but they may well have enough antimatter reserve to maneuver and power their weapon. We can't relax until that ship is either destroyed or in our hands."
 "Why don't we just destroy it then?"
 "We will if we have to, but we are facing a war and we need a look at the technology they'll be sending against us.
 * * *
 Chief Droemer ran continuous tests on the Argippus' gravimetric sensors and its navigation system, finding small faults that required delays to fix. As the number of systems between the Cacks and Earth dwindled from a dozen to three, I sent him an urgent message. "Mike! You promised me you'd have the Argippus ready before we reached Earth."
 I heard the clatter of tools and the chatter of techs in the background as he switched on his mic. "She just passed the last check. I'm giving Mia the green light now."
 I killed the link and switched over to the bridge's data feed and messaged Mia at the same time.
 "Yes, sir?"
 "Mike says the weapon is ready. How are things on your end?"
 "Force Leader Joyner has had to make a last minute crew replacement, but she say's they'll be ready."
 "Very good." I closed the link but continued to monitor the bridge's data feed. We were minutes away from the gate. I kept glancing between the chronometer and the navigation plot as the distance to the gate closed. Finally the H-drive switched off and we transited. I held my breath counting the seconds, waiting for the recoil from the mass launchers firing my ship at the enemy. After nearly a minute, I let it out and messaged the tac officer just as the H-drives kicked in. This was definitely not the plan.


"Yes, sir?"
 "What's going on, Mia. Why didn't we launch my ship?"
 "I still haven't got the green light from Joyner, and Commander Brennon didn't want to let them get too far ahead.
 This wouldn't have happened under Kouvaras, I thought, but resisted saying aloud. "Let me know the second you get the go ahead from Joyner. Don't fire the ship without my OK. We only get one shot at this and I don't want to waste it."
 "Very good, sir."
 I ran simulations as I waited. Assuming the Cacks maintained their current acceleration, projecting the maximum acceleration for the Argippus, I calculated the minimum distance to intercept and watched it disappear on the plot as we delayed. Twenty minutes after we had transited, Mia signaled that the troopers were ready. "Don't fire it now." I double checked the navigation plot. "We're too close to the next station. We have to fire as soon as we transit. If we delay even one more system,we'll be racing them to the Sol gate and I just don't want them to get that close."
 I fell back to waiting, tapping one of the buttons on my com panel over and over because I liked to hear the snick of the window opening and closing. It took us nearly an hour to reach the next gate. By the time we got there, I was leaning forward in my pod, inches from the display, whispering in Mia's ear over the com system. "You're sure everything is green?"
 "Yes, sir."
 "You've checked the mag-launchers?"
 "Yes, sir."
 "Now I want you to fire it the second we clear the grav-distortion zone. Don't wait for the transit control to release us."
 "Yes, sir."
 "You sure you've got a gravimetric fix on the Cack ship and the Argippus has acknowledged the target selection."
 "Yes."
 I leaned back in my crash pod as the Phoenix transited through the gate and listened to Mia narrate what was happening on the bridge. "Opening mass driver bay doors, now. All lights continue to show green. We will be clearing the gravity distortion field in ten seconds."
 A silent clock ticked off the seconds in my head. I braced myself for the launch of my ship, a ship I might not ever see again.
 "Firing mass driver...now."
 I waited.
 "I've got a red light on the board. I'm reading a weapon's malfunction."
 "What?"
 "Looks like a software error. Fire control doesn't recognize the mass load. The ship's configuration is throwing it off."
 I groaned. We had discussed just shoving the ship out the flight deck and remotely triggering the engines. Droemer assured me that launching it this way would not only be faster, but that we could continue to update the navigation systems up to the moment of launch with current information in case the Cacks tried anything. I punched the button for Droemer. "Mike! You promised me!"
 Mike, sweating profusely, glanced rapidly back and forth at multiple screens while he typed away like mad. "I know, sir. It was a stupid mistake. We forgot to reset the firing program's payload parameters."
 "We are almost out of time."
 "You can have my resignation in five minutes, but I'll have this fixed before then."
 "If that thing makes it to Earth, we'll all be fired. And by all, I mean the human race."
 Chief Droemer paused long enough to look up at me with a bleak expression. "Understood, sir."


Realizing anything else I said would only impair his ability to deal with the situation, I logged off and slammed the com panel with my fist. Stupid and redundantly tough, the panel flickered and came back on. I blanked it and threw myself back in my seat. I could hear my heart pounding and the blood rushing through the arteries in my head. I forced myself to take a deep breath and concentrated on my breathing.
 Even when hurried, your mind is not hurried. The mind is not dragged by the body, the body is not dragged by the mind. Pay attention to the mind, not the body.
 The words leaped up in my memory unbidden. My father had made me study Musashi and Sun Tzu endlessly as a teen, declaring them the key to success in war, business or any endeavor worth pursuing. Not seeing how they could get me a girlfriend, I didn't see their use. Even now, I wasn't entirely sure what that half-remember passage meant except that it wouldn't do meany good to panic. "I guess it's not over until it's over,"I told myself.
 Chief Droemer signaled me, text only, that the mass driver was ready to fire.
 I checked the navigation and confirmed we were now too close to try again in this system. I made myself casually signal our tactical officer. "Mia, this is our last chance."
 "Yes, sir."
 "Once we transit, I want you to launch the Argippus as soon as you can, regardless of how far into the system we are."
 "Yes, sir."
 "Also, please ask Commander Brennon to launch his fastest attack craft as soon as he can after we transit. Instruct the pilot, that if our plan doesn't work, he is try to destroy the gate while the Cacks are transiting. We can't let that weapon get to Earth under any circumstances."
 * * *
 I blanked the com panel and forced myself to relax as I waited for this final confrontation. I focused on the white noise of the air handlers and tried to suppress that animal part inside of me that wanted to leap out of my skin, toot hand claw bared. Somehow, impossibly, I managed to drift off to sleep and was awakened by a tone from our tactical officer.
 "Sir, we're approaching the transit station. Any last instructions?"
 I smiled at her need for my confirmation and wondered if my silence had bothered her. "No. Just follow the plan. I have every confidence that the third time will be the charm."
 "Very well, sir." She didn't sound so confident logging off.
 I slid back in my seat and watched the station approach. I wondered if species, like individual life forms, had a natural lifespan. This event could be the beginning of the end for us Solarians or, if we survived, the beginning of something greater. I thought of Dr. Swiftly showing me my kairograph back at Lagrange Point 5 and explaining how it tied into the futures of both the human race and the Indwellers. I remembered how the Solarian future split, one half exploding in possibilities, the other half curling up on itself and wondered which path we were on. Even if we were on the right path now, each branched into hundreds of tiny abortive futures where something went horribly wrong.
 The Phoenix dropped out of H-drive and began its transition from one solar system to another. Though I was waiting for it, I was still surprised by the ship's sudden lurch a sit fired the mass driver. The Argippus flew away, too fast for any stray photon to bounce off it and make it visible.
 The Phoenix lurched again as Mia fired the attack ship, tasked with taking out the Solarian gate. This is where the future is decided, I thought as the Phoenix switched its H-drive back on.
 That Cack ship was nearly a quarter of the way through the system when the Argippus began crawling after it.The Argippus was just a tiny dot on the gravimetric sensors, not much bigger than a large missile and I worried about the type of counter-measures the Cacks might pull once they noticed it following them. It was equipped with only rudimentary protection and evasion routines.
 The enemy ship, however, seemed to rely only on its speed as it made no special maneuvers, only raced straight for the gate. Our own ship followed behind as best we could but I was forced to watch helplessly as all the dots on the monitor converged at the transit station.
 The resolution on the sensors was not great enough to tell us if the Argippus was successful or not. It couldn't even tell us if the attack ship had destroyed the gate. We wouldn't know our fate until we arrived.
 We waited another ten minutes before we caught up to them and dropped out of H-drive. I frantically dialed in on the optical scanners and was relieved to find two ships, unable to sustain their H-drives without the TCR generators, racing for the gate on reaction drives. The Cack ship had not given up trying to get to Sol and the Argippus faithfully followed along behind as it had been programmed to do. I realized then that, without me there to authorize it, the Argippus would ignore the Transit Authority's attempts at traffic control. It would try to transit at the same time as the Cack ship and likely destroy both them and the station.
 Our Fast Attack Craft had overflown the Cacks when they dropped out of H-drive, stopping near the gate, missiles ready to destroy it if we should fail.
 Commander Brennon gave the order to move in on the Cack ship. I reached for the com panel to warn him about their main gun, but realized he didn't need my nagging. He kept the Phoenix out of their line of fire and launched breaching pods. I waited, listening to the command traffic as the troopers quickly and efficiently seized the enemy ship. Moments later, the commander announced over the ship's sound system that we had control of their ship and I heard cheering break out in the corridors. On the monitors, the Cack ship swung around and began burning off its momentum, the Argippus following behind.
 Well at least I get to keep my ship, I thought. Then Commander Brennon messaged me.
 "Commander Phon, I've got a communication from someone who wishes to surrender to you."
 "I would have thought the Force Leader Joyner would have taken care of that."
 "It's not the Cacks."
 "Oh? Who is it?"
 "It's the transit station director."
 I looked up at the monitor and laughed. "I guess you should tell your attack ship to stand down."
 "I did, but he..er...it still wants to talk to you."
 "Me?"
 "Yes, you personally. They're not surrendering to the fleet; they're surrendering to you only." 


 

 Chapter 50

                    Though I've seemed to have spent a lot of time around transit stations, I've rarely been inside one. Zipping past from one system to the next, it's easy to forget just how large the things are. Mere hours after capturing the Cack ship, I stood at the edge of a concourse wide enough to drive a division of tanks down, waiting for transport to the transit station director's office. I finally grasped what it meant when they said the Sol gate had more living space and a greater population than all the colonies on Mars combined.
 The rest of our fleet had caught up to us and surrounded the station in case the Cacks attempted a desperate last attack. Except for Bright Fortune and Most Noble and the other Cack leaders who had fled, our fleet had destroyed the entire Cack advance force. Though we feared the Cacks were still gathering their main force back in the Moiarchy.  My ship Argippus had been recovered and at that moment sat in a private hanger while local TLS personnel began undoing the modifications Chief Droemer had inflicted upon it.  Harlow, standing next to me, chatted to his netpiece. I relied on him to organize my schedule and the meeting requests pouring in. Next to him stood Chief Director Ellsworth, our top lawyer, carrying a copy of the surrender agreement. She'd come along to oversee the station's transfer and to make certain no last minute changes were made. Behind her, gaping at the storefronts and walkways and the vast space they filled, two troopers in open-air combat armor ensured everything else went according to plan.  "Thank you." Harlow turned to me. "There was a mix-up with the hanger number; they're sending transport here now."  "It must be nice to have so many hangers one could get them confused," I said.  Harlow gave me an ironic smile.  "Commander Phon?"  I looked behind me, not recognizing what turned out to be a voice synthesizer. It came from a Crawdad leaning on one of their chairs near an outdoor café.  "Seeing you amuses my delighted mind."  "Excuse me. Do I know you?" I asked.  The crawdad's tentacles bunched together and drew themselves upwards, dropped and repeated the process while one eye looked at me and the other drifted over my companions. "It seems He Who Looks Up does not look back. Stepping out into the world, he has already forgotten his home pasture. I remember you, upon whom He Who Looks Up treads."  "Dr. Swiftly?"  "Yes."  "What brings you here?"  "Guiding the sojourners is my vocation. Have you begun a new journey?"  I let slip a short laugh. "I'm afraid I'm more lost now than ever."  "Fear not. Nothing slips The Maker's thoughts."  An electric cart approached and the driver stopped before us. "Commander Phon?"  "Here."  "I'm to take you to the director's office."  I gestured to the others and we all climbed into the cart. I waved goodbye to Dr. Swiftly as we were taken to something that looked like an executive office building rising up inside the station. I had no idea if he understood the gesture, but then I had begun to suspect that he knew a lot more about us than he let on.  We were escorted down wide tiled halls and through equally wide doors. The transit stations were all Cack property and usually run by Cacks, but being stationed this far out from the Moiarchy was considered something of a punishment and a Cack director would do anything they could to turn the assignment over to another. So I wasn't surprised to find the station directed by another Crawdad. 

The director seemed almost eager to turn the station over to me and I wondered about the Crawdads' relationship with the Cacks. Were they a subjugated race? The Cack's high-pressure tactics could blur the line between a trade agreement and a surrender agreement.  As we marked our copies of the agreement and director Breaking Through officially handed the station over to me, I thought about Dr. Swiftly's unexpected appearance and wondered again what he was doing here and whether he had advised the director in his official capacity as an oracle. If so, could the Crawdads, who always seemed to have served the Cacks so faithfully, possibly have an agenda of their own? Had they foreseen this eventuality? Had they engineered it?   I left director Breaking Through in charge of the station during the transition since he already had the staff and procedures in place and I hadn't a clue of how to begin sorting things out. I was going to need an army of bureaucrats and accountants. At the moment I only had Harlow and he was already talking non-stop to someone through his netpiece as we rode the cart back to the hanger area.  "OK, we'll meet him at the hanger in five minutes."  "What was that?" I asked. "Not another meeting request."  "I'm afraid so. And an important one too, apparently. At least this should be short. His assistant even apologized for taking our time."  "Probably a subpoena. Those don't take very long to deliver."  The cart stopped at our hanger and we got out and waited. I caught Harlow's eye. "I thought you said five minutes." Harlow nodded and seemed to consult something on his netpiece. I noticed Dr. Swiftly had left the nearby cafe and I considered wandering over and seeing if they had any human food when another cart stopped across the concourse from us.  A short Asian man in a dark business tunic got out followed by two tall guys who looked like hired muscle. "Looks like a lawyer," I muttered. "Or a politician—not that there's any difference. I'm guessing Earth's arrived to take our trophy away."  I wasn't under any illusion that Earth was going to let me keep the transit station as my own personal property. Though the government had enacted some liberal privateering laws during the Cack wars, they would most certainly violate their own laws to keep a single man from holding the wealth of a small world. In preparation for this, I had already instructed our lawyers to identify and start talks with various community leaders on the station with the idea of declaring the station an independent colony. In truth, running something like this was more frightening that facing a fleet of Cack warships.  The man walked toward me with the confidence of a man who commanded an army of lawyers. As he approached, I suddenly realized who he was.  He was my father.  He and his two henchmen stopped several yards away and bowed. He bent almost horizontal at the waist, completely inappropriate for a father to a son.  "Father!" Surprised and embarrassed, I strode over in three steps and wrapped my arms around him as he rose. He stiffened uncomfortably then seemed to consciously force himself to relax. He even patted me on the back, laughing awkwardly.  "I didn't expect to see you here."  My father laughed again, his smiling face transforming him into a stranger. "When I heard you had survived and were returning, I had to come see you. I've been waiting here, hoping to catch your arrival since the day you disappeared at Empire. The media reports were confused about your fate. Your mother and I were very worried."  "How is she?"  "She is doing well. She would have come, but you know how ill she gets in zero-G. She considered cryo-suspension, but her doctor advised against it."  "Give her my love."  "I will, but she made me swear to extract a promise from you to come by Mars and see her."  "I will only," I paused and looked at the station around me. "I'm afraid this may take some time." "I thought as much. That is why I brought you some help," he gestured to the two men beside him. "These are Mister Jay and Mister Rutledge, my top two lawyers in space and contract law. I am putting them and their staff at your disposal until this is worked out."  We shook hands with pleased-to-meet-yous all around. I kept looking at my father, trying to read his face. I wondered whether he was doing this because he was afraid I would mess this up, because he saw a good deal and wanted in on it, or if he was just trying to be a father and helping. "I'm sure I'll have work for you," I told Mr. Rutledge, "at least as long as I'm allowed to hold this station."  "Oh, you shouldn't have to worry about that," Mister Jay said. "I think we can protect your claim, though we'll need to see any agreements you've made with the former authorities."  I gestured to Chief Ellsworth and the two each touched their netpieces, exchanging data.  "At this point I'd recommend securing the Sol side of the station," Mister Rutledge said. "The Indwellers typically consider each linked pair of stations as a single administrative unit, but Earth could well make the claim that the Sol side of the station, since it's a separate physical unit, linked only by hundreds of light years of folded space, would require a separate claim."  The suggestion and the realization that I had overlooked such a thing took me by surprise. My assets had just doubled. "I will have one of my subs secure it at once. In fact, we may all wish to transfer over to that side before Earth government arrives."  "Don't worry too much about the government," my father said. "With a possible war brewing, they're going to need our help with the military buildup. A few generous leases should please them." He looked out a window at the inside of the ring. From this angle the light from the stars along the edge were warped and stretched into a watery ripple. "I'd like to talk to the station engineers. I think TLS is about to expand into more than ship building." He paused and gave me a puzzled look. "That is assuming you're interested in buying it."  "Buying it?"  "Sure. The board will salivate at the thought of a merger and with your operating budget for this station, you could probably buy us out with petty cash." The thought of buying my family's company made me dizzy. I suddenly felt very overwhelmed and tired. "I don't know, I'll have to think about this."  He laughed again. "I know it's all a lot to take in and I'm sure you have fleet matters to attend to. Let's talk later. How about dinner?"  "That sounds good."  "Until then."  We shook hands like old business partners and equals. He walked away and I headed for the hangers suddenly eager to be back home on the Phoenix.  "Ken?"  I stopped and looked back at my father.  "You did well, son. I'm proud of you."  THE END 
