 

Chapter 1

Here is a line for those who like to note if they are First Time Readers (FTR) or Re-Readers (RR).  
  I shifted silently through the trees. Despite the dark night, my red tinted sight allowed me to perfectly see every blade of grass and leaf as if it was noon. The wind was gently blowing strands of my waist-long brown hair behind me.
 The wind also blew hundreds of scents at me. I could identify each of them with ease. I considered my choices. A rabbit would be sufficient for tonight. I darted silently through the brush in a hunting crouch as I followed the scent. I passed a small pool of water and caught a fleeting glimpse of a shadowy figure with glowing red eyes in the reflection. Such a sight would have had any of the remaining humans shaking in their boots. That was if they even spotted me at all. Like the ninjas or assassins in the Hollywood films, if someone spotted me, they knew that it was too late to escape unless I let them. The scent of the rabbit was stronger now and I knew I was quite close to it. I slowed as I looked around. The rabbit was just ahead of me as it napped under a shrub. It was sleeping, and if I had my way, it would never wake up. I returned to the old log cabin since the sun would be rising very shortly. Even if I hadn't known exactly where I was, I could have easily followed the smell of wood smoke back. This cabin had probably been a small hunting lodge at one time. There was one queen sized bed in one corner, a petite kitchen, a wood stove and a chair. It was small, but more than enough for one woman. The rabbit I had caught would hold me for a day or two before I would have to hunt again. I opened up an airtight container and took out a dehydrated apple slice. I munched slowly on it as I cleaned up a bit and checked on some other fruit on the drying racks. I peeked out the window blinds. The sky was just starting to get light. I squinted against the brightness. Even the earliest stages of a sunrise were too bright for me to look at. With a sigh, I dug out my pair of special sunglasses and put them on. Technically, they were not actually sunglasses. They were actually welding glasses that looked like wraparound sunglasses. Their snug fit and shape was more suited to a man's face, but I didn't care since they protected my eyes without creating too many blind spots. No bit of light came in around the edges, which was the only reason I could go outside during the day. I went outside and considered my options. There wasn't much to do here and some of my supplies were starting to get a bit low. I decided to head to town and settled my backpack on my shoulders. I ran in the forest alongside the road. I had preferred to keep a low profile even when I had been human and my zombie instincts preferred it as well. Besides, if other zombies saw me running, they would try to follow thinking I was chasing something. Some of the Runners would probably snap at me. I didn't have the ambition or tolerance to deal with that drama today. It was easier to just stay out of sight when I traveled. I paused to examine dozens of zombies roaming around the town. I wasn't overly bothered by their presence. I was no more human than they were. I just had more control. Most were the common mindless zombies that were barely able to move faster than a jog. About as bright as a brick, all they knew was to chase and try to attack. They rarely bothered me and if they did, a quick growl usually made them change their minds. Roughly one in a ten thousand zombies were Runners. Not much slower than their previous human selves, but they were still a long stone's throw away from intelligence. They were stronger and more aggressive though. Like feral dogs, they would try and test other zombies to establish a spot in the pecking order. 

They ignored the regular zombies since they didn't care about such things as hierarchy, but Runners would challenge anything else with red eyes. If it didn't have red eyes, they would attack it before seeing if it was edible. My sunglasses sometimes caused them to challenge me just because they couldn't see my eyes, but the light was simply too bright and painful for me to remove them. Two Runners happened to be in this town today. Neither of them were sane. I had met a handful of sane Runners, but they were extremely rare since their intelligence took a dive south once bitten. They had great difficulty thinking and they usually gave into their cravings without realizing the danger. By then it was too late and they numbered among the mindless horde. With a faint growl I gave into the inevitable. I wasn't getting anything done by just standing here. My vision took on a slightly redder hue and I felt the heat rise in my veins as my instincts rose a bit higher. I came out of the trees in a steady smooth walk. The hint of a stalk to my movements proclaimed me for what I was. It would also keep other zombies from bothering me. The slightly aggressive and predatory stance came easily to me. Most Runners in this area knew me on sight and by scent. They rarely bothered me anymore since they had lost every challenge. Even a feral Runner hated losing time and time again. I didn't even have to think about my movements. They felt natural. Much like a practiced fighter, my knees were always slightly bent. To stand straight and tall was a human action and would attract unwanted attention. I walked toward the corner store. I knew there was some food left in there from previous trips. A larger guy sniffed the air and growled as he turned to face me. Others turned in his direction to see if he had found anything edible. This Runner must be new in town. I paused and dropped into a fighting crouch. I pulled back my lips to show my teeth in threat as I let out a challenging snarl. He took several steps closer and I slightly spread and tensed my fingers as I turned to face him. I gave another warning growl, which he ignored. He took another step and I launched towards him with a snarl. I slashed out with my hand and my sharp nails left four bloody furrows on his arm. He snarled and swung as well, but I was more coordinated and faster than he was. I easily ducked before kicking his upper leg. I resumed my fighting crouch and took one threatening step forward with a snarl. With a growl the Runner lowered his gaze to the ground as he took a step back. He had lost this match and he knew it. I remained where I was until he turned and staggered off in a different direction.  I shook myself off with an irritated growl. Feral zombies didn't really think, they tended to rely on the few instincts they had. Even dogs were smarter than the average zombie, but like dogs, they occasionally challenged one another. Usually the first one to land a strike won. I didn't even bother using weapons in cases like this since weapons riled up the other zombies. Against a Runner, a Nightstalker always won. Even as a Runner would always win against a normal zombie. One on one, none of the present zombies were a match for my Nightstalker abilities. I could be in trouble if they ganged up on me though, especially if I was unable to outrun them. That wasn't a likely scenario though. I was much faster than they were. I tended to get challenged more often than most other zombies. My scent was not quite right since I used soap when I bathed and washed my clothing. The manmade chemicals altered the zombie undertone in my scent just enough to confuse the dim-witted zombies. My sunglasses didn't exactly help either. They couldn't see my red eyes that told of the virus lurking in my blood. I couldn't exactly blame them though, Nightstalkers usually roamed solitarily at night and rarely mingled with their lesser relatives. I hated admitting that I had anything in common with these feral creatures. The irony of that detail was that my still-bloody fingers had bits of Runner flesh under my fingernails from our minor spat. 

I was more fierce, but in the end my instincts were just as feral as theirs were. The only real difference was that I was able to hide it under a more refined veneer of humanity. They had no humanity and I fiercely clung to the remains that I still had left. I will run to the arctic circle before I let myself become a mindless entity. I opened the door to the small store and walked in. This place was just as empty of company as it had been last week. I cleaned my hand with some water and paper towel before I went shopping. I grabbed some canned goods and dried mixes for soup. There wasn't much left on the shelves here after all of this time. I hefted my loaded backpack onto my back. Still, this much food would last me a long time. I didn't eat much normal food. The fact that I did need more than blood showed that I was still sane and in control of my own mind. I had only met four other Nightstalkers. Two had been sane and had been traveling together. Two had lost their minds to bloodlust. I had ended up killing one that kept trying to attack me. I glanced around the store, but didn't see anything else interesting. I walked to the front window and gazed outside. I was always cautious in this new world and my caution had paid off more than once. Not a cloud was to be seen in the sky. Zombies roamed mindlessly through the streets. There weren't as many as usual today. They came and went with no real rhythm that I could see. They did tend to congregate in towns and along streets, probably lured in by the still lingering smells of the humans who used to live here. The human scent had ingrained itself into the very walls and pavement over the years of human habitation. Even I could smell this town from miles away, despite the fact that it had been abandoned to zombies over six months ago. I let my eyes scan the streets carefully. My Nightstalker instincts preferred it when I remained hidden and watched the world around me. I had a lot in common with most ambush predators. Besides, the world was always willing to give trouble away. For free. Heavily armed groups of humans still went from safe zone to safe zone, usually congregating in their Strongholds. There was always the possibility of another Nightstalker passing through as well. There was another infected creature even higher up the totem pole out there, but they were much rarer than Nightstalkers. They were called Terrors, although I had never actually seen one before. There were different hierarchy ranks among zombies. The mindless ones were on the very bottom and made up the vast majority of the zombie population, Runners were above them, Nightstalkers ranked higher yet, and then Terrors claimed the top rank. The higher the rank, the rarer the zombie seemed to be. Each rank was also stronger and faster than the one below. Both Runners were in my line of sight. They turned and started heading towards the West at a run. I jumped on top of a counter for a bit more height as I craned my head in that direction. Other zombies were starting their jogging shuffling gait in that direction as well, alerted by the Runners. I was curious as to what they had seen. They would chase after deer or most wild animals in a similar manner. The wild animals were faster, usually running off and losing their newfound fans swiftly enough. I faintly heard the rumble of a motor. I frowned, but it didn't really surprise me. This town was along the only big highway in this hilly wilderness. A vehicle revved in the distance and it sounded like a truck. I watched the blue truck as it drove along the highway. I exhaled slowly as my irritation started to build. It was going just fast enough to keep ahead of the Runners while honking the horn. Considering they were dragging strings of tin cans, their speed and noise were intentional. Of all days for a group of survivors to come through town... Just my rotten luck. I remained motionless where I was since movement could possibly attract attention. If anyone had been looking, it would have been easy to mistake my form for a mannequin. After all, what zombie would remain standing still on top of a display counter in a store front window?

I narrowed my eyes at a second slightly quieter truck as it lured the remaining slow zombies down the highway. Soon, this truck was also out of sight as it rounded a bend. It would take hours for the zombies to tire and slow. It would take the zombies quite some time to return, if they even returned at all. Normal zombies had terrible senses of direction, so they may not even come back. I had never seen this town empty of zombies before, but the streets were clear at this point. Just in time for the caravan to arrive. I took a slow step backwards to drop off of the counter. My eyes never left the dozen vehicles. These particular vehicles had all been zombie proofed. Bars and metal screen covered every opening with holes for weapons to stick out. Several long horizontal openings along the sides and door were common in any vehicle now. Those narrow gaps allowed someone to put a sword, scythe, or other long narrow sharp object out to cut through the zombies. Cutting the tendons and ligaments would render the limb useless until it healed in a couple of weeks. One had to completely remove the head to truly kill a zombie. The convoy pulled up and spread out along the front of the tiny town. There were only a couple dozen buildings in this tiny roadside tourist town. I smoothly backed up a bit before turning and jogging for the exit. It felt weird to jog. It was a human stride that paced out the runner. I wasn't aware of any zombie that would willingly jog. Regular zombies couldn't. Runners either walked or ran. Nightstalkers usually ran in a slight smooth crouch, although we commonly walked, creeped, and stalked. We could do a slow run, but our normal strides were seamless and practically glided. Like a nighttime assassin. The rough jog did not fit my instincts. But I could overrule my instincts. I slipped out the backdoor and crouched down beside a big green garbage bin with a faint growl of frustration. Some of the vehicles and people were in the back alley I had planned on going down. Well, there went my escape route. Plan A had disappeared with the appearance of the group looking for supplies. Plan B had evaporated with the way they had this area surrounded. Guess I move onto plan C and have plan D ready for deployment. The group was cautiously moving as if expecting a lost zombie to run out at them. They were heavily armed with quite the array of weapons and had some sort of chest armor as well as shin and arm guards. I wanted nothing to do with such heavily armed people. It had not gone well for me the last time I tried and I had no intention of attempting it again. It looks like this group is here to do a thorough looting of the town. They were focusing on the five big stores right by the highway. I knew they had been picked clean by earlier scavenging groups. It wouldn't take them more than a few moments to realize this and move to the next store. The small corner store I had been in was near the back of the town. I watched the group patiently as I waited for my opportunity. There. I darted across the road and ducked behind a house. None had been facing my direction. The wind shifted and I suppressed a flash of irritation as I gritted my teeth. Their scent was sweet and tempting as all humans were. It was a deadly temptation though. The taste of human blood or flesh would drive any sane zombie to madness and strip them of their control and identity. Reduce them to a mere animal. I refuse to go down that route. I will stick with rabbits and deer. The back door to the house was unlocked and I slipped inside. The streets had vehicles and people on them, so there was no way for me to get across the surrounding fields undetected. I would wait them out in this house. They would move on once they looted the stores. I quickly investigated the one story house. It was empty of both the living and the undead. I waited near the back of the living room where I could see out the main window. I remained motionless as I caught glimpses of people and carts moving here and there as they investigated the stores. Good thing I took what I wanted from that corner store earlier. There will be nothing left in there now.

I growled lowly as the groups started checking out the houses. House by house they slowly got closer. Seriously? Why are they checking houses? They often have little of value and it is insanely dangerous for a human to be going into buildings that could potentially hold zombies. A group turned to the house I was hiding in. With a reluctant growl, I stalked into the bathroom before closing the door behind me and locking it. I glanced at the brown-haired short woman in the mirror before dismissing my reflection. My own appearance had barely changed when I turned. I was stronger and faster, but you couldn't really see such a change. These humans were ticking me off. Allowing them to push me around, even if they were not aware of it, chafed against my Nightstalker instincts like sandpaper on road rash. So much for Plan C... I had no plans past Plan G so this group had better quit while they were ahead. I stilled as I heard the front door open and listened as the group banged on the door. When no zombies came to play, five sets of boots started scoping the place out in an organized fashion. Three focused on the kitchen while the other two checked out the rest of the house. The door handle beside me jiggled as someone tried to turn it. I loosed a snarl while instinctively dropping into a crouch with my hands slightly away from my sides. The person took an immediate step back, "Hey Joe, we got a zombie in the bathroom." "There might be some medicine in there then, since no one else has let it out. Let us clear this out first. Slim pickings here, someone obviously beat us to it." That would be me. I growled lowly at their intention to enter the bathroom. I had never heard of a human entering a room with a zombie willingly. They obviously needed their heads checked. I stepped sideways to the cloudy bathroom window and tried to undo the locking latch. If they came into the bathroom, Plan D involved jumping out the window and running. This group was obviously used to taking on zombies and winning. I am not about to let another group of humans try to kill me in the name of humanity. "Alright. We are ready whenever you are." "The door is locked. Just a common twist lock. Do you have a nail to pop it?" I growled again and pulled on the window lock. Still jammed. I was getting pissed as my luck kept rolling downhill like a bowling ball down a mountainside. I snarled and slammed my palm against the lever and it finally gave way with a bang. "Joe, we might have a Runner in there." The voice sounded somewhat cautious. Idiot. About time you got a few of your brain cells functioning properly. "No problem, let me alert Cindy so her group is prepared and we are good to go."  I shook my head, apparently Idiot #2 was still behind in the intelligence race. I muttered irritably to myself, "Idiots..." There was no chance of them hearing my low mutter and I certainly was not about to stop to have a conversation with these guys. My last attempt at that had almost cost me my life.  I wasn't sure how they planned on getting a fast moving zombie out of a small room in the back of a house without getting bitten, but I wasn't about to stick around to find out. I pushed the window open and jumped up to crouch on the windowsill to peek cautiously outside. All clear. I heard a pop as the lock failed and heard the door start to swing open. I jumped and glanced back as I started to run. Two surprised faces stared at my retreating figure. "Shit! Danny! We got a survivor running out back!" Another voice called out, "We mean you no harm! Slow down!" Right. I have heard that line before. As if I am going to fall for that again. I didn't slow or turn back. I kept all traces of my fluid crouch from my run. Run like a human. Run at human speed. That should hopefully prevent them from firing a bullet at me. A bullet couldn't truly kill me, but I had no desire to get shot. Again. Bullets hurt like hell, I knew that from past experience. Several vehicles out of my line of sight started up and I heard tires spin. A car and truck rounded different corners while drifting from their newfound speed. The car was closer and accelerated right in my direction. Their persistence was irritating me further. I am about ready to strangle someone at this point. I obviously want nothing to do with them. Why are humans so bloody persistent? I altered my direction a bit and picked up some speed, but the ground shook from the vehicles as they closed in. The car and truck angled towards each other before slamming on the brakes to form a roadblock. The car slid right in front of me, close enough that I could feel the heat from the engine as the front of the car went by me. It was close enough that I didn't even have enough space to slow down. Not that slowing down had been in any of my plans to start with. They had probably intended for me to actually bang into the vehicle in my headlong run and take a bit of time to recover, but I had other ideas and possessed slightly faster reactions than any human. I held my hands in front of me and planted them on the top edge of the roof as I let my speed throw me into a mid-air somersault like a demented game of leap frog. I was on the other side of the car and resuming my previous run before they realized what I had done. I was closer to the dense trees of the wild forest now. I heard other engines rev as they tried to adapt to my unforeseen strategy. Even running at a human speed I was going faster than they could turn their vehicles around. I darted into the trees before they could improvise their foiled plan. I swiftly angled off at a 90 degree angle before I continued zig-zagging deeper into the forest. I paused and glanced back while listening. I faintly heard vehicles and muffled voices, but from the sound of it, all of them had stopped at the tree line. None were even attempting to follow. Good. I turned and headed deeper into the forest resuming my usual slightly crouched run as I weaved effortlessly through the trees. 
 -------------------------------- Author's Note: Please note, if you are reading this book anywhere other than Wattpad, then it is a pirated copy. Please go to wattpad.com to read it for free. Thank you for your time.

 

Chapter 2


 As much as I enjoyed the warmth of the sun, I loved the cool of night. I could finally take off my sunglasses. Nightstalkers were built for the night. Our night vision was unparalleled. The moon was only about quarter full, but the forest was as bright as day for me. A red tinted view, but every detail was clear. My sight always had a red tint. It came with the zombie virus. I stood in the shadow of a large tree on the edge of a clearing and simply enjoyed the scenery. This was the closest I could come to truly relaxing with the zombie virus running through my veins and putting a short fuse on my temper. I took a deep breath of the cool night air as scents assaulted my nose. My sense of smell was keener than a bloodhound. I could smell and identify at least twenty different kinds of plants on the breeze. The creek was a cool smell that dampened the air and allowed scent to travel even further. I could both hear and smell the mice hidden in the long grass, but they didn't have enough blood to be worth the effort of going after them. I could smell other warm blooded creatures as well. The grassy scent of rabbits, the musky scent of a fox, a pungent odor of a weasel, and the light smell of game birds. The woodsy scent of a deer brought my deliberation of the menu to a close. A deer would hold me for four or five days before I would have to hunt again. I shifted to face the source of the scent and darted off into the underbrush. I was a darker shadow in the nighttime shadows. My movements were smooth and my passage barely made even the slightest whisper of noise. I stealthily approached the sleeping deer and regarded it. If I did this right, it wouldn't even wake up. My instincts rang with bloodlust and the desire to attack, but my human heart didn't like to see creatures suffer. My Nightstalker instincts made the hunt easy. The virus had altered my body, making it a honed and deadly weapon. I crouched down and sprang at the sleeping creature. With a solid blow and a quick twist of its neck I shattered the spinal cord, instantly killing it. I used my knife to shave some of the fur off of its neck. I dug one sharp fingernail into its neck as I cut through hide, flesh and finally sliced through the huge artery. I kneeled on the ground and kissed the injury as I started to drink the liquid red gold that flowed out of the wound. I resisted the instincts that called for me to bite into the raw meat and enjoy the flavor that was rich from the animal's own body heat. Raw meat was almost as dangerous as human blood. Animal blood allowed me to remain in control of the virus. Raw meat, human blood, and human flesh would reduce me to an out of control zombie. If I lost control, I wouldn't be any smarter than a Runner. Part of my mind disliked the thought of drinking blood, but after all of this time I was mostly over it. The virus itself also had a hand in altering my thoughts and making it far too easy to accept this fact. It tasted delicious. The blood also allowed me to remain in control and keep my Nightstalker instincts in check. I sucked the last of the blood out and pulled out my large belt knife. I started carving up the best cuts of meat. There was no way I could eat all of this meat. I didn't eat much in the way of solid food to start with, but I would cook, dry, or smoke the best stuff. I twisted around and snarled viciously at the trees behind me. The cougar hissed at my rude greeting. This cougar occasionally came across me as I butchered a kill. I didn't mind it enjoying what I left behind, but if it thought it was going to chase me off my kill before I was done, it had another thing coming. I growled a second warning and the cougar stepped back with a softer hiss. It slunk back into the trees. I wasn't surprised to see this cougar. I had heard and smelt it approaching seconds after I killed the deer. It often hung around this area to scavenge off my kills and it knew that I almost always left something behind. It would return later when it thought I was gone. It would be wise for the big cat to give me my space. It wouldn't be the first time I had enjoyed cougar blood. In fact, most wild animals refused to let zombies anywhere near them. 

Neither would horses, much to my disappointment. Even my old bay mare wouldn't let me anywhere near her once I turned and I had ridden her almost daily since I was small. Even weeks before I turned she had started acting skittish around me, as if she had sensed the monster that was taking hold in my body. She had been smarter than me. The majority of cats had started acting up a couple of weeks in advance as they detected the infection in their owners, but most dogs had been oblivious. Even now half of the dogs out there didn't realize what I was unless I growled at them. They could pinpoint a regular zombie or Runner miles away, but unless I let my instincts take over they couldn't tell just by looking at me. Half were tipped off by my scent though. I examined the pile of meat I had cut up. This was more meat than I really needed, but much more remained for the local scavengers to enjoy. I packed it up in several carry bags and headed back to the cabin. The trip back was quiet and uneventful. I put on my sunglasses and stirred up the fire. The fire was far too bright for me to look at it comfortably. I dropped a venison steak on the grill and sprinkled some herbs on it. I dug out a tin of canned peaches and opened it. I munched on them slowly, savoring the taste while watching the flickering flames from behind my darkly tinted welding glasses. They looked almost identical to sunglasses, but I had picked them out from the abandoned hardware store simply because they did look like sunglasses. Regular sunglasses simply let too much light in and another Nightstalker had shown me that I could go outside during the day with welding glasses. This was one of those close fitting wrap-around types with reflective steel grey lenses. I had altered them a bit so they touched both my eyebrows and my cheeks as they wrapped seamlessly around my face without letting any light leak in. They were needed during the day. Even the full moon was bright enough to cause some discomfort. I relied on them so heavily that I had three spare pairs in my backpack in hard protective cases. These sunglasses were the only reason I could go outside during the day. The feral Nighstalkers truly only went out of their caves or hiding places when every hint of sun had left the sky. Once I had finished quarter of the can of peaches, I put the rest in a hard plastic lunch container for another day. I flipped the steak over. The firepit was in front of the cabin. The cabin behind me was a small one room thing barely big enough for the bed, stove, and shower. I had seen bigger buses, but it was all I needed. I absentmindedly kept tabs on the noises in the surrounding forest as well as the scents. It was a habit, like glancing at the side mirrors on the car while driving. It was also instinctive. I hadn't picked up any hints of the humans since my close encounter three days ago, but I didn't really expect to. They would have moved on later that afternoon. Even they didn't want to be caught outside of their Strongholds at night. I had avoided the town since then, but considering they had thoroughly looted it, there was no pressing reason to return. The virus may roll through my blood, but that didn't mean that I enjoyed the company of zombies. I checked the steak and it was finally well done. As a human I had preferred it medium rare, but I refused to take any chances. You never realize how precious your mind and thoughts are until something tries to take them from you. Bloody zombie virus... I ate quarter of the steak before I was full. I really couldn't eat much anymore... I huffed in annoyance since it tasted pretty good. Oh well, Chloe would enjoy it. I glanced over at the big long-haired white dog that was waiting patiently across the fire from me. I tossed the steak to her, "Here girl." She easily caught it midair. I watched her chew on it. I never had understood why she had started following me. Most larger dogs or guard dogs were more adept at figuring out what I was. I always gave her my leftovers or brought a rabbit carcass for her, although she was a pretty good hunter in her own right. She rarely let me pet her or sit near her. Odd as it was, I enjoyed her distant company.

The sun was starting to rise so I went inside. I might as well get a nap in. Not much else to do. Chloe remained outside, as was her preference, so I closed the door behind me and dropped my pack on the bed. I crouched and jumped up to grab onto the rafters and pull myself up. I didn't trust sleeping in a bed in the open, it was too exposed and my instincts refused to be put in such a vulnerable position. I had built a sleeping area in the rafters. I had hauled a piece of plywood in and shoved it on top of the rafters. I had laid down a thick section of foam as a mattress and added a dozen blankets for padding. It was darker in the rafters even with the thick blinds drawn across the windows. If anyone did come in, chances were they wouldn't notice me up here. I reclined on the foam padding on top of the blankets and dropped into a light doze. A deep sleep wasn't possible for Nightstalkers, but I got a couple of hours of sleep a day. Oddly enough, other zombies could tire from physical activity and they also slept. Hollywood had been wrong. What a surprise. Regular zombies tended to be more limited physically than a human and slept for about 4-6 hours a day. The Runners weren't quite as fast as humans, but they had much more endurance. They slept about 3-4 hours a day, although they were lighter sleepers than regular zombies. If they chased a slow moving car until they became exhausted, they would slow to a snail's pace as they still tried to follow their prey. Once whatever was tempting them was out of sight, they would probably find a secluded area to sleep. They slept standing up, which I found completely bizarre. Several loud bird calls disturbed my sleep, but I kept trying for more rest. There wasn't much else to do around here anyways. After two hours I gave up. I felt fully rested and in theory I could go a day or two without sleep before I got tired. I sat up and gazed at the room below with half closed eyes as I reached for my sunglasses that hung on the wall beside me. I put my glasses on and blinked at the more comfortable level of light. What should I do today... I had lots of food. The wood pile had far more than I would ever burn. Perhaps I could head back to town and see if the people had left anything of value. The food and medicine was surely long gone, but even if a hundred vehicles had come, there was no way that they could have completely emptied all of the stores and the garages. I could check out the town. Chloe could use a run as well. We could stop by the deer carcass on the way back and I could grab a big leg bone to roast. Chloe would enjoy chewing on that for hours. I grabbed my backpack and headed outside while stretching. It was a human habit that still remained. My muscles didn't stiffen up or knot. They were always limber and ready to roll. Chloe raised her head and looked at me from her dog house as I stepped outside. I whistled, "Come on Chloe, let's go for a walk." She promptly trotted over with a slightly wagging tail. She kept just out of reach, but seemed quite happy about going for a walk. I headed off at a slow lope. Chloe easily kept up with my pace. I suspected that she might be part husky since she could run for hours. We traveled on a beaten down path through the trees alongside the highway. I gazed at the town, most of the zombies still hadn't returned. Only a dozen or so were present. I left the trees and wandered through the streets cautiously while glancing in windows. As expected, anything remotely resembling food was gone. Many of the tools were also gone. Much to my irritation, they had somehow managed to take all of the canning and food preservation supplies. So much for my plans to can some fruits and jellies. I growled in slight irritation, they knew a survivor had been here. They could have left a dozen jars or so. I had always had a sweet tooth, particularly for fruit, and it had somehow survived the zombie virus. I headed to the tourist information building on the far side of town. I entered the room and glanced around. A zombie turned my way with a groan and I responded with a growl. He realized that I was also a zombie and kept staggering around the room. I snorted lightly in derision and went over to a huge wall map. My eyes traced the red lines of paved roads and the black lines of the likely unpaved back roads. I would probably be better off checking out the small backwater towns. Most survivors stuck to the major highways and they would be less likely to travel out of their way to visit a town with only a dozen stores. Sure, I could live off of meat from my kills and wild greens, but I really enjoyed fruit and other processed human foods like chips. This time I would haul the canning supplies and other stuff I wanted back to the cabin. I could build a shed to store the supplies in later on. I didn't want to chance another group of looters emptying out the stores again. Chances of them locating the cabin in the middle of the forest was zero since there was no driveway or road leading to it. It had not occurred to me that a group would be so willing to enter numerous buildings that obviously held zombies. Nor had I anticipated that any group would have stripped entire shelves of thousands of jars and supplies. They had even taken the pallet loads in the loading dock. Those greedy idiots must have had a few screws loose to take that many jars. Although I do have to give them some credit, they did manage to pack all of that stuff in a couple dozen vehicles and trailers. Roads in this area were few and far between. It looked like there was a backroad almost as far north of my cabin as this place was south of it. I hadn't crossed the big river yet, so I hadn't stumbled across it in my wandering. There was supposedly a bridge to the west. It looked like there were a couple of small towns along that road as well. Small would be an understatement, if I was lucky, there would be a dozen stores. I committed the location of the bridge in relation to the towns and my cabin to my memory. I left the building and Chloe was waiting for me outside. Two zombies were en route with their eyes locked on Chloe as they shuffled along in a half skipping gait. There was nothing more I wanted to see in this town today. I turned and started heading towards the forest in a light run. There was plenty of time to get to at least one of those northern towns today, even with a few breaks to rest. Chloe ran ahead of me towards the trees. She didn't like the regular zombies any more than I did.

 

Chapter 3


 I was able to actually travel on this abandoned road since there were no zombies around. I had slowed to a pace that a human jogger could keep up with shortly after leaving the town. Chloe panted lightly as she trotted beside me.
 I moved towards the trees and slowed to a slow walk as I saw the first buildings in the distance. Chloe seemed to like the break, and truth be told, I appreciated it too after traveling nonstop for four hours. We may be unable to starve to death, but zombies still had limits. I wasn't panting hard or desperate for a rest, but our steady jogging pace had me breathing heavily. Nightstalkers were built for an ambush or slower paces, not long distance traveling. I slunk through the undergrowth and Chloe gave me more space as my Nightstalker habits became more prominent. I was a motionless shadow among the trees as I examined the tiny town, although the word hamlet or village would have suited it better. Nine tiny stores and twenty houses were present, all of them could have comfortably fit inside of any Walmart out there with room for a bonfire. I examined the local residents, three zombies who wandered back and forth aimlessly. I glanced back at a cautious looking Chloe, "Stay here Chloe." I left the trees and dropped into my slight crouch as I approached the buildings. All three zombies ignored me as I wandered into the town. Regular zombies rarely bothered me if I acted like a zombie. These stores were smaller than many houses I had seen and carried only the bare essentials. I entered the grocery store, it held nine small aisles of shelving filled with food. A zombie wandered up one aisle and growled at me. I snarled at the shop keeper's welcome. With another low growl, he wandered down another aisle. With an attitude like that it is no wonder he has no customers today. Then again, I am a terrible customer. I never pay for what I take. He wouldn't complain though, he was a mindless zombie and long past caring about something as trivial as the fancy printed paper that resided in the cashier's till. I grabbed a basket and went over to the first aisle. There were a lot of choices and my backpack would only hold so much. I would have to make several trips to this town and stash the food in various locations in the forest. I mostly grabbed stuff like canned fruit, juice, trail bars, and some noodles. Stuff that I couldn't find in the forest. I grabbed Chloe a few dog treats as well. Once my backpack was full I went outside and glanced through the windows of the other small shops. Most didn't interest me. The electronics store was useless without power and cell phones hadn't worked for months. I barely glanced into the furniture store. I ignored the houses for now, if I used up most of the food in the store then I would check them out. I watched some odd whirligigs dancing in the light breeze. Whoever made them obviously had too much time on their hands considering how complex a few of them looked. The one made an entire small scene of wooden people work or wave as it was powered by the wind. Bizarre. I paused and took a deep breath of air. The heat in my blood stirred at the faint scent of human blood in the air. I hesitated, my original human inclination was to help out, but the darker side of me was far too tempted by that scent. If the person was armed, he or she may very well strike first and ask questions later. I took a second breath to test the air. The scent was very faint. Far too weak for the other zombies to notice it. The injured person was probably miles away, it could take me some time to get close even if I ran. The breeze picked up a bit, there must be a lot of blood otherwise I wouldn't be able to pick up details from the scent like this. The scent was that of a child. That decided me. I turned and ran down the road whistling for Chloe. She bounded out of the bushes and quickly followed me. Runners may come close to matching a human's speed, but Nightstalkers were faster. I pushed for speed until Chloe was almost running full tilt. I was glad I had hunted last night, my control should be good enough even around spilt human blood. Or so I hope.

Chloe started breathing hard after roughly ten minutes at this fast pace. It was a long time to run at such a speed even for me. I didn't slow down though, the scent was much stronger now. We were almost there. I could smell the blood of other humans as well. A car came into sight with five zombies cramming themselves into it. The car had the hood propped open. Chloe growled breathlessly as she finally picked up the human blood and saw the zombies. I passed them in a wide circle. The zombies were feeding on a small girl and a man who had been recently killed. I lifted my nose to the air and winced as the scent of fresh human blood made my throat burn in desire. The heat in my blood wanted me to go join them. With a conscious effort, I continued down the road. I did not want to become like those zombies. Under the scent of fresh blood, there was the trail of other humans who had escaped. And more zombies. I darted into the trees to keep out of sight as I followed the road. Moments later we passed two more zombies feeding on a woman's body. We rounded a bend and I slowed down as I spotted the still living humans. A man and women were protecting two more children who looked to be around 6 or 7. Four more zombies kept trying to attack. Where had all of these zombies come from? And how had they caught up to this group? I huffed in irritation, the questions would have to wait for later. Chloe took the initiative and led the attack. She ran around the zombies barking at them. The dense creatures seemed surprised by the loud dog. The humans were surprised as well. I made my way through the trees to get closer while remaining out of sight. I wouldn't be lucky enough for the zombies to chase Chloe, the scent of a human was far more tempting than that of any other animal. As I well knew. I sniffed the air again and growled deeply as I looked around. I could smell it, but where was it? My eyes narrowed as I spotted the Runner coming from the other direction, probably alerted by the noise. The adults were standing halfway between the four approaching zombies and the children, so they didn't see it coming up behind the group. I growled in irritation and frustration. I wasn't sure whose luck was worse, mine or theirs. As much as I detested what the scent of their blood did to me, I wanted to see them live even more. My human life had been ripped from me with zero warning. I didn't think I could stand to see another child killed in front of me. Especially when I could stop it. I pushed for speed and ran through the forest before darting out to intercept the Runner. I reached behind my back to pull out my deadliest weapon. It was hidden between my back and my backpack. It had originally been a grain hand sickle from a museum. I had sharpened it into a lethal weapon capable of slicing through a zombie's neck. The Runner snarled at me and I returned the snarl. It dismissed my presence and turned its focus back to the children now that it knew I wasn't a tasty human. It wasn't interested in challenging me when it had prey in sight. It was an unwritten rule that zombies wouldn't try to kill each other. To hell with that rule. I never signed my name on any dotted line. I passed behind the Runner and swung the curved blade around its throat before yanking it hard against the zombie's neck while I used my free hand to push its head sideways. With a gurgle and a twist, the blade managed to sever the spinal cord letting the Runner's head fall to the ground even as its body collapsed. I kicked its head away from the stump of the neck. If they were to touch even somewhat, they would eventually heal and the Runner would recover within a couple of weeks. I glanced back to see the girl watching me with wide eyes. None of the other three had noticed me. I quickly wiped my blade clean. A quick glance and sniff told me that none of the Runner's blood had hit me. I didn't care about the blood hitting me, but even a single drop could spell disaster for the humans. 

I returned my gaze to the adults as they were still managing to hold off the four zombies with baseball bats of all things. These zombies must have chased the car a long ways considering they were moving fairly slowly, even for normal zombies. The zombies were extremely tired and even more clumsy than usual. It was the only reason the adults were still holding them at bay. I walked a few steps to the side to pick up a crowbar from the road. The man must have thrown it down judging from how his scent still clung to it. I raised the crowbar above my head and whipped it forward with my Nightstalker strength behind it. With a sickening crunch it slammed into the head of the zombie in front, causing it to fall into the two behind it. All three went down in a heap. The man and lady jumped before looking back in shock to see me standing behind them off to the side. I bent down to pick up a fist sized rock before doing my best impression of a baseball pitcher to whip it forward. It crunched into the skull of the fourth zombie. The two I had hit were motionless on the ground. Severe injury to the brain would knock a zombie out cold, although they would heal in a couple of weeks. The other two were regaining their feet like drunken sailors on a storm tossed ship. No wonder regular zombies slept while standing up. Simply watching them clumsily trying to get to their feet was almost painful. I shook my head at the staggering zombies as they finally regained their feet. The man took new courage and stepped forward hit one upside the head full force with his baseball bat. It fell to the ground motionless. I put my sickle back in its sheath and simply waited since they were no longer so badly outnumbered. The lady's bat glanced off of the last zombie's head, causing it to stagger, but it didn't fall. The man rectified that with one more desperate swing. I examined the four survivors. I didn't smell any blood coming from them, so they hadn't been injured. They smelt strongly of fear and terror from their fight for survival. These two were not fighters and possessed no such skills in that area. This meant that they also lacked the needed skills to make it to the nearest Stronghold on their own power. I didn't know the location of any Strongholds in this part of the country. I sighed lightly, in order for them to have any chance at making it to other survivors, I would have to help them. Lovely. Just what I needed. The couple had backed away from the zombies and were currently hugging the children in relief. The man looked over at me and blinked as he noticed the headless zombie behind me. Chloe trotted between us with a wagging tail as she looked between them and me. He stood up and slowly walked forward with his hand outstretched, "Thanks for your help. We wouldn't have made it without your assistance. I'm Tom." My dark glasses hid my red eyes and he hadn't seen me take out the zombie to notice my movements. I walked forward, keeping my movements human-like. I shook his hand while taking care that my sharp nails didn't brush his skin, "Nice to meet you, I'm Trinity." To say that I was happy to see them was more than a bit of a lie. I would have preferred that he had remained in whatever Stronghold he had come from. I was somewhat irritated by the fact that this group had decided to take a scenic detour. Several humans had paid for it with their lives. I was not looking forward to being their guide. Their proximity and presence was unwelcome. It was also triggering instincts that would terrify them if they were to figure it out. I glanced at his group and spoke gruffly to try to hide my irritation, "What are you doing out here on foot? You don't look like fighters to me." The lady came forward and the kids followed her, "Our car broke down and zombies came after us before we got it fixed. I'm Marissa by the way." I shook her hand too, "Why did you leave the Stronghold to drive down these remote backroads?"

She looked tired, "We were actually trying to get to a Stronghold. We had survived in my Aunt's old place until two days ago when we ran out of food. It had a huge fence that kept the zombies out." I blinked in surprise, it hadn't occurred to me that they were one of the groups still trying to get to safety. The girl walked forward and grabbed my hand. I looked down at her in confusion. I had never really had anything to do with kids before. She looked up at me with hope in her eyes, "Marissa said that we were going to a safe place where there are no zombies. Are you and your dog going to lead us there?" Talk about being put on the spot. Neither of the adults spoke, their eyes also held the same hope. The girl still held my hand tightly, if she squeezed any harder my nails would pierce her skin from her own grasp. I crouched down so my head was level with hers, "What is your name?" "Liz." The smell of her breath hit me and I had a hard time keeping my reaction from giving me away. Okay, having her head closer to mine wasn't such a good thing. I carefully controlled myself as I took another breath to speak, "Okay Liz, I won't lie to you. The place where I live isn't big enough for all of us, and it certainly isn't a Stronghold. Truth be told, I don't even know where a Stronghold is located, although I do know that there are a few around somewhere. I will help you get there though, okay?" Liz nodded enthusiastically before wrapping her arms around my neck in a tight hug. I awkwardly returned the hug as I groaned internally. Her hug pressed her body right against my neck and chest as her hair brushed against my face, leaving my control near its limits. I breathed through my mouth so her scent couldn't tempt me as badly. I knew my eyes were glowing brightly from how high my instincts were. It was a good thing my glasses prevented them from catching any glimpse of my eyes. We had better find this Stronghold quickly. I stood up to get some space between me and the child before looking at Tom and Marissa. They looked relieved that I was going to help them. I doubt they would be so relieved if they saw my eyes. I glanced down the road, "We had better get moving. I assume you came from that direction?" Tom nodded, "Yeah, but you don't want to go back that way. There are dozens more zombies that followed us from the last town. Thank you for helping us, Trinity." It was almost strange to hear my name after so long. If I recalled the map correctly, the town in that direction had been the much bigger than the one I had been in. The other direction headed towards the mountains where the road would eventually dead end. I looked down at the pavement, the scattering of unbroken old twigs showed that no vehicles had driven along this remote road in months. I had always known that my luck stunk. We would have to do this the hard way... "Well we better get moving then, we are going to have to travel cross country for some distance. There is a bigger highway south of here." I was hoping that the caravan would pass through again and we could flag them down. They hadn't shot at me, so they would likely welcome more survivors. Most Strongholds did. Liz looked at me, "Through that scary forest?" I glanced down at her, "The zombies down the road are more scary than the animals that live in the forest." She came forward to hold my hand tightly as she looked towards the trees. I wasn't sure why Liz had decided to cling to me like lint on my favorite sweater. Marissa took the boy's hand and led him forward. With a quick glance at all of them, I started walking. They followed me silently. I kept a careful eye on my surroundings as I surreptitiously tested the air for any potential threat. Half an hour later I realized that it was very unlikely that we would reach my cabin by nightfall. They had obviously been cooped up wherever they had been and they were out of shape for a cross country hike over the hilly terrain. They were also exhausted from their close call when they tried to run for their lives. The children in particular were barely managing a slow walk. Marissa was out of breath, "We need to stop for a rest." I nodded as I stopped beside a fallen log. All four sat down on it tiredly. Chloe sat by Tom, who rubbed her ears. Liz looked up at me with big pleading eyes, "Do you have anything to drink?" I pulled off my backpack and dug through it. I dared not share water from my water bottle, any traces of my saliva would likely have the zombie virus. My stop at the grocery store had been a blessing. I passed each of them a bottle of fruit juice, "This is the best I have until we get to my cabin." I could drink water from the streams without worry, but it would have to be boiled for them. "How far away is your cabin?" I turned my head towards Tom, "About halfway between where I found you and the highway that we will be going to. It is the biggest highway in this area. We should get moving though, we still have a long ways to go and I really don't want to camp out here overnight." Marissa looked concerned, "We have nothing to keep us warm once the sun sets, but we aren't going to be able to go far. The children simply won't make it." I examined the four of them more closely. She was right. All they had was what they were wearing and they didn't even have a coat. For them to try to sleep outside would mean hypothermia in the cool night air in the mountainous foothills. I suppressed a growl of irritation at this situation. It was bad enough having their scent around me, but to actually touch them made things much harder. I exhaled gustily and I knew they would be able to pick up my dislike of the situation from the noise, "There is no place closer than my cabin unless we head back to those zombie filled towns. If I carry the kids, can you two keep up?" Tom and Marissa exchanged a look before Tom nodded, "We will try our best." I looked at Liz, "I am going to put you on my shoulders and carry the boy, so you will have to sit carefully." She nodded in determination as she came forward. The two adults looked doubtful. I carefully picked up the girl and set her on my shoulders. Marissa picked up the slender boy and came over. He was younger than Liz and I guessed he was about five. I tucked Liz's feet under my arms as I reached out to take the boy. Marissa handed him to me. "His name is Josh." I nodded at Marissa and started walking. I didn't reply in words because I had my jaw clenched tightly. Having these two so close to my face was making me fight to stay in control. I hadn't been in close proximity to humans for months and I wasn't used to having to worry about my control. My throat burned lightly from their scent, although it wasn't as bad as the scent of fresh blood. The heat in my blood beat like a war drum in time with my heart, the virus wanted their blood and it wanted it badly. The things I get myself into... This is far too close to torture for my liking. It didn't improve my mood any. The only consolation was that we were moving faster.

 

Chapter 4


 Tom was breathing heavily behind me, "If they get too heavy for you, I can carry them for a bit." His comment actually caused me to chuckle. I couldn't remember the last time I had chuckled, probably back when my eyes had been light brown. The chuckle had also caused me to unclench my jaws. To my surprise, I had become slightly desensitized to the scent of these four during the last hour of hard walking. The virus still sang for their blood, but it was easier to tune it out. I still wouldn't be able to lower my guard in case my control slipped. I paused to glance back at the two tired adults and smirked, "By the time I tire enough to put them down, you will have collapsed." I turned and kept walking. I heard Tom mutter to Marissa, "I know she is helping us, but she seems to be a bit of jerk." I had been terse and blunt whenever I had spoken so far, despite their occasional polite attempts at conversation. Marissa replied softly, "She probably just isn't used to being around people after so long. She may be gruff around the edges, but if she had really been a jerk, she would have left us behind." Tom grunted. I ignored their conversation, a normal human wouldn't have heard their quiet whispering. We would be pushing it to get to the cabin by nightfall. If these two have enough breath to talk, then we are clearly not going fast enough. I picked up the pace a bit as we kept walking. Yeah, I was a bit of a jerk. Time and distance passed far too slowly for my tastes. The two behind me were saving their breath to try and keep up with our slightly faster pace. I had to give them credit for their determination though, they weren't going to be left behind easily - even if they had to go to the point of collapse. Finally the bridge came into sight. I called back over my shoulder, "The bridge is up ahead, we are more than halfway back. Just keep up, once we get to my cabin you can pass out." Tom muttered, "I think she must have been a drill sergeant before the world went to shit. They push you right to the breaking point with no remorse." I was somewhat amused that Marissa once more stuck up for me. "If she had no remorse she wouldn't let us stop for a short break every fifteen minutes." Tom made no response as he panted. Liz was softly singing on my shoulders as she looked around with no fear. Josh was sleeping as I carried him. It was rare to encounter zombies in the middle of the forest like this and thankfully we hadn't encountered any so far. The bridge was the only time we had come out of the forest. It was a narrow bridge, only wide enough for one car at a time. Marissa looked at the road longingly as we left it to enter the forest on the other side of the bridge. Walking on the flat road would be easier than weaving through trees and over rocks. I also knew that the death of their three companions sat heavily in their hearts. I wasn't sure how to speak softly or make any attempt to console someone anymore. I spoke gruffly, "The road goes a long way before it comes to any town or buildings. My cabin is much closer. Besides, few zombies roam the forest, they prefer to hang out in towns or wander along the roads." I was trying to keep my irritation suppressed, but wasn't doing very well at it. I wasn't used to watching every step I took to keep it human-like. I had stifled half a dozen growls already and they had barely been speaking. My constant hold on my control due to their mere presence was an irritant as well. Nightstalkers in general were prone to irritation. Very prone. She sighed, but sounded oddly grateful. "Thank you." I wasn't entirely sure why she was thanking me. They knew I was irritated and in a somewhat foul mood. Perhaps she didn't know why either.


 
 I sighed in relief as I entered the clearing around the cabin. The adults staggered into the clearing in an exhausted daze. The last bit of light was rapidly fading from the sky. Even Chloe simply walked to her dog house for rest. The boy in my arms still slept and Liz was struggling to stay awake so she didn't fall off my shoulders. "We're here. Can you open the door for me?" They blinked as they looked up in a fatigued daze and realized that they had finally made it. Tom staggered forward to open the door for me. I placed Josh in the comfy armchair and took Liz off my shoulders. I pulled out some extra blankets and laid them beside the wood stove, "Here you go Liz." She tiredly climbed into the blankets. She was asleep even before I managed to get the third piece of wood inside the stove. I rose to my feet and turned to the two adults who were swaying on their feet from exhaustion. I gestured to the queen sized bed, "Get some shut eye. I will keep an eye on things." Marissa shook her head, "We can't take your bed..." I sighed, "I use that bed." I pointed up to the rafters and they gazed up and blinked in a fatigued shock. "Get some sleep before I have to pick you two up off of the floor." They didn't argue and both crawled into the bed. I wasn't even entirely sure if their heads had hit the pillows before they were asleep. I looked around at the four sleeping humans. I will have to air this place out for weeks to get the smell out... I shook my head and headed outside. Chloe lifted her head as I came out. "Go back to sleep girl." She dropped her head. She was used to me leaving at night and not taking her. I went back the way we had come and confused the scent trail in case any zombies crossed it and tried to follow. I ran a circuit around the house to ensure that nothing lurked in the woods. The air held only the usual scents. I passed by a rabbit and made a quick decision. Seconds later the rabbit was dead and I was drinking its blood. If I had to travel with humans, it would be best if I hunted every night. It would help me retain control. The burning in my throat eased as the warm red liquid washed away the scent of the humans that clung to the back of my throat. I headed back to the cabin with handfuls of pungent smelling plants and dropped them all around the clearing. They would help prevent anything from scenting the humans within. I also brought the rabbit back for Chloe's breakfast and left it by her dog house. I grabbed the small ladder that was leaning against the cabin and took it inside. I quietly propped it up against where my elevated bed was. I couldn't just jump into the rafters with potential witnesses if I wanted them to remain oblivious to what I was. I added more wood to the merrily burning fire before climbing up to my bed. I barely noticed the cold of the night and never started the wood stove just for the heat. The humans needed it though, and it was putting off some good heat. The smell of four humans in an enclosed space was making me second guess my plan for pretending to sleep up here. I had wondered about that. I pulled a plant stem out of my pocket, it was one of those pungent ones from outside. It had a strong crisp smell and I crushed the juicy stem and rubbed the juices under my nose. It helped a bit, but not enough to be worth the trouble. I growled under my breath as that small hope was dashed. I had become somewhat used to their tantalizing smell during our eight hour hike, but being trapped in a small building where the scent was unable to escape was a new level of torment. I am sure hoping that I become somewhat desensitized to this or this trip is going to have a lot in common with jumping out of an airplane without a parachute. In other words, there could very well be blood and guts on the tarmac by the time this is all over.


 
 
 It was a long night and in the end I didn't even take a bite out of anyone. I did manage to doze off here and there, much to my surprise. As the sun rose I got up and quietly got things ready. I put a lot of water on to boil and put several empty water bottles nearby. I had some cans of food that I didn't particularly like and left them on the table along with a bowl of freshly collected greens and a box of cereal. I went to sit on the front porch and simply enjoy the fresh air. I could still smell those sleeping inside. It leaked out of the house through every crack and gap like it was purposefully trying to find me. I was quite surprised when Chloe came over to sit beside me. I slowly reached out and gently scratched behind her ear. It was rare that she let me touch her. I could count the number of times on my hands. After a bit I pulled my hand back, unwilling to make her uncomfortable. We sat there for a couple of peaceful hours before I heard a set of footsteps walk around inside. I knew it was Liz. The door creaked open and she stepped out blinking at the bright light. She came over to crawl into my lap with her bowl of dry cereal and bottle of juice. I gritted my teeth at the contact, but didn't comment. Zombies were not much for contact. She quietly munched on her breakfast. I was thankful that her scent didn't bother me as much today after all night in the cabin. Part of me still thirsted for her blood and her scent caused a slight burning sensation in my throat from her close proximity, but I didn't act on my instincts. I couldn't forget it or turn it off, but like a teenager's terrible music echoing loudly up from the basement I could put up with it if I tried. It was and always would be a conscious effort. I heard louder footsteps inside and the door opened as Tom peeked outside cautiously. Chloe trotted up to him and he relaxed as he saw us. He came outside and closed the door behind himself. He had filled a water bottle and was drinking like he was dying from thirst. He sat on the steps not far from my feet, "I can't believe how long I slept. Is it really 11 O'clock?" I glanced at the clock keychain that dangled from my belt loop, "Yes, it is 11." "Wow. I haven't slept that long for ages." Silence fell between us. He seemed bothered by the silence and my short answers. Liz was unaffected by it and she looked up at me, "Are we walking more today?" I shook my head, "No, we will rest here today. Tomorrow morning we will head south to the highway." Tom relaxed and seemed relieved for the reprieve. I got some of the deer meat and started roasting it over the outdoor fire. By the time noon rolled around the other two had also woken up. I kept a close eye on the trees, but no feral zombie had ever shown up here in the past and I hoped that the trend continued. Liz followed me like my shadow and seemed interested in everything I did. I was somewhat amused by her and at the same time exasperated and irritated by her constant presence. Nightstalkers tended to be loners and I hadn't had any true company for months. It was an adjustment and it wasn't going down smoothly. The day passed extremely slowly and made me wish for an empty mountaintop to enjoy in solitude. Marissa and Tom would occasionally try to start a conversation, but my answers were always blunt and short. Marissa tried again, "So where are we going tomorrow?" "Heading to a major highway that I see other survivors use a few times a month. Hopefully we will find someone right away, otherwise we will just follow the road until we see a sign or something." "And if we don't stumble across anyone by nightfall?" I shrugged, "Then we camp. Hopefully we can find a working car and make good distance." Chances of finding a working car were slim to none, but I didn't bother mentioning that. If we went west away from the mountains, there would be more small towns and houses. I could confirm if a house was empty easily enough and we could take shelter there for the night. Tonight I was making a run to the northern town, one of those shops had camping supplies such as sleeping bags and heavy jackets. We went inside as the sun set. Josh was confused, "Why do you wear your sunglasses inside? Aren't they meant for when you are in the sun?" The boy was obviously stumped by my sunglasses. They are so I don't scare you to death... But I couldn't say that out loud. I shrugged, "Bright lights or flickers of light hurt my eyes. Even the fire in the stove can flicker enough to cause pain, so I just find it easier to wear the sunglasses all the time." He looked intrigued, "They make you look so cool. Like the crazy lady on tv who planted all the bombs." I started snickering. Marissa turned red in embarrassment, "Josh! That wasn't very nice to compare her to a crazy lady. Sorry about that, Trinity." I shrugged, "He is young, and from someone that age it was pretty funny." He was also so close to the truth that it was almost funny. No one else even realized it either. The irony was that the boy was more observant than the adults. My human charade was holding up so far. Day two with these people was almost over. Thankfully they all wanted to go to bed early since the only light came from the stove and I was planning on hitting the trail once the sun was up. 
 
 ----------------------------------------------- Author's Note: Thank you for taking the time to read my story. If you like a particular chapter, please vote on it (the small star in the corner). It is possible to vote on each chapter. I love getting votes and comments. It tells me that the readers enjoy the story and encourages me to keep writing.

 

Chapter 5


 Once more I carried Liz on my shoulders and Tom had Josh on his shoulders as we trekked through the forest. I avoided the town, angling further west. Marissa ducked beneath another branch, "Is there a reason we are walking in the trees when the highway is right there?" It was a miracle that they had survived two days by themselves. They knew nothing about evading zombies. And I was the lucky one who got stuck with them. Oh, joy. This trip is going to be as fun as playing football using a porcupine. "We can see the road from here and if anyone drives by we can get out in time to wave them down. If we walked on the road, any zombie out there could see us and potentially scent us." She was silent after that. I kept a sharp lookout as we walked. I had half a dozen crowbars hanging from my backpack. The way the one had flown previously had impressed me and I really didn't have any sort of ranged weapon. Truth be told, I didn't need one with my speed and strength, but I wanted to avoid melee fights unless these people were unable to see it. I had no idea how they would react if I attacked a zombie with a hand weapon at unnatural speeds. We paused for short breaks and for lunch. So far none of the zombies on the road that we passed had realized that humans were walking through the trees just out of their sight. After seeing several of them on the road, Marissa and Tom had fallen silent with jittery nerves, afraid to attract attention to themselves. Silence was fine by me. It saved me from trying to talk when I had nothing to say. Three times we had passed by abandoned vehicles and I had snuck out of trees to check if they started. I swiftly returned each time with no success. I hadn't expected it, they had been abandoned for a reason, but the fact that they didn't start still annoyed me. If they had started, we could have made much better time and my task would have been completed sooner. I paused and held up my hand for silence, tilting my head as I listened. There it was again. I jogged for the treeline and my luck was back with me as no zombies were in sight. Marissa and Tom now heard the vehicle in the distance as well and swiftly ran after me. We made it to the side of the road before the truck got close. It sounded like it had seen better days. I was positive that the serpentine belt was having a war with the radiator fan while the engine pistons were rocking to a Nickelback song. It was a terrible combination... Marissa and Tom started waving at the truck while I stood and watched them approach from behind my sunglasses. The truck slowed as it approached and the windows rolled down to reveal two men in the front seats. I could smell a woman in the back seat as well. The smaller guy wore a camo shirt, "What are you doing walking on the road?" Tom replied, "Our car broke down and we are trying to find a Stronghold. Can you possibly give us a lift?" The men looked at each other before Mr. Camo shrugged, "Fine by us, but you have to ride in the box." Marissa smiled in relief, "Thank you so much!" Marissa and Tom wasted no time in clambering in. Chloe jumped into the truck box and Tom held her collar to keep her in place. I glanced at the hood of the truck, "That thing isn't going to explode, is it?" Both men chuckled and a lady's voice answered me, "I keep asking them that exact same question! We are simply hoping that it holds together long enough for us to get to safety." I shook my head in disbelief before vaulting over the edge of the truck box to land on the bed mattress that they had obviously put there for passengers. The dried spots of blood and faint scents of strange humans gave me a pretty good idea that their party had decreased in size recently. 

If this thing made it to any Stronghold, then I would be amazed. I sat with my back against the cab so I had an excellent view of everything beside us or behind us. It would also give those inside a nice view of the back of my head. The truck picked up speed again and the noise from the engine got worse. It was giving me a headache. At least the wind whipped the scent of the humans away from me swiftly. Liz wasted no time crawling into my lap for a more comfortable ride. I raised an eyebrow at Marissa who was watching us intently, I was kind of hoping that she would take the child back. She shrugged, "Liz is very outgoing. I am kind of surprised at how she has attached herself to you though." I examined Marissa with my red hued vision, "You don't seem overly bothered, which I find odd." I was a complete stranger and most adults were fiercely protective of any surviving children. She sighed, "I helped out at the orphanage. Tom also worked there and these two children are all we have left of the forty that had been in our care originally. So many turned or were killed in the first wave. Liz tends to love anyone and gravitates towards strangers." Lucky me... I nodded and turned my attention to the passing scenery and occasional zombie that tried to follow us as I tried to ignore the small warm child in my lap. I found it a bit odd that the trio inside had accepted us so easily. Then again, if we had been infected and turned while we traveled, we were in the truck box and the three of them would be fairly safe in the cab. Chloe huffed as we hit another pothole in the road. She was a silent vote for our humanity, most big dogs could sense someone who was infected and close to turning and avoided them. Chloe was running freely with us and that had probably scored us some brownie points. At least we were covering plenty of distance with no effort on our part. 
 
 Hours later I turned my head as the engine took on a new whining and the smell of something burning was detectable on the wind. I gently knocked on the tinted window, pointed forwards and then pointed to my nose. This truck had a small sliding window on the back glass and it opened a crack and the woman's voice spoke, "I don't speak sign language. Try that again in English." "I can smell something in the engine burning. It is making more noise too." I heard one of the men groan and call back, "Doesn't surprise us, but we can't exactly fix it so we are just going to drive until it breaks down." The window slid shut with a click. I sighed, there weren't any zombies at the moment so they could have let it cool down for half an hour. The truck would probably make more distance in the long run that way. It was their truck though, so who was I to argue? Logical thought had no impact on the slowly burning rage at being brushed off like that. My Nightstalker instincts were insulted and detested their offhand dismissal. I hoped that this truck kept its shit together until we found the walls of a Stronghold. The burning smell became stronger, showing that my luck had once more evaded me. Something else started squealing like a banshee, causing me to eventually plug my ears against the noise. The others also covered their ears. I had no clue what those inside were doing, the tinted windows provided me with an excellent reflection of my face and sunglasses when I glanced over my shoulder. I had a distant and somewhat suspicious expression on, which was my normal appearance. Nightstalkers were a top predator and top predators were usually cautious and didn't trust easily. In fact, I did not even trust this truck to get us another ten feet. As if it had heard my thoughts and had been insulted, a new deep humming noise joined the orchestra under the hood. I suddenly hunched over to shield Liz with my body as a huge boom echoed behind me. The truck shook and skidded forward as the driver hit the brakes.

I heard the faint hiss of something from the motor, but otherwise silence greeted my ears. Liz was shaking silently in fear. I cautiously lifted my head, movement above caused me to jerk my head skywards. I watched the truck hood as it fell out of the sky and landed in the ditch with a thud. I slowly stood up so I could see over the truck cab, leaving Liz at my feet. I looked at the engine, or rather, what was left of it. It hadn't quite exploded, but it was close enough in my books. This truck wasn't going any further unless we pushed it. I had no intention of doing that. Both doors opened and the two men got out shakily. A red haired lady jumped out of the passenger side after the guy got out. She sighed heavily, "Well, I guess we are walking." She was thin, and looked pretty fierce. She was even shorter than I was, which was saying something since I wasn't much over five feet tall. I was certain that she knew a few fighting tricks from how she moved. I lightly jumped over the side of the truck and held out my arms for Liz. She crawled over and I put her on my shoulders. Chloe was more than ready to get out of the truck at this point. The other three in the back quickly followed. Our three newfound traveling companions were watching us with sharp eyes, obviously checking for any noticeable injuries or bite marks. The guy with the camo shirt walked forward, "Well, I'm Ben, this is Hank, and that is Nicky." Tom came forward with Josh on his shoulders, "I'm Tom, this is Marissa, the little fellow here is Josh, that is Trinity and Liz is on her shoulders." The man nodded, "Alright, none of you were bitten right?" We all nodded. It wasn't even a lie for me. No zombie had ever managed to sink its teeth into me. I had also never bitten anyone either, although I had no plans on mentioning that at this point in time. He sighed, "Well, we better start walking before it gets dark out. I don't fancy spending a night under the stars." He took the lead and the rest of us followed him. No zombies were in sight at the moment and I was glad that I had those crowbars. I carefully inspected the three new members of this crazy party while I pretended to scan the treeline. I was glad for my sunglasses, they wouldn't be able to see me looking at them and I took care to never face them directly. I didn't see or scent any guns, which was a relief. Hank was a huge man and packed a huge two handed sword with ease. Ben was leaner and had a baseball bat along with several knives. Nicky had several knives and a sword that would have fit into a pirate movie perfectly. Liz looked around before commenting, "Why aren't we walking in the trees like before to avoid the zombies?" I remained silent and the lady turned around, "What is she talking about?" I turned my head so I was clearly looking at Nicky, "Normally those who travel on foot walk just inside the treeline. Zombies can't see or smell you easily so you can pass by the majority of them with no problem." Ben had stopped to watch our conversation, "And this works?" Another group with no real zombie evasion experience outside of the classic hit-the-gas-and-drive strategy. This trip just gets better and better... I reined in my temper and nodded, "We walked for two solid days and saw dozens of zombies. None of them noticed us." Nicky scratched her head and huffed, "Well, if you know what you are doing, lead the way. If it keeps zombies away then I am willing to try it." I had noticed that she had been getting grumpier as we kept walking. I had an odd feeling that her temper was a close match for mine if she got angry.  Their scents were human and untainted, so she couldn't even blame her mood on the virus. This could be an interesting trip. I headed for the trees. The others followed, Tom and Marissa with familiarity, the other three with reluctance and suspicion. It worked though. The first zombie had made them very nervous, but we had passed by half a dozen of the mindless cretins by now. I could smell more zombies and human buildings ahead. "I haven't seen a map the last few days, but I am pretty sure we should be approaching a town soon." Ben grunted, "Good. We can hole up in a building for the night." I slowed as we neared the edge of the trees, the small town was in plain sight at this point. I saw one zombie, but that was it. I could smell a few more in the area though. Thankfully there was no scent of a Runner. My eyes zoned in on the grocery store. Food was still on the shelves. Movement inside explained why it was left untouched, there was at least one zombie in there. Tom and Marissa stood nervously near the back while Ben and Nicky came forward. Ben frowned, "I see at least one zombie. Any idea which building we are going to target?" Nicky eyed up the town, "We have no supplies, so something with food. Any idea if that grocery store is safe?" I kept my voice low, "I have some experience in clearing stores, I can check it if you want." Ben glanced at me in surprise and I could feel Hank's suspicious stare from behind. Nicky looked at me speculatively, "Well, if you are up for it, then go for it." I nodded and put Liz down. I headed further along the treeline and whistled, "Chloe, come." Chloe joined me with a reluctant glance backwards. I was somewhat surprised that she had come with me so easily. Once I was across from the store, I exited the trees. I jogged across the parking lot and started banging on the windows and doors. Two zombies came down the streets at the noise and two appeared at the door. My casual human-like stance and Chloe's presence had them convinced that I was human. My contact with Liz had also rubbed her scent off on me. I kept banging until I was sure that no others were hidden in the back. I yanked the door open and ran while Chloe barked her dislike of the approaching zombies. I started jogging at a good clip down the street away from the hidden humans. My four new followers were hot on my trail as I led them away. I headed to the spray park, it had a tall twelve foot fence surrounding it. It should be sufficient to contain normal zombies. I opened one door and left it open as I ran across the spray park. They followed me inside and I quickly left via a second door. After Chloe was out, I closed it and bolted it shut. I quickly ran to the first entrance and closed it as well. I jogged halfway back to the grocery store before stopping to look back and double check that the zombies were going to stay put. I had known by sound that they were stuck inside, but I was well aware of my audience and had to keep up appearances. They pushed on the chain link, but that was it. Regular zombies rarely climbed up fences if they could see through them. Good enough for me. I headed back to the grocery store and banged on the door again. I could see the others hiding in the trees with shocked or surprised expressions. The heavily built man was watching me with a closed expression. I didn't think I had heard him talk once despite walking for over four hours. Nothing else came out of the store and I crept into it slowly. It was more for show, my nose told me that two different zombies had been in here and I had removed two. Nonetheless, I checked every aisle and the back storage area. It was all clear now.

 

Chapter 6


 I came back out and waved at the survivors. They left the trees and headed towards me. Ben looked at the store with watchful eyes, "Are you sure there are no more zombies in there?" I nodded, "I checked every aisle and the back area. Chloe was with me and she didn't find anything either." Ben nodded at Hank, who drew his sword and entered the store. We waited by the entrance with an eye on our surroundings. A minute later Hank reappeared with his sword sheathed and waved us over. We all entered the grocery store and Hank ensured that the door was closed and secured behind us. He had ripped a metal handle off a mop bucket and twisted the piece of metal around the handles like a twist tie. I was somewhat impressed at his ingenuity. I also made a mental note to dodge any punch he may throw my way. That big boy could possibly do some damage. The group enthusiastically scoured the store to pick out their favorites. We all seemed to gather in the open produce area just to the side of the main door. Hank had shoved the produce stands to form an open square in one corner. As soon as I sat down on the floor, Liz came to take up residence in my lap. Marissa had a big pot of noodles soaking in cold water. I glanced at the Mr. Noodle wrappers, that type didn't really need cooking and I had even eaten them dry on some occasions. I grabbed my scavenged can opener and picked out a can of pineapple. It had been a long time since I had found pineapple. I slowly savored the fruit while Tom and Marissa talked with Ben. Nicky occasionally put in her two cents, usually with a sarcastic twist. The children, Hank, and myself remained silent and simply listened. Ben looked over at me, "Do you plan on ever taking off those sunglasses?" He had been glancing at me on and off all evening. My answer was short and clipped, "No." He frowned, "And why not?" I exhaled in irritation at his obsession with my sunglasses, "I have some eye damage and any reflection of light causes me problems. Even the glint of the sun reflecting off of those shiny cans on the shelf would be an issue if I took them off." He snorted, "Right. I bet it is just your way of looking cool." I had to clamp down on my temper. His tone was setting off my instincts and they wanted to put him in his place. I turned my head to face him and kept my voice aloof, "I lured four zombies into a spray park and lived in a remote cabin for months, why would I need sunglasses to look cool?" Nicky snickered, "I think I have to get some sunglasses. Perhaps it will give me that dangerous aura that you somehow give off while just sitting there." I knew I wouldn't be able to manage a poker face with her comment so I simply smirked at her. Which she found hilarious. I thought that I had been hiding my Nightstalker side very well, so I was surprised when she had mentioned that I had a dangerous aura. Guess I had better work on that if I wanted to blend in. Ben shook his head, "You two are just far too alike." Nicky grinned at his comment while I kept the smirk plastered on my face as I wondered what the hell he meant. Other than being a bit grouchy, I didn't think Nicky and I had anything in common other than the fact that we were short. Nicky finished her trailbar and got up to walk over to the turning display of sunglasses. Nicky tried on a couple pairs and struck a pose, "Hey Hank, do these make me look sexy or dangerous?" Hank merely shrugged with disinterest. I noticed that Marissa was turning red in embarrassment. Ben shook his head with a grin, "Like an old granny." The pair of sunglasses bounced off of his head as Nicky turned back to the display. She talked to herself and to us while she debated the pros and cons of each pair of sunglasses.

After half an hour she finally settled on a pair with reflective blueish lenses that hid her eyes completely and fit comfortably. I was glad when she finally picked one. Her constant sarcastic remarks and pointless comments were wearing on my remaining shreds of patience like a grater on a block of cheese. She headed off for the cleaning supplies so she could clean her new accessory. Marissa stood up, "Liz, Josh, come on, let's go to the bathroom before we get ready for bed." Tom tagged along with them, which left me with just Hank and Ben. Ben seemed to be a player and I bet the absence of the children would bring it out. Oh, Joy. Ben turned to me with a smirk, "I bet you wear those glasses as a shield, because deep down you are just shy and scared." His theory wasn't even in the same solar system as the truth. I snorted in derision, "Not even close." He frowned, "You sure have a chip on your shoulder, don't you?" I shrugged in dismissal, "Put it down to me being anti-social." My tone plainly said that I didn't care about his opinion. "What do you think you are going to do in a Stronghold? They often hold a couple hundred people. You keep acting like that and someone will clean your clock for you." I gazed out the window, "I won't be staying. I am simply making sure that the children get there and I am heading back to my cabin in the remote forest." He shook his head in disbelief, "You may be able to trick and evade those common zombies, but a Runner can chase you down. If you cross the path of a Nightstalker or a Terror, nothing is going to help you." I shrugged in indifference, I wasn't overly concerned. Feral Nightstalkers traveled alone and my control gave me the upper hand against them since I could use weapons. If I played passive, they wouldn't even challenge me. I had never seen a Terror before and if they were feral, they would count me among the zombie population and ignore me if I didn't challenge them. "Maybe if I give you a kiss you will change your mind?" I turned to level a glare at Ben before glancing at Hank, "Will you object if I knocked your friend out? He seems delusional and some sleep might help him." Ben made some sort of unidentifiable noise as Hank pretended to consider my question. Hank eventually nodded that he would object and Ben grinned triumphantly, "Ah ha, I knew Hank wouldn't let me down!" I rolled my eyes and looked up at the ceiling in exasperation since they wouldn't be able to see my eyes. My voice dripped with sarcasm, "This day just gets better and better..." Ben grinned at me, "Come on, don't be like that. A kiss or two from a handsome guy would cheer you right up!" I snorted, "Yeah, well those are in rather short supply since the outbreak. Let me know if you see one walk by." Hank chuckled as Ben cringed. He set himself up for that one... Ben finally fell silent. I pulled one knee up and slung my arm on it before resting my chin on my arm. The peace and quiet was short lived as Nicky's voice broke the silence, "That is one hell of a pose! You look like you don't give a shit about what those two think and yet you look ready for action!" I lifted my head to examine the slender fighter who was staring at me as if committing my pose to memory. I glanced at Ben, "What did you spike her water with?" He sighed, "I wish that energy was something we could bottle. She is either a little spitfire of energy or Miss Crankypants - and we don't get to choose which, so enjoy this while you can." He barely managed to dodge a can of soup as it whizzed past his head. The second one clipped his shoulder. The third one bounced off the wall above his head as he ducked and ricocheted towards me. Some days Nightstalker reaction times were an excellent asset. I had time to see it coming and raise my hand to catch the spinning soup can before it could hit my head.

Nicky stopped her assault to gape at me, "Shit! Awesome catch!" I lightly tossed the can back at her and she caught it in confusion. I stood up and walked towards her, "It works better if you pretend to throw it like a knife." I kept walking past her. She looked back at me in confusion, "Where are you going?" I chuckled darkly with a glance back, "To get you more ammo. Hank may not let me knock Ben out, but he doesn't seem to object to you throwing stuff. Besides, if you practice on him, it will be easier to peg slower zombies." A wide grin split across her face before she looked back at a wide eyed Ben, "Okay, I like her." Hank started chuckling again. I rounded the shelf as I heard more thunks as cans missed. "Hey!" "Ouch! That one-" "Ah!" By the time I headed back his complaints had become more frequent, showing that Nicky's aim was improving. I dropped my haul on the now empty shelf. Nicky turned to examine what I had brought as her grin somehow got even bigger. Hank started chuckling again, I noticed that he had moved away from Ben to avoid being caught in the cross fire. "What the hell is that for?!" I grinned maliciously at Ben, "It is amazing what you can use against a zombie. This will help improve Nicky's aim. Just look how much better she got in just a few minutes." His eyes were round, "You want her to whip one liter cans of tomato juice at me?! I am not even sure I want to know what the bars of soap or the cans of pringles are for." Nicky rubbed her hands together gleefully before she tested the weight of one of the large cans. Ben watched her with a rather nervous expression. I chuckled, thoroughly enjoying his predicament, "The bigger the can, the more damage it can do, but it takes a lot of practice to throw one properly. Bars of soap are common missiles found in any house or bathroom. Get one in a zombie's mouth and it will be distracted for several minutes as it tries to get the taste out of its mouth. One can of chips is for me, since I prefer pringles over popcorn. One is for Hank so he can also enjoy the upcoming show and the other is for Nicky once she is done." Ben jumped to his feet and bolted down an aisle seeking safety, "Get me away from these crazy people!" "Hey! Get back here! I haven't had a chance to throw one of these big cans yet!" Nicky took off in hot pursuit with a large can of tomato juice in her hands. I went back to my original seat. I tossed one can to Hank, who caught it easily. I opened my own can as I leaned back to watch the spectacle. I popped one in my mouth and Chloe came to sit by me. That surprised me, she was well within reach, which was highly unusual. I offered her a chip, which she took greedily. I dug around in my backpack for those dog treats that were near the bottom and handed her one. This one would take her a while to chew. Ben rounded the corner of the aisle and ran down another one. Nicky had backtracked and cut him off. She threw her can, which Ben managed to dodge. "Shit! I missed! Get back here! I obviously need more practice!" I commented idly, "She really is a loose cannon, isn't she?" Hank's deep amused chuckle told me that this wasn't exactly a new situation. Ben managed to lock himself in the bathroom while Nicky turned the can into a mini battering ram. "Open up the door! I can't throw shit at you if you are hiding in there!" "That is the point!" I looked out the window before calling out in a low voice, "Nicky, there is a zombie on the street. Please keep the noise down while you kill him, we don't want to attract too much attention." "Will do." The loud banging was replaced by quieter noises as she tried to force the doorknob while attempting to convince Ben to show himself. Marissa and Tom were sure taking their sweet time in the other bathrooms. Perhaps they didn't want to be in the store front while Nicky was on a rampage. I turned to look at Hank and kept my voice low, "Do we tell her that the keys for those doors are hanging behind the till?" He shook his head, "Nah, if she gets grumpy it gives us a safe spot." His voice was very deep. I was somewhat surprised that he had spoken since he hadn't said anything yet. I nodded and ate another pringle. The silence between us was comfortable, neither of us really liked talking. Having Ben in hiding put me in a better mood as well. Nicky eventually gave up and came over to claim the last can I had brought before she sat against the wall beside me. She turned to me with curious eyes as she opened up her can, "So where did you learn to lure zombies off like that?" I shrugged, "Watched another group of people do it." "Any tricks for a Runner?" I sighed, "Have really good aim and throw a crowbar, it can crush their skull enough to knock them out. In a tight spot a glass of bleach in the face gives you a few seconds." She mumbled, "I will have to remember that one. I was wondering why you were carrying so many crowbars." I didn't bother answering. I wanted a breath of fresh air untainted by their scent, but it simply wasn't possible tonight. The back doors had been chained shut by the previous owner and they would see me leave the front. Good thing I had hunted every night so far, one night without hunting shouldn't be too bad.

 

Chapter 7

            I wasn't used to anyone putting limits on what I wanted to do. I stared at Ben with disbelief, "You want to wait in here until someone drives by?" He shrugged as if it was logical, "This road has someone travelling on it at least once a week from what we heard. It beats skulking in the forest hoping to avoid becoming a zombie snack. It is much safer to remain inside." I rubbed my forehead as my irritation built. I wanted to growl at him so badly, but managed to merely grumble, "Then let me outside so I can check to see if any of the vehicles run. I will go mad if I am cooped up in here for days on end." He shook his head, "No, if anyone leaves, it could lead zombies to us. We will wait here. We have lots of food." He must have been trying to test my patience. "Just let me out. I will wait out there until either someone comes by or you give up on your waiting game. Even if someone did come, you wouldn't be able to undo that metal twist in time to flag them down." He shook his head, "Hank can undo it quickly enough. And no, no one is leaving." I stilled as I faced him. His words were a challenge and they hit my instincts like gasoline on a fire. Hank seemed to sense that Ben had overstepped an invisible boundary and got up to stand behind Ben with arms folded. I turned my head slightly to examine the massive man. Had I been human, I would have been shaking in my boots. What he didn't realize was that he was like a mouse glaring at a cat. I grabbed my control with both hands as I turned around with a pissed off huff and silently stormed off to the back of the store. It was not wise for me to be around them at the moment while I was so angry. I knew that my eyes would be glowing very strongly in my current mood, a warning that was invisible to them. I glared at the solid chains on the back door, each link was as big as my fist. Even my Nightstalker strength wouldn't be able to damage them. I shimmied up the various pipes until I got into the rafters. I sat up there on the narrow metal rafter supports while I fought my temper back down to something that was safe for the humans to be around. Part of my temper was due to the strengthening smell of humans in the building and part of it was the fact that I hadn't hunted last night. The largest part was that he had stomped on the Nightstalker instincts in such a way that they wanted to retaliate. Hours later I came down. Liz was sitting on a box below, simply waiting for me to come down. She took my hand and pulled me forward. I let her, she had sat patiently for three hours once she managed to find me. She had recruited Nicky to help find me and even with both of them scouring the tiny store, it had taken them almost 20 minutes to locate me on my unusual perch. She led me back to the others as I stifled a sigh. I still wasn't exactly in the mood for company. I still sat down in my usual place and Liz crawled back into my lap. Ben's ego was overinflated from our last encounter, "I am amazed that you didn't fall out of those rafters with those sunglasses on. No need to hide behind them. I will like you just as much without them." This guy is getting on my nerves. I wasn't in the mood to put up with him right now. I glanced down at Liz and pointed to a pencil beside her, "Can I borrow this?" She smiled sweetly at me, "Sure." "Thanks." In a lightning fast move I grabbed it and whipped it just off to the side of Ben without even looking up. I watched them out of the corner of my eye as I slowly turned to face them. Ben was looking at the pencil that had lodged itself in the drywall not far from him. Hank had tensed up with a hand on his knife. Nicky had her hand on her sword, waiting to see if her help was needed. 

Ben turned his head to look at me, "You missed." He was trying for bravado, but his voice was shaking. He also stunk of sudden fear. I snorted, "There is a line drawn there and I aimed for that. My temper has a short line and you are about that close to crossing it buddy." Ben and Hank glanced over at the pencil again and realized that I had hit a line that someone had drawn onto the wall with a pen. Neither of them spoke. Nicky was watching me closely with some emotion I couldn't identify. Tom and Marissa seemed surprised and uneasy at my display of temper. Liz frowned at her pencil that now resided in the wall, "Well, they can keep that pencil. There were more on the shelf, I will go get them." She bounded out of my lap and ran down an aisle on the far side of the store. Hank regarded me silently. Ben frowned, but didn't say anything. Perhaps he was finally learning some speck of wisdom. I am not holding my breath waiting for that to occur. Liz came back swiftly enough with a package of pencils. She plopped back in my lap. She tried to pull the box lid open, "Ouch." I closed my eyes as the scent of her blood hit my senses with a shock that reminded me of being ambushed with a bucket of ice water. A few seconds later I had myself mostly under control. I opened my eyes to see her examining a cardboard cut on her finger that was seeping a few drops of blood. Thankfully it wasn't deep or it would have bled more. I kept a careful grip on my control. I was surprised that she wasn't crying. Instead she was inspecting the growing drops of blood with an interest that bordered on fascination. I sighed and grabbed a napkin from beside me to wrap around her finger. Marissa tossed me something and I caught it, it was a box of bandaids. I pulled a larger one out. The better we sealed it, the better off I would be. I helped her bandage it up. I put the napkin in an empty pie tin and lit a match before setting the napkin on fire. I shifted Liz out of my lap and got up to go down the nearby aisle for something I had seen earlier. I undid the bottle of bleach and started pouring a thin line around the entire perimeter of the store. Marissa looked at me as if I had gone nuts, "What are you doing?" These people knew nothing about zombies... I sighed, "The smell of blood can lure in zombies quite easily. Between burning the napkin and pouring the bleach along any possible gap, it should cover the scent of her blood." The sharp fumes should also help me retain my control. The smell of her blood had been brutal and I had not expected it. I had remained in control though, that was the main thing. I was glad it was just a small papercut and that someone hadn't slipped with a knife and inflicted a larger injury. Looks of shock or surprise crossed their faces. I paused to examine them, "Please don't tell me that such a thought never crossed your minds." All the adults shook their heads. I gritted my teeth, I was surrounded by idiots. Who, apparently, wanted to sign their own death warrants. I finished the perimeter and dropped the bottle in front of Ben. I gestured to the back of the store, "Split that bottle between the toilets and pour some down the sink drains and in the corners of the rooms. It should mask the smell in there for a few days." I went to sit back down and Liz promptly climbed back into my lap. Ben opened and closed his mouth a few times before he grudgingly got up and took the bottle to the back. The one room had a shower and Ben had somehow convinced Chloe to use it for her business. It really needed something to help with the smell. Nicky started snickering, "Oh, did you see his face?! Priceless!" I chuckled, pleased that I had made him do something he didn't want to do. It helped ease the irritation. Nicky gaped at me, "Wow, how do you get your teeth so white?"

For having the most bizarre form of humor I had ever seen, that lady was far too perceptive. I grinned at her to hide my surprise, "The crest white stripes are down Aisle 4." She blinked in shock, "How many boxes did you use?!" I shrugged and didn't reply. She glanced over her shoulder before heading to aisle 4. I was somewhat dismayed that she had noticed my white teeth. It was something all zombies had in common, our teeth had no stains and remained white enough to make any model jealous. I was glad that she didn't realize that my canines were slightly longer than usual. They were also razor sharp, but she wouldn't know that unless she came into contact with them. I helped Liz color various pictures to pass the time. The time was passing far too slowly. I tried drinking a can of tomato juice, hoping the iron rich liquid would help with my craving. The big can did help a bit, but nothing substantial. I hoped that I could sneak out during the night. The craving was getting uncomfortable and the heat in my blood was getting more noticeable. I was growing accustomed to the constant burn in the back of my throat, but it was getting worse. Ben was still a pain in my ass. "Come on, the sun has dropped behind the horizon. Nothing in here is reflecting any light. " I groaned, "You don't give up, do you?" "No." I leveled a glare at him, not that he could see my eyes, but my facial expression would give it away, "And if I take off my glasses for a few moments, will you drop the subject permanently?" He perked up, "Certainly." Liar. I highly doubted his claim. I eyed him up, "If you shine a flashlight at me, not even Hank will be able to protect you." Ben held up his empty hands, "I am innocent on that front." I could control my eye color somewhat if I wasn't too worked up. I suppressed the red coloration that came with the heat and the Nightstalker instincts. At this point they would be a rather dark burnt orange color that could easily be mistaken for brown in this low light. Considering that the room was almost completely dark by human standards, I wasn't sure what he planned on seeing. I slowly reached up and removed my sunglasses for the first time in three days. I blinked slowly in what I considered to be painfully bright light. I composed my face so they wouldn't be able to see my discomfort and pain. I raised my eyebrow at Ben, "Happy now?" If he didn't know I was irritated before, he certainly did now. Allowing him to make me do something that I didn't want to do was putting me in a worse mood. He was obviously too dense to realize that his actions were the main trigger of my short temper. He grinned, "Yep. That wasn't so hard, was it?" It was official. He clearly didn't know when to quit. He was like a chicken strutting around in a KFC parking lot. He thought he might have just been taunting the people in the restaurant, but he didn't realize that the drivers in the parking lot were the true danger. I snorted and put my glasses back on. The room may have been quite dark by human standards, but it was very bright for me. "I hope you enjoyed it because it isn't going to happen again." He chuckled as he rubbed his hands together, "We'll see, we'll see. We cracked your defenses, so we will just have to keep working on them until we get to your soft heart." I am beginning to think that he is a few bricks short of a garden wall. I leaned back against the wall and didn't answer in my growing anger. I had suspected that he wouldn't leave my sunglasses alone if I took them off once. He grinned and pressed his luck, "Not even a reply, shows that I am right. We will break through your shell yet." I exhaled loudly in irritation, "Go to sleep Ben, you are getting on my nerves." He chuckled and opened his mouth yet again. I interrupted him, "Not another word, or else." He smirked, "Or else what?" I grinned at him in a slightly predatory manner, "Or else I will show Nicky how to pick the lock on that bathroom door." He immediately lay down in his sleeping bag and was silent. I silently grinned at his sudden obedience. Nicky was also grinning, "You can show me anyways. That way he can't hide. Love that grin by the way, it reminded me of the big bad wolf that was ready to rip its prey's throat out." I turned to look at her in surprise, trying to hide my unease, "How do you even come up with such analogies?" I wished she would keep them silent, in case someone started to connect the dots. She shrugged, "I have a gift for that sort of thing." I shook my head and draped a blanket over my shoulders. I rested sitting up with my back against the wall, as I had pretended to sleep last night. I had managed to get half an hour of restless sleep last night, but I knew that my desire for blood was too strong to allow sleep to come tonight. It confused the others, but they ignored my odd sleeping position without comment. Liz cuddled up to me as she slept. One by one most of the others fell asleep. This didn't help me though, since our three recent companions took turns on watch as they had last night. Once the last hint of the sun had disappeared I felt my Nightstalker instincts become stronger. They always did at night. I wanted to run through the forest and hunt. Even the thought of putting a Runner in its place sounded good. That was my altered human mind's preferences; my instincts were more than happy to remain here if I could sink my teeth into the humans' flesh. I refused to go down that route, so I had to sit here and pretend to sleep. It chafed against my waning patience and I was having to work harder for control. Why did I have to get mixed up with a bunch of humans? Right, my human heart wanted to help. I wasn't sure how much longer my humanity could cover up the monster hidden within. It wasn't something that was easy to hide for even a short time. With a sigh I got up to walk silently over to Nicky, who was on watch. I crouched down by her, "What are the odds of you letting me out for an hour? I am getting cabin fever in here something fierce." She shook her head, "No can do. I can't even undo that piece of metal." I glanced at the door, "I can undo it." She sighed, "But I can't do it back up once you are out. Sorry, go back to sleep." I went back to my spot. It had been worth a try. I would have to try during the day again.

 

Chapter 8

            I watched as Ben headed towards the bathroom. I turned to Hank, "The longer we sit here, the more our scent is ingrained into the building. How about you let me out so I can go check for a car that runs?" He shook his head without even considering the matter. He must be smart enough to know that chances of finding a working vehicle were slim to none. I sighed as my temper went downhill, "Okay, how about I undo that twist and you can do it up once I am outside?" He narrowed his eyes at me and got up. For a moment I thought he was about to let me out, but he simply sat in front of the doors. Blocking any attempt I might make. I gritted my teeth to keep from snarling at him. My mood was already pretty bad from the growing bloodlust and I knew it was just going to get worse as the day wore on. Ben came back and frowned at Hank, "Why are you sitting there?" Hank glanced over at me as I fumed in my usual spot. "She was intending to leave. She seemed pretty certain that she could undo what I did to secure the door." Ben looked at me in irritation, "What is with you? Just stay inside, we aren't that bad." I turned my head to glare at him, "I would rather entertain a zombie than be stuck in here with you." Ben gritted his teeth as he turned to me. He was obviously ready to take out his anger on me, but Hank gently kicked him in the ankle from where he sat, "Let her be. I know she is feeling cooped up and I suspect she has problems with claustrophobia." That surprised me. I had never thought that Hank might attempt to defend me, especially when I was in such a rotten mood. Ben visibly fought with himself to prevent from lashing out verbally before he stormed off. I remained silent as I sat where I was. Ben returned an hour later, although he didn't speak to me. If he thought giving me the cold shoulder was going to bother me, he was mistaken. I enjoyed his sullen silence. It was getting extremely hard to remain patient with Liz, who was innocently naive about the mood around us. Chloe wasn't fooled and gave me more space than she usually did. I hope that someone drives by so we can get to a Stronghold today. Then I can leave. My hopes were unanswered though. I had been listening carefully for any hint of a motor with no success. No travelers were out and about today. The sun started dipping below the horizon. This wasn't good. My control was getting shaky and once my Nightstalker instincts got stronger there was a good chance I would lose control with so many humans so close to me. The bloodlust and heat in my veins was a constant burning presence. I had tried several times throughout the day to get them to let me go out, to no avail. At this point I only had two choices left and I wasn't fond of either of them. I got to my feet and put my backpack on. Ben narrowed his eyes at me, "And just where do you think you are going?" I didn't answer and Hank got to his feet as he stood in front of the door. Ben jumped over the display and stood beside Hank with his hand on his knife. I stopped in front of them, "Move. I am going out." My no-nonsense tone clearly said that I wasn't going to compromise. I was done playing politely by their human rules. Hank frowned, "Go to sleep. Morning will come soon enough." I gazed steadily at him, refusing to back down, "Not soon enough. I have to go out." Ben shook his head, "It is getting dark out already. It is too dangerous." For humans, going out at night was a suicide mission. They just didn't know that I didn't fit into that category. I gritted my teeth and my voice practically growled, "Move." Hank examined me, "You would have to give us an extremely good reason considering that zombies could follow you back." He seemed to realize that something wasn't adding up. Normal humans never wanted to go outside at night.

My voice was cool and clipped, "I would rather kill a deer as opposed to one of you." A bit dramatic, but it was true. Ben snorted, "There is canned meat over in that aisle. Get away from the door." The others were watching in confusion, possibly wondering if I was losing my mind. They may hate me after this, but at least they would be alive. I reached up to pull off my sunglasses and opened up my eyes. My red hazed vision was no longer hampered by the tint of the sunglasses and it was dark enough that I could open my eyes without too much pain. The two in front of me froze in complete shock. My eyes would be glowing red at this point with the bloodlust raging in my veins. I blinked slowly at them. My voice was rough, "Move. I am not joking when I say that I need to go out." I waited where I was. Oddly enough, my Nightstalker instincts had the ability to wait patiently in certain circumstances. Faced with two humans who had just realized that I wasn't human, my patience was endless as I watched their reaction with viewpoint of a top predator about to go on a hunt. They took slow steps to the side. I walked forward and with three twists the metal bucket handle was undone. The others hadn't been able to see my eyes from their angle. Nicky was confused, "Why are you letting her out now? She could get killed out there!" Neither of the men answered her, they were possibly still in shock. I tossed the piece of metal to Hank as I opened the door. I paused, "You can decide whether or not you want to let me back in later on. I will knock, if you open the door, fine. If not, I will remain outside." I left and put my sunglasses back on. I glanced back and both men still wore shocked expressions as they watched me. The five zombies on the street headed towards me and I started jogging like a human as I lured them down the street and away from the humans. Once we were well away from town I picked up speed and entered the forest while testing the air. I wanted blood. I was in no mood for a mere rabbit either. A sharp tang in the air guided me to a more substantial meal. It had been a long time since I had come across an elk. I attacked it so fast that it had no clue that it was actually in danger. I drained its blood and relished the warm taste. My mood noticeably improved even though my Nightstalker instincts were truly awake since the sun had set. I raised my head to the moon and let out a Nightstalker shriek that echoed throughout the night. Much like a victory cry, it was an announcement to the world that a Nightstalker ruled this part of the forest. I rarely had engaged in such sound effects in the past, but the feral Nightstalkers often let loose such cries once or twice a night. The large feed after going thirsty for so long in combination with the full moon was triggering such instincts. It was somewhat like a cougar's nighttime scream. It would make any animals a bit uneasy for a day or two and probably scare any human who heard it. I doubted that those in the grocery store would have heard it. I was a long ways away from the town. I started running through the forest until I found the road.  I followed it for several hours at a jogging pace before turning back. Lots of tracks and broken sticks showed that this road was frequently used, but I hadn't seen any sign of a Stronghold. My run had covered enough ground that it would take the humans all day to walk that far. Chances of me getting them to attempt walking again were slim. I returned to the small town. I checked each vehicle for keys and I tried to start those that had keys with no luck. I tapped the gas tanks, but all had been drained and echoed back hollowly at me. I headed for the residential section. I saw a large 4x4 jacked up truck in a driveway. A quick tap on the gas tank showed that this truck actually had gas in it. It almost surprised me since all the others had been empty. The keys weren't inside the truck, but were likely in the house. 

I tried the door knob, but it was locked. A quick sniff told me that no humans or zombies hid inside. I took a step back before giving the door a powerful kick. The doorframe by the lock splintered as the wood gave way, allowing the badly damaged door to swing open. With a huff I walked inside while glancing around. There was a key hanger with several sets of keys on the wall right in the hallway. I pressed the remotes until I heard the truck unlock. I took that set of keys and stuck them in my pocket. I remembered my ride in the back of the truck and headed down the hallway. The second bedroom had a bed of the proper size. I grabbed the mattress and blankets and hauled them out into the back of the truck. I jumped into the driver's seat and twisted the key in the ignition. The truck gave a deafening roar as it came to life after its long hibernation. I backed out of the driveway and headed towards the store. Four faces were at the door watching. Marissa was out of sight with the kids somewhere. No zombies had come back yet, although that didn't surprise me. I parked it on the road in front of the store and turned it off. I pocketed the keys and got out of the truck. I slowly approached the door of the grocery store. My sunglasses were back on. Hank and Ben held their ground by the door while Nicky watched almost eagerly from further back. Tom had backed up with my approach and was well off to the side now. I paused in front of the glass doors as I looked at those watching me. "Did I scare you guys shitless or are you still willing to put up with me?" They would have no problem hearing me with just two old glass doors separating us. Hank slowly pushed the door open. I put out my hand to hold it open and slowly walked in. I was being cautious, lest they try to kill me with an ambush. Nicky came forward with a grin, "So, what is the casualty count?" I somehow doubted that she believed the story that the guys gave her. I chuckled, "There is one less elk in the forest, but that is about it." For them, the room would be almost pitch black since it was well past midnight, but I could see them perfectly. She came forward fearlessly, almost eagerly, "Can I see your eyes? Ben kept claiming that they were glowing red. I think he needs his vision checked." I had kind of expected this. With a sigh I reached up and took my glasses off. I kept my eyes at a faint glow, but didn't alter their red color. She blinked in shock, "Wow. That is so cool. How come they were brown yesterday?" I gave her a confused look, how could she accept this so easily? Most humans put as much distance between themselves and me as possible. "I can control the color and glow to a certain extent." Ben turned on a small flashlight and pointed it at the ceiling to allow them to see easier. The small amount of light it emitted was uncomfortable, but tolerable. At least he didn't point it at me, which was a good thing. Having a light pointed at me flared up my temper in a fashion that little else could. Nicky's excitement only climbed as she bombarded me with questions, "How long have you been a zombie? How come you can talk and the others can't? Are you always grouchy because you are a zombie? I have a hard time believing you are a zombie considering you haven't tried to eat us yet." I watched her until she had to pause for breath. My red eyes didn't bother her in the least. "I turned about a week after the zombies first appeared. I can talk because I am still in control. Yes, the irritability is common in all zombies. I don't attack humans mindlessly because I am in control. For me to actually eat human blood or flesh would reduce me to a mindless zombie." I restrained my irritation at the bombardment of questions and kept my answers as patient as I could. They had let me in after all, so they didn't expect me to lunge for their throats. I knew that knowledge often dissipated fears so my answers should calm them a bit. 

The others looked surprised at my answers, but Nicky was already rattling off more questions, "How come you are in control while the others are all deranged morons? Yeah, I wouldn't eat Ben either. Insanity is contagious and considering how that bathroom stunk after he was in it, you know he would give you food poisoning. How come you had to go out so badly? If I got bitten by a zombie, how do I remain in control too?" This could be a long night. I was so full from the elk that even the powerful smell of seven humans barely bothered me. That was a good side effect as far as I was concerned. "The regular zombies have no chance of retaining their sanity. They are insane by default. For the other types of zombies, as long as you can avoid human blood, human flesh, or any raw meat you can remain in control. Many don't realize the dangers and when you first come to after turning you crave raw meat and blood." Nicky was still staring into my red eyes with all of the excitement of a hyperactive child, "But why did you have to go out? There was lots of other food in here. What did you mean by there was one less elk in the forest?" Here we go... I sighed, "Sanity is shattered by human flesh, human blood, or any type of raw meat. To remain in control a zombie still needs blood from other animals. I had to go out because my control was waning and I had to hunt. I drained the elk of its blood, so I am in full control again." Marissa made a face and Tom looked pale. Nicky's excitement flew through the roof, "Like a vampire! Awesome!" I blinked in confusion at her wild excitement. This girl was definitely off her rocker. And had possibly fallen on her head. Several times. Hank was watching me closely, "You are too coordinated for a Runner. Are you a Nightstalker or a Terror?" Ben's eyes got wider at Hank's question. I nodded at Hank's keen observation, "Nightstalker." Nicky spun to face Ben with an evil smile, "Still feel like kissing her?" Ben rapidly shook his head. I chuckled at his sudden change of heart. "You should be proud Ben, you managed to piss off a Nightstalker at least three times in three days and you still live. Not many can claim that feat." Nicky shook her head, "You don't act much like any zombie I ever heard of." "I was acting as human as I could. Now that you know, I won't be trying so hard. So don't be surprised if I growl or snarl at you. It is as natural for me as breathing is for you." Nicky grinned at me, "As irritable as you seem, I have a feeling I will be hearing more growling than laughter." I bared my teeth in a parody of a grin, my white teeth showing even in the darkness as proof of how true her words were. I was a zombie. Nicky grimaced, "Just give me warning before you eat me." I snorted, "I have no plans on eating you." Especially her, just in case whatever was wrong with her was contagious... Hank gave Nicky a confused look, "You can't outrun a Nightstalker, what good would a warning do?" Nicky grinned at him, "I would drink every drop of hot sauce in this place and give her indigestion as revenge." I sat on the bench behind me to see if it would help relax those watching me, "Wouldn't do you any good. You can't give a zombie indigestion or poison them. It simply isn't possible." Nicky pouted, "You ruin all of my fun." Liz sat up from her bed in the corner, obviously just waking up as she blinked sleepily around. She spotted me, "Trinity?" I nodded, "Yes, it's me." I wasn't sure how the girl would react with my red glowing eyes visible in the darkness. I just hoped she wouldn't start screaming about zombies and freak out. She promptly stood up with her blanket and walked over to climb into my lap, much to my surprise. The adults all tensed up as Liz curled up in my lap and pulled her blanket over herself. Nicky was the only one who seemed unconcerned. I held Liz as she swiftly fell asleep again. Hank lifted his head, "That was how you knew to evade all of those zombies and keep our scent down. It was because you were a zombie." I nodded in confirmation. He furrowed his eyebrows in thought, "I saw you tense up a bit when Liz cut herself, but didn't think much of it then. The smell of her blood affected you, didn't it?" I exhaled, "Yes. The mere scent of humans is a temptation, but I can easily ignore that as long as I hunt regularly. Fresh blood is much worse, the smell of it makes my throat burn somewhat and only blood can ease the burn. I wasn't expecting her to cut herself, let alone in my lap when I hadn't hunted for two days. I took a few seconds to ensure that I was in control and wouldn't slip." Marissa got suddenly pale as she realized the danger that the child had been in. People from the orphanages had always been worried about negligent or abusive parents. Bad parents had nothing on me. I could have easily killed and eaten the child over a paper cut. I set a whole new definition for bad parenting. Marissa slowly stood up and came over, "Can I please take her? No offense, but I just need some time to adjust and prefer her in my arms for now." I held out the child and she came closer with a nervous watch on my red eyes. I spoke quietly, "Had I truly wished you harm, I wouldn't have killed that Runner that was coming up behind you when you were fending off the other four zombies. That first night you all slept so hard that if it wasn't for the snoring, I would have thought that you were dead. Yet you all still live." She nodded slowly as she took Liz and backed up. Her mind was now working and fear was no longer the center of her attention. I was pretty sure I had seriously rattled her though. She would likely start avoiding me, which was typical behavior for most humans. Nicky yawned, "Well, if you aren't going to kill us, then I am heading to bed. I assume that Hank will be up at the crack of dawn since you brought us a new truck." "I have no plans to kill you." At least at the moment. I would probably want to throttle them before it was time for lunch. Hopefully they wouldn't irritate me as much now that they knew what I was. She yawned and headed to her sleeping bag, "Good. See you in the morning." Ben seemed at a loss and looked at Hank. Hank met my eyes once more, "I think we had all best get some sleep. I assume you will keep an eye on the door?" I nodded. Ben gave Hank a disbelieving look. Hank shrugged at him, "If she wanted us dead, she would have killed you the other day." They all went to their sleeping bags. I doubted Ben or Tom would sleep, they were simply too nervous. Marissa would probably manage to get some sleep. Nicky was already snoring softly. Hank was one of those people who thought about something carefully, analyzed it from every angle, made his decision and went with it. I knew he would sleep. Ben turned the small flashlight off, leaving the room in darkness. I turned my red eyes towards the doors and remained as a sentry.

 

Chapter 9

I sat in the truck bed with my back against the cab. Hank and Ben had gone over a map they had found and they chose a route that we would try to follow in hopes of finding a Stronghold. Tom had been persistent enough to get himself and the children to ride in the cab as Hank drove. The others sat in the truck bed with me. Nicky had no problems sitting beside me. Ben was still leery of me and gave me my space. Marissa seemed to have gotten over the worst of her fears, but she still didn't come close. The horn honked and I rose into a crouch. We passed a Runner who reached for the truck, if it got a good grip, it could pull itself in with us. I lunged forward with a ferocious snarl as I swiped out with my nails. My sudden presence startled it and it balked with a snarl of its own. The truck was out of reach within a second. I resumed my seat. Chloe had her tail tucked and whined in fear. We had tied her to the truck just in case she tried to jump. With the debris and pot holes in the road we couldn't go that fast and Runners were a potential threat. I had said that I could keep one or two at bay as long as we kept moving. I don't think they realized exactly what that entailed at the time. Ben and Marissa were white and their eyes were round at my method of keeping the Runner at bay. Nicky was grinning widely while sporting her new sunglasses. Nicky elbowed my side lightly. I raised an eyebrow at her with a light growl. She wasn't fazed as she grinned at me, "I love having a zombie as a friend. You make things interesting." Yep. She had definitely been dropped on her head as a child. I shook my head at her unique outlook on life. Of all people to not be bothered by the fact that I was a zombie... To my surprise she wrapped an arm around me, "You may be growly, but deep down you are just a big softy. Why else would you hang out with humans?" I didn't appreciate the contact. I rolled my eyes before swiftly wrapping my arm around her neck and giving her a noogie. She flailed her arms as she tried to get me off. I was gentle and released her seconds later. Ben was watching in shock as Nicky took it all in stride. She lightly punched my arm in retaliation as we grinned at each other. She raised her eyebrows, "So you can put the run on the Runners, what about other Nightstalkers or Terrors?" "They would have to be feral to come after us. I have the upper hand over another Nightstalker because I am in control and can use weapons. I have never met a Terror before, but they are stronger and faster than Nightstalkers." She frowned, "So if we come across a Terror we're screwed?" I nodded, "Pretty much. I wouldn't be able to hold one off for more than three or four seconds and you wouldn't be able to get away in that much time. I might be able to grab one of the children and run, but if it gave chase we would be done for." She made a face, "Let's avoid Terrors then." Ben muttered, "I don't think it is something you can plan for. Our original plan had been to avoid all zombies and now I am sitting in the box of a truck with one." I snorted, "If you had let me out of that store earlier, you would likely still be oblivious." He made a face as Nicky laughed. Her laughter was interrupted as the truck suddenly slowed to a stop. I stood up and looked forward. I gave a growl of irritation at the sight that met my eyes. The bridge had washed out. The deep swift water wasn't something even this jacked up truck could cross. Hank opened the driver's door, "I guess we have to back track and use that other road. Hopefully that bridge is intact. But I have bad news." Ben frowned, "What is it?" Hank sighed, "This truck is terribly hard on gas and we are under a quarter tank."

Nicky piped up, "Stop by any other vehicles and we can try to siphon their gas out." Hank nodded and got back inside. I sat down as the truck started moving. Nicky pulled out the tubing that she had insisted on taking from the store. She had planned to siphon gas when she packed it in the truck. I wondered what kind of a past this fierce and yet crazy lady had. On one hand she was a crazy lunatic, on the other hand she was a fierce spitfire with a touchy temper that matched her red hair. I had noticed her scent shift the tiniest bit a few times and I had a suspicion that she was bipolar. Technically I was dealing with two people and no medication to make them get along. Her crazy self seemed to like me while her grouchy fighter personality gave me the same grudging respect that she gave Hank. I watched the river grow more distant. I hoped that this truck wouldn't give out on us too soon. 
 Nicky groaned, "We have to walk again?!" No one answered her since the answer was obvious. We weren't exactly on foot by choice. Every other vehicle we had checked had also run out of gas. The truck now joined the others as a roadside monument to show that we did not make it to our destination. Ben looked at his map, "In theory the Strongholds are within a day's drive of each other. They don't like being out at night. Not only can they not see any approaching zombies, but Nightstalkers come out to play. No offense Trinity..." "None taken." I scanned the horizon and tested the air. Seven nervous humans, various large mammals somewhere nearby, and the faint hint of sun warmed concrete. The concrete was actual concrete and not just the hot tarmac we were standing on. I looked at Ben, "Is there a town nearby? I am scenting some sort of building. We can probably take shelter there or find another vehicle." Ben glanced at me in surprise, "I am not exactly sure where we are on this road, but there should be another small hamlet ahead somewhere." Nicky headed for the trees, "Well, let's get this show on the road. The sooner we move, the sooner we can rest." We followed her. Tom and Marissa insisted on carrying the kids. I let them, if we crossed a zombie I would be the one to intercept it. Nicky looked back at me, "It was in this direction right?" She had been getting grouchier as we had been walking. Her scent was also starting to shift under the scent of sweat. I nodded, "The smell is much stronger. We should reach it in another ten minutes or so." I could smell zombies as well. I didn't scent any Runners though. Before too long we were looking at the small town. It was even smaller than the last one. Five stores and maybe a dozen houses. I wasn't even sure it rated the classification of a hamlet. Perhaps it qualified as some sort of residence for a family reunion... Two zombies staggered around. I took a step forward, "Let me get rid of those two zombies. Wait here, give a holler if something shows up, but I am not scenting anything other than those two." I jogged towards a small house. The zombies swiftly noticed me and gave chase. I opened the door and went inside and out the back door, closing it behind me. I swiftly went around and closed the front door. That should suffice. This house didn't have large windows or glass doors, so the zombies wouldn't be able to escape. I quickly checked out the town, but other than the two zombies, I didn't find anything. I thoroughly checked the grocery store. It was tiny, smaller than many houses. It had been looted at one point and the back door was missing. I did catch a faint whiff of a man, but it was so weak that it was likely days old. I returned to those waiting for me, "All clear. Just avoid that one house. Not much in the grocery store, someone beat us to it. No way to secure it either."

Ben nodded, "Can you check out that hotel while we scavenge in the grocery store?" I nodded, "Give a holler if you need help." I checked every room in the small hotel. The short hallways only had six large rooms so it didn't take long. This place obviously didn't get many tourists. The funniest part was that this place had a flat roof with lawnchairs and a raised firepit. We could actually have a cooked meal. The roof had raised sides that formed a waist high parapet, so the kids weren't in danger of falling off. Nicky came out of the grocery store and waved at me. I waved back before vaulting off the hotel roof. My knees bent to absorb the impact as I landed on the grass, dropping off of a one story building was well within my Nightstalker abilities. Nicky looked jealous as I approached her, "Show off. This place is pretty well empty, what did you find over there?" I shrugged, "Six rooms and no zombies. There is a patio and firepit on the roof though." "Sweet. We can finally have a hot meal." I kept an eye out for trouble as we all headed to the hotel. I volunteered to collect firewood in case there were more zombies around. It was a task I didn't mind. I got a breath of fresh air that wasn't tainted by the close proximity of humans. Before long there was a big stack of firewood in the corner of the roof and a fire was burning merrily away as it heated up some soup. There was more than enough wood for the night. Ben walked to the edge of the roof and looked down as the sky started to darken. He looked back over his shoulder, "That fire and the smell of cooking isn't going to lure in too many zombies, right?" I walked over to look around. No zombies were in sight. I took a deep breath to test the air, "There aren't any zombies upwind, but a few downwind may come. There shouldn't be too many in this area since it is pretty remote. Zombies prefer to congregate in larger towns and cities. You have to pull the main doors of this hotel to open them and they are made of wood, so the average zombie or Runner can't get in." Hank came up behind us, "And if a Nightstalker comes?" I chuckled darkly, "Nightstalkers don't appreciate company and I have one trick that should make any Nightstalker in the area keep their distance. It might scare the crap out of everyone here though." Nicky came up as well, "Well, whatever it is, you better do it. I don't want a feral one to come to visit." She was a bit grouchy. The day's heat must have really taken a toll on her. I grinned showing my teeth in a predatory grin, "You were warned. The noise you will hear shortly is me, so don't freak out. I will be back shortly." I jumped off the roof again and headed for the trees in my smooth running crouch. I paused in a clearing some distance away and looked up at the darkening sky. Most Nightstalkers gave their territorial scream as soon as they came out. The sun had halfway set, but it would be a couple of hours before any ferals came out. The first Nightstalker to come out and scream generally claimed that hunting range. It was similar to the First Strike rule in a way. Although if one came close enough to scent the humans, the scream wouldn't stop it from hunting them. If they hadn't come close enough to smell the humans, then they would move further away. I let my instincts come to the front of my mind and filled my lungs before loosing the signature cry of a Nightstalker. I had more or less claimed the town as mine for any Nightstalkers within hearing range. Hopefully none would come close enough to scent the humans. I headed back to the others and went through the front door before heading to the roof. Nicky huffed as I took a chair, "What exactly did that accomplish?" Yep. She wasn't in a good mood. Hopefully a good night's sleep would help her. Otherwise I might end up strangling her. I growled a light reprimand for her tone of voice, "That was a Nightstalker territorial scream. First one to scream generally gets their pick of a hunting range for that night. Any that heard it will avoid this area. I will probably repeat it again in the middle of the night for any that are wandering through."

My growl didn't faze her. She glowered at me, "That seems stupid." Ben rolled his eyes at her, "If it works, that is all that matters. You are just crabby because it scared you so badly." She turned her head to face him. I bet she was glaring at him from behind her sunglasses, "It did not scare me." Ben chuckled, "Right, you jumped just as much as everyone else did." He turned to me, "I don't think any warning could have prepared us for that. Most of us jumped so high that we ended up standing instead of sitting." I didn't bother replying. The last thing I needed was for Ben to get going on a roll. The sun had halfway set and the sunset seemed rather spectacular although I wasn't able to really look at it. "Soup's ready." Marissa handed everyone a bowl and there was more than enough for seconds. I didn't manage to finish the bowl I was handed and let Chloe finish it off. Animals were not affected by the virus. Liz once more managed to escape Marissa and climbed into my lap. Marissa seemed to have given up trying to keep the child away from me. Liz was quite persistent when she wanted to be. Before long she dozed off on my lap. "Hello to the camp!" I raised my head with a light growl of surprise at the unknown lady's voice. Hank and Nicky went over to the edge to see who was below. Ben raised his eyebrow at me and I shrugged as I quietly replied, "They came from downwind. Not much I can do." The lady's voice called again, "We are unarmed. Our car broke down and we are looking for shelter." Ben got up as well and went over to see. He called down, "If you mean us no harm, you are welcome to spend the night with us." Nicky groaned and left the railing to flop on the chair beside me. I tilted my head at her, "How are you holding up?" Her grouchy voice replied, "Just peachy." I rolled my eyes at her, but didn't comment. Moments later two sets of shoes came up the stairs. A slender lady with long brown hair came through first. A well-built man followed her. I was lucky if I came up to his collarbone. He had short brown hair and while he wasn't overly muscled, he wasn't a lightweight either. The way he moved put me on edge. The lady took a seat on the far side of the fire and the man sat beside her. She smiled, "I'm Nina and this is Daniel." I stilled as I finally picked up the man's scent. It worried me. He had the same underlying scent that all zombies had. There was a crisp undertone to it though, so he wasn't a regular zombie, a Runner, or a Nightstalker. That left only one option. A Terror. Bloody hell... Can my luck possibly get any worse? Ben once more did the talking for our group and introduced all of us. Nina's scent was clean with some sort of rather flowery perfume that almost completely obscured her scent. She was obviously a human, unlike her companion. The Terror was keeping a close eye on Nicky and me. He had undoubtedly caught my scent and knew a female Nightstalker was present, but he didn't know if it was Nicky or me. Marissa's blue eyes immediately ruled her out while Nicky and I were still wearing our sunglasses. He was mostly focused on Nicky, who was oblivious to his scrutiny. Her foul mood was more in keeping with a Nightstalker and I had an obviously human child on my lap. I hoped that she didn't get too mouthy, I wasn't a match for a Terror if she provoked him. He was obviously in control though. He had enough control that his eyes were a brown with a light orange tinge. In the low light, no one else would notice. Oddly enough, Chloe seemed oblivious to his presence from her napping spot in the far corner. Some guard dog she is. Ben sharpened his knife, "What are you two doing out here?" Nina seemed to be the talker with this pair, "We were heading to another Stronghold and our car broke down this morning. We smelt the smoke from your campfire and found you. Whatever you are cooking smells pretty good by the way." Marissa filled two bowls and passed them to the newcomers who took them with thanks. Tom spoke up, "We are looking for a Stronghold, could you possibly give us directions or let us accompany you?" Daniel didn't seem overly bothered by the thought of traveling with a group of strange humans. I had a suspicion that he was used to human company. Nina nodded, "Sure, we can guide you. Is there enough room in your vehicles for us?" Ben sighed, "Our truck ran out of gas just up the road. We are stuck on foot too. We were hoping to find a working vehicle in this town come morning." Nicky snorted, "We have had two trucks break down on us in two days. I tried to hotwire the three on the main street and all of them are out of gas. Luck isn't exactly on our side at this point." The Terror had his eyes focused on Nicky with a calculating gaze. Ben sighed, "We haven't checked the garages yet, so there is hope. If we find something, or even if we don't, you are more than welcome to travel with us. There are six rooms downstairs, please help yourself to one." Nina nodded, "Thank you." I listened to Ben, Marissa, and Nina talk. The rest of us watched silently. Nicky occasionally grumbled to herself. Her mood was slowly worsening and she started glancing at the door to go back inside. I nudged her foot and very carefully controlled my voice lest it give me away, "You wanted that big room on the end, right? We can share it if you want. It is starting to cool off. Could you give me a hand getting a bed put together for Liz?" She nodded and stood up. I followed her with Liz in my arms as we went headed for the door. My instincts were starting to awaken as the last traces of light were fading. I felt both Nina and Daniel watching us. He must have scented me quite some distance away and had alerted Nina that a Nightstalker was present. We entered the room Nicky had been eyeing up. She unrolled her sleeping bag with a kick. I closed the door behind us, "Keep your voice down, that guy is actually a zombie so he has excellent hearing." She spun around with wide eyes, "Are you serious?!" Her hushed voice was startled and somewhat alarmed. I nodded. She pulled her sunglasses off, "I thought that your cry would keep Nightstalkers at a distance, not call them in." I growled lightly at her accusing tone, "That cry would only work on ferals, and only as long as they didn't smell a human. Besides, unless I am severely mistaken, he is a Terror." She sat down hard on her sleeping bag, "Shit. I didn't even notice. How do you zombies blend in so easily?" I shrugged, "We were human not that terribly long ago. On a side note, what is bothering you? You were grouchy enough that I think the Terror might have thought that you were actually the Nightstalker present. He would have known one of us was a Nightstalker simply by scent." She sighed as she flopped on her back, "I think I got a bit of heat stroke today. How dangerous is that guy?" I covered up Liz and sat on my own sleeping bag, "I am not entirely sure. He is in control, but I have never met a Terror before, so I am not sure what to expect. He will figure out that I am actually the Nightstalker as we travel tomorrow. Try not to antagonize him though." She closed her eyes, "I'll keep that in mind." She must have been more tired than she realized as her breathing leveled out in sleep. I chuckled as I stretched out on my own sleeping bag. I wasn't sure what to expect tomorrow. My instincts were rattled by the presence of a stronger zombie. It had never happened before and I was unusually cautious. 

 

Chapter 10


 I listened as the others headed to various rooms not long after we came in. I tracked the sound of Daniel and Nina's footsteps to the other side of the building. The building fell silent as I lay there listening. I actually managed to doze off for half an hour or so. I heard faint footsteps as the Terror left the hotel and quietly closed the door behind him. He had likely left to hunt. After my large kill last night, I didn't need to hunt tonight. I remained where I was listening to the nighttime noises. I heard an odd shuffling noise also leave that room. Why would Nina go outside at night? Her friend had been gone for at least fifteen minutes and her scent had definitely been human. I got up and parted the blinds to look out the window. A low snarl escaped my throat as I saw someone forcibly dragging Nina away from the hotel. I swiftly and silently left the room. I took off my sunglasses and put them in my pocket since it was the middle of the night. My Nightstalker abilities were perfect for swiftly catching up without getting spotted. The man had already dragged her into the trees. He smelt like sour cooking oil, which he must have used to cover his scent. This was the same man I had scented earlier. I stifled a growl as I noticed that his hand was clamped over Nina's mouth as he continued to drag the small lady away. I saw his second hand drop to grope along the top of her jeans and tried to undo the button. I could smell the sharp scent of Nina's fear and blood on the air. Nina struggled wildly, but couldn't escape the filthy burly man. The red haze in my sight got more intense in my building anger. He managed to undo the button. I charged forward with an enraged snarl. He jumped in fright and he spun around as he let go of Nina. He barely managed to turn in my direction before I had his throat in my hand. I pinned him against a tree with another vicious snarl. Nina dropped to the ground and raised her hand to her chest as she tried to catch her breath. Her voice shook from her ordeal, "Thanks goodness you arrived Daniel. I was worried for a moment that-" Her voice cut off suddenly as she realized that my smaller shadowy form was not Daniel. The man in my grasp squirmed wildly as he stared in terror at my brightly glowing red eyes. I dug my nails lightly into his neck and felt them pierce his skin with ease. I growled at him, "Run. If I catch you anywhere near us again your life will be forfeit." He gurgled for breath and I threw him off to the side. Even one handed I had enough strength to throw him quite some distance from us. He scrambled backwards before getting to his feet and running away as he crashed through the underbrush. I took a deep breath and exhaled as I tried to rein in my temper. He wouldn't be back for days. I straightened out of my crouch and gave Nina a sideways look. I didn't look at her full on as that could be taken as a threat or challenge with those familiar with zombies. She was still sitting motionless in the leaf litter as she watched me cautiously. My voice was rough from how high my instincts were running, "How badly are you hurt?" I could smell her blood on the air. The scent of the man's blood on my nails didn't exactly help cool down the heat in my veins. She shook her head, "I'm okay, thank you for helping me. Not even a scratch." I snorted in disbelief, "I could smell your blood from the hotel. As faint as it is, it is probably only small scratches. Let's head back before that friend of yours picks up the scent of your blood on the air and attacks me." She shakily stood up. I tested the air, but the Terror wasn't close enough for me to scent him. Hopefully he was far enough away that he wouldn't catch her scent until we got back to the hotel. She took two steps and promptly stumbled over a branch.

I caught her elbow before she could fall. She regained her balance, "Thanks." She seemed a bit uneasy with the contact, but didn't pull away. I dug around in my pocket for the small led light I had put there for when I had to walk Liz to the bathroom. It only had three weak leds, but it was better than nothing. I pointed it at the ground and narrowed my eyes to mere slits before turning it on, "Here. Just stay behind me and don't point it at my head." She took it and I led the way back. She must have known that Nightstalkers were light sensitive as she kept the dim light right in front of her feet. I listened hard, but the man must have stopped running and gone into hiding. I didn't hear any other footsteps either. I opened up a small baggie in my pocket that held a lemon scented wet hand wipe and carefully cleaned the blood off of my hand. Once we were inside the hotel she turned the light off, "Thank you." I took the light back as she went into her room. I retreated to my room and lay down while listening carefully. Daniel was sure to catch the scent of her blood and fear as he approached the town. He would know that I had been with her by the way my scent mingled with hers. I hoped he would stop to check on her and get her story before breaking down the door and coming for my hide in a rage. I stilled as I heard his swift footsteps entering the hotel. The growl that rumbled in his chest was audible even from the far side of the hotel. He wrenched open Nina's door and a few moments later I heard the faint murmur of their voices. They were too soft for me to make out. The door clicked closed and prevented my eavesdropping. Minutes passed and I relaxed slightly. The night passed slowly and I knew that Daniel was likely as awake as I was. It was an uneasy situation. We were both aware of each other's presence, but we hadn't truly interacted yet to know where we stood with each other and what our limits were. It was worse for me since I knew that in any fight I would end up as the underdog. It did not sit well with my Nightstalker mentality. Liz stirred and sat up. I whispered, "Do you have to use the washroom?" She nodded, not bothered by my red eyes. I clicked the flashlight on and kept it pointed at her feet. I guided her across the hallway to the bathroom and back once she was done. I pulled the blinds away from the window and sat on the chair to watch the still night pass by. The sky started to lighten and before long it became uncomfortable. I put my sunglasses on as I debated my options. It would be a few hours before the others rose. A zombie walked by on the street. My eyes followed it. I would have to lure it away before the others stumbled outside. I really didn't want the Terror following me outside though. His footsteps had been louder than I had expected, much like a really soft footed human. I wondered if Terrors lacked the silent stalking footsteps that Nightstalkers had. I rose and tried to walk silently down the hallway. My footsteps weren't even audible to myself. Hopefully he couldn't hear them. I quietly opened the door and carefully closed it. I slunk away from the hotel, taking care to ensure I didn't cross the line of sight of their window. I picked up speed and the zombie set off after me even though I still ran silently. I locked it inside of a second house before exploring the tiny town. I broke into each garage, even if I had to kick down the door. All but one was empty, and the one only held a tiny car. I managed to locate the keys in the house and tried to start it. It didn't even attempt to turn over. I lifted the hood and growled in annoyance. Half of the motor was pulled apart as if they had been attempting to repair it. I was no mechanic and I knew it. I slammed the hood down with more force than necessary. I paused at the sight of the jerrycans in the corner of the garage. I walked forward to nudge them with my foot. One was mostly full while the rest were empty. In curiosity I knelt down to peek under the car, but its gas tank had taken a walk to the repair shop. Can't siphon the gas from it if the gas tank isn't even in the garage... One jerrycan would at least let any truck run for a couple of hours. We could cover more ground in those hours than we would in days on foot. Every other car was empty, so this was all we had. I narrowed my eyes as a sudden thought struck me. Wait a moment. I remembered that I had always stored gas for the lawn mower in my shed. I grabbed the jerrycan and started searching various sheds. I found two nearly empty jerrycans, but that was it. I drained the dredges into the nearly full one. That was two more cups of gas than what I had before. This town had some bizarre obsession with electric lawnmowers. With a faint growl I gave up my search and headed back. I left the jerrycan in the hallway by the front door and quietly headed for the roof. I started the fire and put the remaining soup near it to warm up. I also put water on the edge of the fire to heat and put a container of instant coffee nearby. I went back inside and returned to my room to sit against the wall. Liz and Nicky were still sleeping.

 

Chapter 11

            An hour after I had returned I heard movement from Tom and Marissa's room. Josh's voice rose in a complaint of hunger. Marissa quieted him and I heard the three head for the roof. They left the door between the roof and the hallway open, "Oh, someone put the soup on. That was nice of them." Shortly Hank and Ben stirred in their rooms. Ben was clumsy first thing in the morning. A bang sounded from his room followed by his sleepy irritated voice, "Darn chair. You weren't supposed to fall over like that." Of course, blame the chair.  He was the main reason I put the coffee out. Nicky was the second reason. I looked over at her as she sat up with a grumble. Liz stirred and blinked sleepily as she also sat up. I stretched and stood up, "There is coffee and soup on the roof." Nicky stood up with a grumble as she wrapped her sleeping bag around her and trudged out the door without so much as a good morning. Liz stood up and I helped her put her coat on before we entered the hallway. Hank and Ben were already climbing the stairs. I glanced back as a door behind us opened. From the corner of my eyes I saw Daniel enter the hallway first as he glanced around. He eyed me up with an expression that looked like curiosity with a hint of a challenge. Nina had obviously told him who the Nightstalker really was. I let Liz drag me towards the stairs and up them. I heard the two others following the flow of people. Marissa handed Liz a bowl of warm soup. I declined the bowl she offered me. This didn't surprise her, they had gotten used to me only eating a small amount at supper. I couldn't eat much in the way of real food anymore and one small meal a day was my limit. I could easily go a day or two without real food. In theory, I was technically unable to starve to death, but I had no desire to attempt it. I liked my food too much. The bowl was passed to Nina instead. To my surprise Daniel accepted a small bowl of soup. Ben was downing his cup of strong coffee like water. I couldn't even figure out how he managed to swallow it. It smelt strong enough to enter a kick boxing ring. Liz climbed into my lap again and leaned against me as she slowly ate her soup. My sunglasses shielded my eyes so I was able to observe Nina and Daniel without them catching me openly watching them. Nina had a slightly scraped up elbow and one or two small scratches on her arms from last night. Nina kept glancing over at me with an intrigued look. Daniel was more open about his watching and his eyes often strayed to me. He didn't seem openly hostile, although every time I shifted my weight I gained his immediate attention. In truth, he looked pretty laid back with the other humans on the surface, but I clearly recalled his growling as he went to check on Nina and I could easily pick out the signs of distrust in his body language. Appearances were so deceiving. Ben yawned, "Hey Nicky, could you please wash my dishes?" She retorted, "They are disposable styrofoam, wash your own bloody dishes." He chuckled, "Pretty please?" Nicky whipped her spoon at him and he moved his leg to avoid the off course missile. Daniel examined the fiery lady who had clearly not woken up enough for Ben's teasing. She was wearing her sunglasses again and I wondered if she was doing it on purpose to annoy Daniel. If it hadn't been for the event last night, it could have kept him uncertain for a while longer. Ben was truly awake now and there was a new lady present. He promptly made a nuisance of himself. "I bet you would look cute with your hair done up in a ponytail or a bun." Nina glanced at him, "In that case I will leave it hanging as it is." She had no intention of putting her loosely flowing hair up if it made him attracted to her. Score one for her subtle putdown.

As per usual, Ben ignored the subtle request for peace, "Such a cutie like you shouldn't be ashamed to dress up and live a little." "You should try jumping off a bridge. You only live once after all. I hear it is the fun trend for cool people right now." I chuckled as I gave Nina another point for a snappy comeback. Ben obviously had lots of practice in being blown off since he didn't even bat an eye, "I will happily jump if a beauty like you jumps with me." Daniel exhaled gustily, "Leave her alone." Hank raised his head, he seemed to realize that there was more to this man than met the eye. I suspected it was because his gusty exhale of mild annoyance was so similar to the one he had heard numerous times from me when I had enough of Ben's teasing. Ben wasn't so observant, "Relax dude, I am sure your questionable manliness can handle me flirting a bit with this cutie pie." Daniel's muscles tensed a bit as his eyes shifted to a glowing red while he gave a sharp growl of warning. Ben froze with wide eyes, the others were also looking alarmed or surprised. Hank looked wary, but didn't seem too terribly surprised. Nina wasn't bothered and Nicky looked bored as she downed another swallow of her coffee. I wasn't overly worried since the growl had been a warning growl, not a true threat. I still kept a wary eye on him as my instincts shifted uneasily. Ben turned to me with wide eyes. I snorted, "Don't look at me for help. A Terror wouldn't have any more problems beating a Nightstalker than a Nightstalker would have beating a Runner. And I don't particularly feel like being pinned face down in the dirt this early in the morning. Especially over your ill-timed flirting." His jaw dropped, "You mean you knew?!" I gave him a look that plainly said how dense I found his observation, "His scent gave him away the second he came within range. There were a few other clues if you were looking." How did I get myself into these situations? Last week I had been enjoying a quiet life at my cabin in the foothills on the edge of the mountains and now I was trying to escort a bunch of humans to safety. To make things worse, a Terror had appeared and some of the humans seemed determined to tick him off. This trip was going downhill so fast that it was practically in freefall. Nicky yawned, "Ben, is your head up your ass for the warmth? If so, I am sure these two red eyed freaks can help set you straight." I growled lightly and she sent a half-hearted punch at my shoulder to show that she didn't give a shit. I barely felt her teasing blow as I let her hit my shoulder. She smirked at me, "It is my job to be grouchy in the morning. You can take over later on." I rolled my eyes. She was clearly starting to wake up. Sometimes I wasn't sure what was preferable, her scowling at her morning coffee in silence or her attitude as she started to wake up. Nina and Daniel watched our interaction. Nina's eyes practically burned with curiosity, "So you really are a Nightstalker?" I looked across the firepit at Nina, "Yes. I assume Daniel is a Terror?" They both nodded. Daniel tilted his head in curiosity, "I met a sane Nightstalker once. She was quite the cantankerous thing and easily lost her temper. I ended up pinning her a dozen times in three days. Very temperamental. You don't seem anything like her. I was under the impression that all Nightstalkers were a snarly bunch. I truly thought you were human last night." Nicky snorted, "Once she is aware that you know her secret she doesn't hide her temper so carefully. I lost count of the number of times she growled at me yesterday." Ben chuckled, "You deserved every one of those growls." She shrugged, "Probably." She didn't seem to care that a zombie had growled at her a dozen times and that she now sat with a Nightstalker and a Terror. I wasn't sure that there was any medication out there that could help her at this point.

Daniel's gaze moved back to me and his eyes were back to their camouflaged brownish color, "Thank you for saving Nina last night." The others had looks of confusion. I shrugged lightly, "No problem. I originally thought that you might have returned and that both of you were sneaking out. I didn't realize she was in trouble until I saw them through the window." He blinked slowly while he examined me, as if he wasn't overly sure what to make of me now that I had blown his preconception of Nightstalkers out of the water. He still kept a careful eye on me, uncertain as to how unpredictable I really was. Nina leaned forward, "I thought that Nightstalkers had severe problems with light and couldn't handle being outside during the day? From what I heard, even sunglasses let in far too much light and weren't sufficient." I turned my head slightly to face her, "These are actually welding glasses and I altered them a bit so that they form around my face to prevent any light from coming in. They are the only reason I can handle this level of light." The morning light was just starting to hit us and I took care to avoid looking towards the sun. She nodded with a look of fascination, "You don't seem to have any problem holding that child. Surely you feel the bloodlust?" I stilled for a few moments before responding slowly, "Yes, the bloodlust is present and I am constantly aware of it at some level. Being around them so much has desensitized the severity of it somewhat, but it is still there. I am in control and my humanity is greater than my Nightstalker instincts." She tilted her head intently, "And if you lost control?" A growl rumbled lightly in my chest at that thought, "I take precautions, but if I thought my control was that close to breaking I would do my best to get away from any humans. Human blood is a short path to madness and I like having my mind at least mostly intact." She nodded, neither of them took offense to my growl. "What sort of precautions?" I exhaled gustily at the interrogation, "Mostly I hunt regularly. The smell of spilt human blood in the immediate vicinity is the worst and if it gets too bad I try to get away. If that option is out, I generally try to breathe through my mouth or somehow mask the smell." Her eyes widened as she stiffened slightly. Daniel transferred his gaze to her reaction in confusion. Nina spoke lowly, "You said you could smell my blood and I was right beside you. You led me back and there was no way to mask the smell on our trip. You had to be worked up after what happened. How did you manage?" Daniel's head swiveled to me as his eyes took on a red tint. I leaned back in the chair, slightly rearranging the child in my arms, "Your injuries barely bled and the scent was faint. I had hunted very well the night before. Yes, the bloodlust got worse when I smelt it, but my control was not in question. If it had been, I would have directed you back to the hotel and gone hunting." I paused and turned to Daniel, "How far away did you go that you didn't pick up the scent of her blood?" He blinked at my question, "About ten kilometers or so. Once I was about halfway back I caught her scent." It was my turn to be confused, a Terror should have picked up that scent way faster at that distance. "There was a light breeze, were you upwind? I didn't catch your scent while outside. If you were downwind, how could you not have noticed it?" He seemed confused as well, "I was downwind, but that is a long distance to pick up even the scent of human blood." Both of us looked at each other in confusion. Nina interjected, "Trinity, you said you picked up my scent from the hotel. Would you have picked up the smell of my blood from ten kilometers downwind?" I nodded slowly and replied just as slowly, "Certainly. I picked up the smell of blood when I went to rescue Tom and Marissa and I was much further away, although much more blood had been spilled." Her eyes lit up, "That is very interesting. I wonder what the differences really are between a Terror and a Nightstalker. I had thought that all abilities were heightened through with each zombie rank, but now I am having doubts after what I have seen and heard. Would you mind doing some experiments?" My body stilled as I watched her like a hawk. Experiments? I was suspicious to say the least. Nina picked up my suspicion from my silence and clarified, "Just simple things, like having you race Daniel. To see if he is actually faster or stronger, and if so, by how much." I relaxed slightly, that wasn't nearly as bad as what I had been envisioning. It would also be a harmless way of seeing Daniel's abilities. If he flipped, I wanted to know how many steps I would get before he caught up. I slowly nodded, "I don't see any problem with that." Hopefully I wasn't getting into more than I could handle.

 

Chapter 12

            Nina looked excited about my acceptance. She smiled and glanced at the town below, "How about a race to that truck over there?" I looked over, the truck was just outside of the town. I glanced at Daniel who nodded and stood up. I set Liz down, "Go see Marissa for a bit, okay?" She nodded and walked away. I walked to the edge of the roof and lightly vaulted over the parapet to land lightly on the ground. Daniel hit the ground a mere second after me. Apparently heights didn't bother him either. That didn't surprise me. I heard footsteps and looked up as Nina came into sight with her watch in her hands, "Okay, when I yell go race to that truck. Stay there and we will see who can hear the best at that distance. Ready, set, Go!" I had dropped my human facade and pulled my Nightstalker abilities out as I hit speeds that humans couldn't touch. My footsteps echoed around me as I traded my silent stalk for speed. Daniel easily pulled ahead and beat me by a long shot. I slowed as I reached the truck, keeping an eye on Daniel as his red eyes showed that his Terror abilities had come out to play. Nina voice reached us as she called out, "Grab the front bumper of that truck and see how hard it is to lift it." I glanced over at Daniel, who waved me ahead to have the first attempt. I reached under the bumper and lifted. My muscles strained, but the front tires came off of the ground. I held it for ten seconds before lowering it back down. I backed up and moved well to the side to let Daniel have a shot. There was some tension in the air between us and I gave him a fair bit of space. His muscles tensed with the weight, but he didn't seem to be as strained with lifting it as I had been. He put it down after ten seconds as well. He was obviously faster and stronger than me. I had already known that I wouldn't be able to outrun or outfight a Terror, but having that fact flaunted in front of me was a blow to my rather over-inflated Nightstalker pride. I wasn't used to being outdone, it had never happened since I had turned. Daniel spoke, "How long do you think you could have held it?" "Maybe a couple of minutes. You?" "Probably an hour or so." I nodded while hiding my envy as we turned to face the hotel where all the humans were watching with interest. Nina called out, "Stay there. I am going to call out words and you raise your hand if you can make them out." We waited where we were. "Sunshine." I raised my hand as Daniel also raised his. Each word was called out more quietly. Soon enough my hand remained by my side while Daniel raised his hand while his head was cocked to the side a bit while he listened intently. Five attempts later his hands also remained down. That was interesting, unless Nina had really dropped her voice those last times, his hearing didn't outstrip my own hearing by as much as I had assumed. Nicky handed a bag of something to Nina, and Nina turned to us, "The wind is blowing towards you. Call out the scent we are using when you pick it up." Mere seconds later I called out, "Lavender." Daniel glanced at me in surprise while sniffing deeply. It took him ten seconds to catch it before he also called out, "Lavender." Time after time I caught the scent way before Daniel. Much to the surprise of both of us. He gritted his teeth as his frustration built. The scents started getting fainter, they weren't spraying as much into the air. I sniffed and growled faintly in disgust, "Ben, put a cork in it. You passing gas was not part of this test." Nicky disappeared from view as she hit the floor rolling around in laughter. I shook my head before calling again, "Smells like a bounce sheet. I have no idea what to call that scent though."

Daniel moved closer to me in case I was more directly downwind as he tried to catch the scent. He stood close enough that he could have reached out and touched me. He shook his head in frustration as he was unable to pick up the scent. Neither of us was entirely comfortable with the close proximity to another mostly unknown zombie. My nostrils flared before calling in an irritated voice, "Nina, was that really necessary?" The very faint scent of her blood wafted on the wind as if she had pricked her finger and a drop of blood had beaded up. Daniel took a slow deep breath and exhaled with a faint growl of irritation as he once more failed to pick up the scent. I tilted my head and spoke quietly, "It is the smell of human blood, surely it should stand out more than those air fresheners." He narrowed his eyes and sniffed again before growling, "I am picking nothing up." I blinked in surprise, "Is that normal? I thought you would have been ahead in every ability." He shrugged, irritation clear in his body posture, "I don't know. I know I am faster and stronger than the other Nightstalker I encountered, but the ability to pick up a scent never came up." He started running back towards the hotel. I followed more slowly. He jumped and managed to scale the outside of the building without too much difficulty. I scowled as he unintentionally flaunted off his abilities. I doubted I could manage that, so I didn't even try. No sense kicking my already aching pride. I went in the front door. The others were packing up on the roof. The dirty styrofoam dishes had been burnt. Ben looked at me, "I don't suppose you know if there is any working vehicle in town?" I shook my head, "Every vehicle is either out of gas or in serious need of a mechanic." Nicky groaned, "Just our luck. If I get heat stroke again today, I will kill someone." I chuckled, "But I did manage to find a jerrycan of gas, so you get your pick of the ones that are simply out of gas." Nicky let out a whoop that had all of us jump a bit. Shit, that girl really had a set of lungs on her. Hank looked eager, "Where is it?" "Just inside the main door." He shouldered his backpack and headed downstairs. Everyone else followed him. Daniel went ahead of me with Nina in front of him, remaining between his companion and the only other zombie present. He glanced back over his shoulder in confusion, "When did you grab the gas?" I watched his face as I tried to work out what was rolling through his head, "This morning around sunrise." He furrowed his eyebrows in doubt, "I didn't hear you leave." I smirked, that meant he hadn't heard me. "Nightstalkers can move silently when we choose. Getting the door open silently was the biggest challenge." His hearing may best mine, but my footsteps were too quiet for even him to hear if I tried to move silently. I filed that tidbit of information away. We gathered on the street as Hank gazed over the tiny town, "How many of those garages did you check?" "All of them. Nothing in there is going anywhere. You get to choose between two cars and a truck." Nicky started walking towards the truck we had used as a weight, "Well, I am not riding in a dinky car with nine other people when two of them are zombies. Especially not when Ben had beans for breakfast." Hank made a face, "I smelt him earlier. Ben is exiled to the box." "Hey! Come on! I call shotgun!" Nicky snorted, "I don't care what firearm you are packing. If your only ammo is coming out of your rear end, it isn't going to help you any." Josh jumped up and down in excitement, "I call shotgun! I call shotgun!" Hank smiled at the energetic kid, "Only if you are sitting on Tom's lap. Liz can sit on Marissa's lap in the back seat and the other seat is open for anyone except for Ben." Nicky tilted her head, "I honestly say we stick Chloe in there. I am not sure how she would handle two zombies in such tight quarters." Nina nodded, "That is a good thought. I am surprised that she has done so well around Daniel. I have only seen two dogs not run the moment they realize what he is." We reached the truck and Hank popped the hood for a quick check before dumping the precious gas into the tank. I went back inside to drag out a mattress. It was a bit crowded with five us in the box considering how we tried to avoid having certain people overlap each other's personal space. I sat in one with my back against the cab while Daniel sat leaning on the tailgate in the opposite corner, as far from me as he could get. Nina had no problems being near him and sat beside him. I could tell that he didn't want her too close to me just in case, although he never said it out loud. Nicky had no problem sitting right beside me while Ben occupied the other empty corner behind the cab as he didn't want to be within cuffing distance of two zombies with the way those beans were kicking in. It was complicated to say the least. In one way, the gas would run out far too fast and we would be walking all too soon, but in a different way, the tension in the back of this truck was going to make that time go far too slowly. Hank stuck his head out the window, "Which way are we going?" Nina pointed the way that we had been heading, "That way, turn right at the junction by Cross Lake." The truck started up and headed for the highway.

 

Chapter 13


 The tension between Daniel and me was obvious to anyone. He watched me with slight suspicion and I kept a wary eye on him. Our zombie instincts were playing havoc with our frame of mind even if we were in control. Nicky was amusing herself with various string tricks using a shoelace she found. Ben was staring at the scenery while pretending that the occasional rumbling noise and resulting odor did not originate from him. Nina was scribbling in a small notepad. I watched the scenery as it flew past with half an eye on the Terror in the other corner. The occasional zombie stumbled after us. Daniel was watching the road we were heading towards while also watching me for any threatening move. It was almost as if he expected me to try to attack someone before the day was over. It was equally as obvious that he intended to stop me if I attempted it. I was about ready to say hell with it and leave this group in the care of the Terror while I headed back to the mountains. One thing stopped me though. I had made a promise to Liz and even if I had become a zombie, I had always kept my word. I intended to keep it this time too. If I had known exactly what I was getting into before I would have simply said I would help them until we met others who would help. I was never going to make another promise without careful consideration. I had agreed to help them get to the Stronghold. I had not agreed to get mixed up with a Terror and then get stuck in close quarters with him. The walls of that Stronghold could not come into view soon enough for my peace of mind. Nina interrupted my thoughts, "So what is your story? If you don't mind me asking, when did you turn?" I turned my head to gaze at the lady. I spoke slowly and somewhat reluctantly. In the back of my mind, I hoped that the longer I took to speak, the fewer questions she could ask. "I turned in the first wave, about a week after the first zombies appeared. It turns out that the flu shot I got had been one of the contaminated ones." She blinked in surprise, "You were one of the originals?" I nodded slowly. My workplace had encouraged workers to get the annual flu shot and even brought in a nurse to do it for free every year. Like all of my co-workers, I had also gotten the vaccine as we had every other year. It was just a flu shot to prevent respiratory influenza after all. Every country ordered the flu vaccine from the World Health Organization and they all originated from the same place. No one had been aware that a large number of the vaccines had been contaminated in the formulation process. The virus had snuck into almost every bottle being sent worldwide wherever basic healthcare was present. It was a rather slow virus that took three months to finally show itself. At the end of the three month incubation period, the person suddenly started sneezing almost non-stop for three days. After that they went into seizures as the virus re-wired their brain. Those last three days they were infectious. A huge portion of the population had been exposed to the airborne sneeze droplets without realizing the risk. Three months later they would make up the first wave. If they survived those who turned in the original outbreak. Those who went into seizures rose with red eyes and a desire for blood and raw meat. The regular zombies were mindless and readily attacked anyone and anything. Those who were unfortunate enough to get bitten turned within several days. Between the bite marks that swiftly turned people and the slow reacting sneeze transmission of the last three days, it was an evil two pronged attack. Thankfully, once someone turned, a mere sneeze was not sufficient to infect anyone. The virus shifted at that point, becoming much more potent in our saliva and blood and was no longer capable of surviving being airborne. 

The original outbreak had occurred just over six months ago. The first wave mostly knocked humanity to its knees. The second wave nearly wiped out the remaining survivors. Runners, Nightstalkers, and Terrors were still sane when they recovered from the seizures, but many had been unprepared for the bloodthirsty instincts and desires of the virus that now resided in our body. The virus had also re-wired our brains somewhat. The thought of blood and raw meat was no longer disgusting, but tantalizing like a glass of cold water on a hot day. Many thought they were simply dreaming and went along with the flow only to lose themselves before they realized the danger. Some never realized that animal blood was needed or that any raw meat was dangerous. The first few days was like walking on a tight rope blindfolded. Not only did we have to fight the virus's influence and figure out the new rules for remaining in control with no instruction manual, but we also had to survive humans who wanted to kill a potential threat. I continued slowly, "I had no idea that anything was wrong. My horse was increasingly skittish around me, but I put it down to a new shampoo or a neighbor's kids scaring her. I had been on a cross-country train ride to visit my friend. Days before I got on it, zombies had started appearing around the world. The train stopped in the mountains as we got word that the station at our destination as well as the one we had departed from had been closed for safety." I remembered the panic on the train, "We had been stopped there for two days when a radio broadcast finally gave us some decent information. The radio informed every listener that if anyone was sneezing a lot that they were likely infectious, and to keep them isolated. Apparently three others had been sneezing and were promptly quarantined to the last train car. The next day the radio informed the public that anyone who was sneezing unusually often was likely going to go into seizures and develop rabies like symptoms that caused them to attack anyone." I lowered my head and stared at my hands in my lap, as my mind went back in time, "Two others had started sneezing and both of them, as well as the others in quarantine, were sent into the forest by a panicking trainload of passengers who wanted them as far away as possible. Later that afternoon I started sneezing. By the fifth sneeze in ten minutes I was chased off of the train by aggressive and threatening people worried about their health and safety. The sneezing didn't stop and I got really worried." I lifted my head to look once more at Nina, "I followed the train track while heading back the way we came. The next day I encountered my first zombie. It was one of the previous passengers. I ran from it, getting lost in the process. I wandered around lost in the wilderness until the seizures hit." I clenched my jaw at the memory of the white hot waves of pain. Daniel was watching me closely. Nina and Nicky looked curious. "When the pain stopped, I had no idea what had happened. It was like I had been heavily drugged. My thoughts were slow and sluggish, my mind didn't work as it usually did. I had the most insane desire to taste the metallic blood of any living creature. Only it didn't seem insane anymore, like it was just as simple as a cup of coffee." I tilted my head as I recalled the event that had likely saved me from a mistake, "A bear chose that moment to walk out of the trees. It huffed threateningly at me. My new zombie instincts made me immediately respond with a snarl. The sound was so ferocious that it actually shocked me and snapped me partially out of the bloodlust trance. The thirst was raging and my control was thin since I had barely eaten anything in three days. "The bear ran. I staggered to my feet and happened to come across an injured rabbit. The smell of its blood overwhelmed me. My new instincts were perfect for locating it swiftly and easily. I had eaten rabbit before growing up, so the thought of eating rabbit didn't overly bother me."

I paused, "I have no clear recollection of why, but I started drinking its blood due to the powerful craving. I recall being tempted to eat the meat as well, but that thought seemed... shadowed... and I was off balance from my earlier snarl and what I was experiencing. I could resist that temptation and did simply because I had no clue what was going on." I shrugged, "A few days passed and I got more accustomed to the virus's influence. I headed back to the train to see if anyone else had turned. I wanted to talk with them and see if they were going through the same thing I was. None of the zombies were in control and when I came across them they were eating someone else who had been thrown off the train. I had to fight for control due to the bloodlust. Those zombies were eating others who had been thrown off of the train and I remember watching them ripping off mouthfuls of flesh. They weren't sane and they were eating humans. I was sane and hadn't done such a thing." I glanced at a zombie as we drove by it, "I hung out in the trees around the train, hoping for news or simply someone to talk to. I tried to approach a few people who were sneezing to talk with them, but I was limited to the darkness of night and they ran from my glowing eyes. A few days later I heard the radio in the train alerting anyone who turned that if they could avoid eating humans or eating any kind of raw meat that they had a chance to remain in control if they drank the blood of any mammal except for humans." I was silent for a few moments, "The smell of all of the humans in those small train cars was bothering me since I hadn't gotten used to hunting animals for their blood yet. I left the area to see if I could find a town. I found a town all right, but it was inhabited by nothing but zombies at this point. I went back to the train to warn them, but I was too late. Zombies had found the train and managed to break in. I searched for three days, but found no survivors." I exhaled slowly, "I traveled for weeks before I realized just how far the virus had spread. I met a few other in control zombies in the following months. A pair of Nightstalkers informed me about the welding glasses trick. I eventually stopped at a cabin on the edge of the mountains and remained there until I happened to stumble across Marissa, Tom and the kids seven days ago." I fell silent and the others were quiet for some time. Daniel broke the silence, "I had gotten the vaccine almost a month late due to a delayed delivery to our area. No one in our area had the vaccine early, so the original outbreak missed our location until those in it started turning. I had heard all of those reports before I started sneezing. I remember how hard it was when I turned. I can't imagine going through it without knowing what to expect. Did you ever attack or kill anyone?" I considered the matter, "If you don't count that clown from last night, then no. Even if they tried to kill me, I simply tried to escape. I may have broken the arm of one guy who attempted to kill me, but I wasn't actually trying to inflict damage. You?" His gaze watched me steadily, "I only harmed someone once without provocation and that was during the first days when I wasn't accustomed to my new temper. I have seriously injured or killed dozens who first attacked those I was traveling with or myself. I did give them a warning, but they chose to ignore it." That last sentence had been meant as a warning for me. I nodded, not overly surprised. I had already guessed that he lived with humans and that almost guaranteed conflict at some point. Out in the forest I only had Runners and deer to argue with, other than occasionally dodging looting humans in town. Nina spoke again, "Just how short is your temper? I thought that it would have been worse than what I have seen from you." It didn't surprise me that she wanted to know just how unpredictable I was. She had been uncertain about what her bounds were last night when I was guiding her back. 

I shrugged, "Depends on what is trying to trigger it. It is actually pretty short. I have been trying very hard this week to keep it under wraps, but it isn't something I can hide over a longer period of time. The presence of a Terror has my instincts off balance enough that they are more on the defensive and it makes keeping a rein on my temper a bit easier." Nina jotted down notes in her notepad, "That is very interesting. How do you react to the presence of Runners or regular zombies? How did you manage with those other Nightstalkers?" I wished that we would arrive at the Stronghold so I could gracefully escape these questions. This lady was persistent enough that saying that I didn't feel like talking probably wouldn't stop her. A sarcastic comment or growl at her would likely land me in hot water with her bodyguard. "I didn't have any trouble with the sane Nightstalkers. I did encounter two ferals, the one left once she realized that I was also a Nightstalker. The other one was a rather nasty piece of work, even for a Nightstalker. I was carrying enough human objects that he wouldn't stop trying to attack me. I ended up killing him." I exhaled gustily and rolled my shoulders as my annoyance built. I was tired of talking and didn't really appreciate spilling out my life story to a stranger who was taking notes. I didn't care if she might have been a counselor previously, it seemed rude and annoyed me. Why couldn't she have been the type to sketch the scenery or something? "Regular zombies rarely bother me if I don't pretend to be human. A growl sets them straight if they get close. Runners always investigate me. About half are deterred with a growl or snarl, but the majority of them are confused by my sunglasses and I usually end up taking a swipe at them before they believe me. Met a couple of sane Runners. One visited for a couple of weeks, he was a bit uneasy around me, but we got along well enough while he was in the area." She tilted her head, "You tend to have the same ways of showing irritation with body language as Daniel does. That is quite fascinating." I had different words for her observation, but didn't say them aloud lest Daniel toss me off the truck. Her note taking and intent observations had me on edge. Curiosity was one thing, but she was getting my nerves with her endless questions even though we had only been talking for about fifteen minutes. The sooner I parted ways with this group, the happier I would be. Thankfully she fell silent as she examined several pages of notes and wrote more down. I watched as the scenery and occasional zombie passed by. We slowed as Hank turned at the specified corner. Nicky yawned in boredom, "Just how far away is the Stronghold?" Nina replied without even looking up from her notes, "About three days away." I turned my head towards Nina, I knew that there had to be closer ones. Most people refused to sleep overnight on the road. My suspicion once more rose. We may not be driving much faster than was allowed in a school zone, but we were still driving and not walking. Ben looked confused, "I thought the Strongholds were closer together?" She shrugged, "There could be, that is just the one we know about and it is home for us." I slowly took a deep breath to refrain from growling in irritation as I took a closer look at the road behind us. A large number of tracks had been going straight at that junction we just turned on. Chances were that there was a closer Stronghold in that direction. We didn't have enough gas to go half a day, let alone three days. Most vehicles we passed had the gas cap let open, showing that someone else had checked for gas and come up empty. If we tried to walk all the way there, we could be walking for a month. I wouldn't be able to handle a month with an overly watchful Terror dogging every step I took. I would go mad if it didn't come to blows first. Silence fell once more. The clouds parted and the sun decided to make its appearance. Of course my usual rotten streak of luck dictated that it had to shine right on my face. I pulled my hood over my face to shade my sunglasses. I turned my head to the side so I didn't have to face the direction of the bright light. I watched the scenery flow by. The truck horn honked and I lifted my head. Nicky peered through the cab windows to the road ahead, "It is coming up on your side Trinity." I wondered idly if there was any possible way of convincing someone to trade their luck for mine. They would undoubtedly be getting the rotten end of that deal. It would make my life much easier though. I shifted to my knees as the Runner banged on the passenger door as it tried to get to the humans it could see. I leaned over the side of the truck and snarled nastily at him. His eyes had been locked on those inside the cab and he hadn't expected me. He snarled back at me as he backed up a few steps, by then we had driven past him. He would be unable to catch up unless we ran out of gas shortly. A rumbling growl shifted my attention behind me. I turned my head swiftly and eyed Daniel up warily, his muscles were tensed as his eyes were locked onto me. His eyes were red once more, showing that he was too riled up to camouflage his eyes. I didn't look directly at him, lest he take it as a challenge. I spoke quietly with no hint of my usual sarcasm or insult, "Calm down. I snarled at the Runner, not at you or the humans." Nina joined my cause as she carefully put her hand on his arm, "Easy Daniel, she chased the Runner off to keep us safe." He exhaled gustily as he slowly relaxed. His eyes were fixated on me, my snarl had triggered his instincts even though it hadn't been directed at him. It looked as if Terrors took challenges to their rank and power about as gracefully as Nightstalkers did. I knew it wasn't really his fault, it was our zombie instincts, and as a Terror, his were likely more touchy than mine. I didn't recall this sort of tension between me and any other sane zombies I had met after the initial greeting had been made. We had been able to relax around one another for the most part, but that didn't seem to be happening with the two of us. I wasn't sure why, and it only added to my own unease. This situation is as badly balanced as a blind butler handling six glasses of red wine on a white carpet with barefooted dancers twirling around him. It is trouble just waiting for a time and a place to happen. Daniel managed to regain his composure after a few minutes. I relaxed a bit as well. I had been ready to jump off of the truck if he came at me. If he chased me off, I was leaving willingly - and I wouldn't be coming back. I turned my gaze once more to the passing scenery, willing time to move faster, or at the very least, for us to stumble across a second working vehicle. Neither of my wishes were granted. Several hours later my bad luck reared its head again as the truck started sputtering as the gas ran dry. It wasn't long before it became just another roadside ornament.

 

Chapter 14

            Walking had one big perk though, I was able to put more space between myself and Daniel which eased the tension somewhat. I once more put Liz on my shoulders, she squealed in excitement, "Giddy up horsie!" I growled lightly at her, I was way better than a horse... She kicked a bit with her heels, "Horsie's don't growl, they go neigh!" Nicky started snickering and I sent a glare her way. Hank ignored us and immediately headed for the nearby treeline to walk hidden from sight as we had before. Everyone else followed suit. Daniel took the lead while I followed as the rear guard. The day was cooler so the humans weren't sweating or overheating as badly. I was ready to strangle Ben, he seemed to think that his gas was the equivalent of propulsion power. Nicky swatted his arm, "If we could bottle the stuff that keeps escaping your ass, we would be halfway to the moon by now. But we can't - so cut it out or walk on the road. You smell so bad any zombie would think you are already dead." Her complaint didn't help cut down on the number of escapees. I made a mental note to subtly check all of the bags and hide any cans of beans that may be present. We paused for another break for them to rest while Ben and Hank went over the map with Nina and Daniel to determine if we could make it to the nearest town before nightfall. I moved off to the side where the air was clearer of their scent. My head felt like I had been in a perfume shop all day, I simply wanted a breath of fresher air. I breathed deeply. There were some deer nearby, a couple of rabbits and some pheasants. I hadn't hunted last night so the smaller creatures were tempting. I might have to take a break of my own during their next breather. My Nightstalker instincts shifted slightly as I caught a hint of a faint and vague scent. I raised my head to sniff the air, but was unable to detect it again. I tried to pick up the smell, but couldn't pick it up even with half a dozen deep breaths. Perhaps I imagined the faint scent or it may have been several weak scents overlapping into something unfamiliar. It wouldn't be the first time that such a thing happened. We started walking again. But my instincts wouldn't settle, I kept glancing around as I peered into the surrounding trees and listened for anything out of place. Nicky decided to walk beside me after we had walked for some time. She gave me an odd look, "What has you looking around like that?" The others glanced back at me as we kept walking. I frowned, more from faint unease than from irritation. I focused on Daniel, "Something is triggering my instincts slightly, but I am not sure what. Are you picking anything up?" He stopped and tilted his head as he sniffed the air and listened while debating if anything was bugging him. Several seconds later he shook his head, "Nothing." We resumed walking. The worst part was that I couldn't find anything out of place either. No odd scents, no weird noises, nothing. Great, now I am jumping at shadows. For all I know, I imagined that whiff of scent I thought I detected. I couldn't pick it up a second time and there is no wind for something to hide downwind. Besides, Daniel would hear anything that approached before it got to us. I just couldn't put my finger on why that scent had seemed familiar, as if I should have known what it was. It bothered me like an itch I couldn't scratch as we continued walking. My instincts still wouldn't settle. Half an hour later our companions required another rest. I moved off to the side, intending to go out of hearing range to do a bit of hunting. Perhaps some pheasant blood would allow me to settle down. I could smell some of the birds not far from here. I took a deeper breath to see how close they really were. I froze as I caught the faint scent again, only it was much stronger this time. I also knew why I felt like I had known what that scent belonged to. Of all of the rotten luck... I dropped into a slight crouch and gave a warning growl to the others. I backed up a few steps towards them while facing the direction that the danger was approaching from.

Daniel's footsteps approached me, "What is it?" My voice was a growl as my unease increased steadily, "We got another Terror trailing us and it is approaching quickly." How was this even possible? Terrors were extraordinarily rare. I hadn't seen a Terror since I turned and now there were two in the immediate area. I heard inhales and exclamations of surprise and fear behind us. Daniel growled in anger as he came level with me while facing the direction I was. Nina's voice was the only one of calm reason, "He or she may be in control. They could be curious as to why two zombies are traveling with a bunch of humans on foot." I raised my head and took a deep breath while searching for details. I wasn't getting much, but I also wasn't picking up the more civilized scent of a sane zombie who washed their clothing or used personal hygiene products. Another growl rumbled through my chest, "I have my doubts about that one. The scent isn't quite right for a sane zombie." Daniel dropped into a crouch as well as he took several steps forward into the middle of the clearing we had stopped in. Nina started directing the others away just in case, "Let's go over by that tree, just in case it does come to a fight." The Terror must have crossed the road and caught our trail from when we drove by. It had been following us and was catching up now that we were on foot. He knew he was getting closer and had picked up speed. Anyone in control would have slowed in caution. I backed up some more. In a fight against a Terror, Daniel would be doing most of the heavy lifting. A Terror was much stronger than me and a single blow could send me flying, if it didn't break bones as well. Daniel and I also didn't trust each other enough to fight together. Once our instincts came to the fore, we would be just as likely to land a strike on one another as on the approaching Terror. The humans had retreated to the far end of the clearing. Just to be on the safe side, I backed up until I was at the edge of the trees along the side of the clearing. I had no desire to become a Terror's punching bag. Daniel's snarl marked the moment he finally caught our pursuer's scent. Not long afterwards I heard approaching footsteps. We knew he was running in a hunting crouch from how his footsteps sounded. A light rumble echoed in my chest while Daniel snarled as the red eyed heavily built man entered the clearing. He slid to a stop as he returned Daniel's snarl. This Terror was not in control. He stalked closer to Daniel who mirrored his movements. Both were in a crouched position while they threatened each other with snarls of challenge. I slowly backed into the cover of the trees. There was no way I could fight a Terror head on. I slunk through the bushes until I was off to the side as I closely watched the two circling like unfriendly dogs. Terrors seemed a bit more cautious or reluctant to close in an instant vicious melee battle. Nightstalkers, on the other hand, were well known to lay into a foe tooth and nail with our short tempers. The tension was rapidly building between the two though. Such a standoff couldn't last long with two powerful zombies who refused to back down. The feral charged with a snarl and Daniel met him halfway with a snarl of his own. The two titans clashed and both came out with a few scratches as they parted to circle each other once more. Neither had landed a blow sufficient enough to declare a winner, and in this situation, the feral Terror wouldn't back down if he was being kept from his prey. That was a fight over food, not something to do with his status in the local hierarchy. The humans were rapidly backing up in case the fight moved in their direction. I remained hidden in my concealed location and slowly drew my grain sickle. The Terrors closed again with roaring snarls that actually echoed throughout the clearing. They managed to lock their hands together as they strained to try and push each other backwards. 

They looked pretty evenly matched, although the feral had a heavier build and weighed more. I began to have doubts that Daniel would walk away from this fight as the winner. Being sane did not mean you were stronger, all it meant was that we were in control and could use strategies and plans. In a battle of raw power, Daniel didn't really have any way to trick the feral. I couldn't figure out why he wasn't using weapons though. He didn't even carry any weapons. That detail made little to no sense, although he had probably never required weapons before today. Daniel was slowly losing ground to the larger zombie. Their struggle was causing them to slowly spin on the spot as they fought for an advantage. My vision took on a redder tinge in my desire to attack. I tensed my muscles as the two zombies shifted in their struggle. Just a bit more... There! I launched out of my ambush at the feral Terror's back. My ambush was silent, not a growl or snarl left my lips. A silent Nightstalker was often more dangerous than a growling or snarling one. The Terror I was targeting had no warning as my hand landed on his head and pushed it sideways at the same instant that my sickle sliced the entire front of his neck open. I immediately pushed off against his side to jump away. I had to get out of his range or else I would be in big trouble. My sickle hadn't managed to cut the spinal cord, but the injury I inflicted would cause him serious issues when his lungs ran out of oxygen or filled with blood. Either way it would slow him enough for Daniel to finish him. I swiftly backed up to the edge of the trees. The feral Terror was trying to turn to face his new attacker as blood poured out of his throat. He forgot about Daniel for a moment and Daniel took that opening. He wrapped both hands around the feral's throat and snapped his neck before tearing the spinal column apart to behead the deadly menace. I wiped my sickle clean on the grass and quickly sheathed it before Daniel finished with the Terror. Daniel turned on me with a snarl, his eyes glowing red from how high his instincts were. I doubted that he was thinking clearly if his instincts were so elevated. I dropped into a crouch and slowly backed up. I restrained a growl in case it egged him on, his instincts were flying high from his battle and I was the only possible contender for his position as winner. He took a slow step forward with another snarl. I narrowed my eyes as I took several smooth steps back. He was still in zombie mode and not thinking rationally. Well, if he wanted to play by zombie rules... I used my finger nail to cut through a part of my palm, letting my own blood flow. It smelt of Nightstalker. Just like with the Runner, the first solid blow or first blood won. I had a new injury that drew blood, in his zombie haze it should declare him the winner. Apparently Terrors didn't always observe the unwritten zombie laws. He took another step forward with a deep growl. It was a struggle for me to not snarl back as my own instincts wanted. I knew I had landed a winning blow on the enemy Terror and my instincts wanted him to acknowledge that. My instincts hated backing up in defeat or giving in. He took another step with a snarl as he dropped into a deeper crouch. I had interfered in his battle and almost stole his kill. He was not happy with me and he wasn't in full control. I doubted he would harm a human, but I was a zombie and that blurred too many lines in his current frame of mind. He wasn't playing by either human or zombie rules. This made him far too unpredictable and dangerous. I had to leave before he attacked me. He would probably kill me in his current state. I backed up and then moved sideways behind a thick stand of shrubs where I was out of sight. I immediately spun and ran off as silently as only a Nightstalker could. He wouldn't be able to hear my footsteps and would think that I was still there. It would buy me precious time. I moved as fast as I could while remaining silent. I silently thanked my two Nightstalker friends for our many games of tracking as we learned to cover our scent. I didn't have time for most of the methods, but I used the simplest and quickest ones. I cut my hand and rolled the blood on a piece of driftwood that I sent floating down the creek before I rubbed plants on my hands and clothing. Let him chase that driftwood for a while. It was a stronger smell than my current plant obscured one. I had to move quickly since the plant scent wouldn't cover my zombie scent for more than a minute or so. I moved to the larger tree branches, using them like monkey bars so I didn't leave any tracks or scent trail on the ground. It slowed me though, so I only did it in some spots before I resumed my flight back north. I had no intention of going back to the humans. Daniel could escort them. He was strong enough to keep them safe and if the two of us tried to travel together, it would come to blows. I snorted as I realized that we hadn't even managed to travel together for 24 hours. Twice we had come close to a challenge and this third time was the last straw. He had killed the Terror without hesitation even while his instincts were high, and zombie law said that one did not kill another zombie. He would have killed me just as swiftly. I altered my path frequently, a straight trail was far too easy to follow. I kept fleeing with the occasional trail breaking trick that could slow or lose someone tracking by scent. My instincts hated fleeing, but I preferred living so I overruled them and kept heading north. I didn't hear him on my trail yet, but that didn't mean anything. I had no clue if Terrors could move silently. He was definitely faster than me though, and he would be able to hear me before I could hear him if we were making the same amount of noise. I slowed somewhat as I kept going. I may be a zombie, but all zombies had limits and I was reaching mine. I had been going at a full run for the last fifteen minutes and I was breathing hard. I was designed for the silent stalk and the nighttime ambush, not long distance chases. I didn't stop though. I kept moving.

 

Chapter 15

Ten minutes later I paused to listen and scent the air. I didn't hear anything, but I was picking up Daniel's scent. He was on my trail. Considering he wasn't calling out, that wasn't a good thing. Unless he didn't think I would answer, which was also a possibility.
 I picked up speed again while looking around for something that could resemble cover. Not much would stop a Terror, so unless I found a cave that I could just squeeze into, I was going to be facing him shortly. I doubted that he was going to be out of control like he had been earlier, but I wasn't taking any chances. I started to pick up the sound of his footsteps. He was gaining on me rapidly. I glanced around wildly, I needed something to give me an advantage before my time ran out. My eyes landed on a massive tree with huge branches. I jumped up on one of the branches as I turned to face my pursuer. I could hear that he was running in a hunting crouch as he tracked me. I dropped into a light crouch as I drew my sickle. My left hand reached into the pocket of my jacket for an item that might give me an advantage even against a Terror, if I could take him by surprise. Mace. It was bad enough for a human, but it was agony for a zombie since our sense of smell was stronger. It would bother me, but I could breathe through my mouth since I knew what to expect. If he got a full blast of mace in his face, he would be distracted long enough for me to temporarily cripple him and escape. He would expect me to go for his neck, but I had no intention of that since he would be expecting it. Truthfully, I didn't want to kill him or potentially strip his human mind of control by knocking him out. I would be aiming for his legs. If he couldn't run, he couldn't chase me. I was more than ready to play dirty. I knew I was outclassed and I wanted to walk out of this confrontation alive. I kept the small object hidden in my hand. He would undoubtedly know I was holding something, but he wouldn't know what it was. The heat rose in my veins as I took my stand. I was done running for the moment. My vision hazed a deeper red as my instincts rose to the front of my mind. I let them rise. He entered the clearing at a run and slid to a stop as he instantly spotted my motionless form. His red eyes showed that his own instincts were quite high from the earlier fight or from trying to track me. Possibly a combination both. He took a step forward as he started to rise out of his crouch as he began to walk towards me. I was in no mood to have him any closer to me and I still had no intentions to hear him out or go back. My snarl was closer to an enraged shriek of pent up emotions. At this point I was pissed and I made sure anything within hearing range knew it. He paused with narrowed eyes, he had not expected me to stand my ground and threaten him. His eyes glowed redder, showing that my challenge was hitting his instincts hard. I growled at him, egging him on as I dropped into a deeper crouch. If I pressed his zombie instincts enough, it could fog the human mind slightly and he wouldn't realize what I was up to until it was too late. A Terror should have no problem beating a Nightstalker. In theory at least. With luck, he wouldn't question that assumption either. I noticed that he still carried no weapons, but I was armed. Hopefully he would overlook that detail as he relied on his greater speed and strength. My tactics to rile him up were working. His muscles shook lightly in his desire to attack as he took a step forward. I stared right at him in a challenge as I lapsed into silence. My ambush was set. I could see him struggling for control as he took several more steps forward. He paused and shook his head as he finally took in my silent poised form. His eyes locked onto the sickle in my right hand and I could see some rational thoughts once more entering his mind. His eyes narrowed as he noticed my sudden silence when I should have been growling or snarling. He took a step backwards. 

My own eyes narrowed as I growled lowly, he hadn't come close enough for my ambush. He seemed to realize that I had set up a trap. His jaw clenched as he restrained a responding growl. The glow in his eyes faded slightly, even though the thought of me trying to catch him in a trap should have set him off even more. My eyes were still glowing strongly, my ambush was set and my instincts were high. He couldn't see my eyes though. The sunglasses gave me the closest thing to a poker face in the zombie world. Our eyes often told more than our body language did. He took another step back and exhaled gustily as he fought for control, "I didn't come out here to fight." His voice was nearly a growl with his instincts so high, but he was regaining control. I didn't respond remained silent in my position, waiting like a spider in a web. With a sudden motion he stood straight and dropped his slight crouch. Such an action took force while facing another zombie that was also acting like a zombie, especially when it was a lower ranking zombie trying to goad you into an attack. Despite my attempts to push him over the edge and past rational thought, he was regaining control quickly, which wasn't good for my plan. That ticked me off even more. A growl escaped my lips against my will. He tilted his head as he examined me carefully, trying to figure out what I was up to and why I was trying to start a fight when I was outclassed. My own control was tenuous at this point. My instincts wanted to attack this annoying and threatening zombie who had the gall to avoid my ambush. He spoke again, "I followed you out to apologize-" I snorted in disbelief. He gritted his teeth as his eyes glowed brightly for a few seconds before fading. He tried again, his voice deeper with a contained growl, "I am sorry for stalking you earlier. Will you please come back?" I narrowed my eyes, an apology for any zombie was extremely hard. It went completely against our competitive instincts. I didn't really want to return and I failed to see why I should return though. My reply was snarky and nearly a snarl, "Why? So you can attack me later on? I'll pass." His eyes flared again, but he swiftly got it under control. He was confusing me, my insults should be riling him up, but he was handling himself far better than he had when I had attempted to be passive. Had he been a Nightstalker, it would have come to a fight shortly after he entered the clearing. He growled a reprimand, but it was the lighter growl of a sane zombie, not the growl of one reacting on instinct. I couldn't believe it, if he wasn't in full control, then he was the next thing to it. How the hell did that happen?! He should be going off the deep end, not attempting to rationalize with me! His eyes never left me, "I realize that my instincts caused me to act unfairly. I will try to control my reactions better. The kid started crying for you when they realized that you had actually left." I growled, my mind was mostly running on instinct at the moment. Trying to pull my heart and human emotions into this wasn't going to work while they were so buried. He seemed to realize it as well. He shifted his weight, "Can you at least come out of that tree? I promise I won't attack you." I chuckled darkly, my height advantage was severely bothering him. I considered it for a few seconds, if me being up here bothered him so, it might have been one of the reasons he didn't come close enough for my trap. He likely thought that I had set something up on the ground. I bared my teeth silently in a half amused fashion, as if I would be so foolish as to rely on some faulty pitfall or trip trap. I stepped sideways and dropped down to the ground. He relaxed a bit more, "Thanks. Now how about coming back before I strangle Nicky? She was muttering endlessly about cans of tomato juice and crowbars while insulting my mother, my attitude, and my left shoe. I couldn't make heads or tails of what she was muttering about, but she threatened to make me understand perfectly if I didn't bring you back. She said she wasn't really fussy if I had to tie you up and drag you back either."

Yep, that sounded like Nicky. I sighed heavily in irritation as I realized his tactic, he was making me think about people I knew. He was forcing me to think with my human mind and heart, which would suppress my instincts. It was working too. The red haze in my vision had abated to its usual level as my human mind was surpassing my instincts. Daniel knew that he was gaining ground, "Come back before the kid cries herself to sleep. She is blaming me for chasing you off." I snorted and tilted my head accusingly at him. He shrugged, "Okay, okay, it is true, but I didn't mean to do it. I am also not used to having a child screaming that I chased her horsie away." I gritted my teeth, I wasn't a horse. I also didn't feel like spending weeks on foot with this guy's insane mood swings, "You will do well enough protecting them. Chances of encountering another Terror are slim to none and if you use weapons, you won't have an issue. Liz will forget about me in a day or two and I am sure that you can survive Nicky's insanity blitzes." I shifted sideways as I prepared to leave. He took a step forward while holding out a hand as if to stop me from jumping from the top of a 20 story building, "Wait." There was an odd note of desperation to his voice, it was faint, but it was there. I growled in irritation. Today had pushed my patience far past its limits. "What?" He hesitated and growled lightly in frustration, "We need you or else the chances of us making to the Stronghold are slim." I snorted in blatant disbelief, "Open your eyes, you are a Terror. Those tests this morning should have told you something." This was irritating, I was back in full control. No hint of growl had tainted my last reply. Bloody conversations... He gritted his teeth, "I can't protect them well at night. We probably won't cross another Terror, but I highly suspect that we will cross a Nightstalker between here and the Stronghold." I tilted my head as I gave him an ironic look, "You were ready to thrash my hide. Nothing is stopping you from shredding a feral Nightstalker." He growled slightly and his words were reluctant, "I can't see well enough at night to catch a Nightstalker. I am nearly blind once the sun goes down." I paused and regarded him in stunned disbelief. He continued, "I can see like an eagle during the day, but once the sun goes down I can barely see my own two feet. I wouldn't have a chance at stopping a determined Nightstalker and even several Runners could give me problems in the dark. Great strength means nothing if you can't see your foe until he has snatched or bitten those you are guarding." I slowly turned back to face him, examining his expression. It was open. A quick test of the air revealed that he spoke the truth. He detested spilling his weakness out to someone who could so easily take advantage of it, but he had done it. I blinked as I realized that this was the reason he had such a problem with my presence previously. I was the perfect weapon to exploit his weakness. Any Nightstalker was. No wonder he had mood swings around me, his instincts would recognize that I was a potential threat once the sun dropped below the horizon. I watched him closely and spoke fairly quietly, "Are you serious?" I had never heard of this little detail. I wasn't sure if he was making it up, but I didn't think so. It explained why it had taken him almost two hours to hunt last night. Several other small details were also lining up. He sighed gustily in defeat, "Yes. And I would prefer if you didn't tell anyone else." I nodded slowly. I didn't really like it, but I knew that I would be returning with him at this point. The odds of him encountering a Nightstalker or several Runners at night were quite high. He was counting on me to be the night guard. Oddly enough, the tension that had been present all day had mostly disappeared during our conversation. I sighed as I put my sickle away and tucked the mace into my pocket. I took several cautious steps forward as I left my crouch behind to walk like a human towards him. He watched me with caution, uncertain of what I was up to this time. I paused as I walked up to him, "Let's get going then, before Nicky decides to try and force some regular zombies into having a tea party. That lady really needs around the clock supervision." He relaxed as he realized that I wasn't about to try to attack him. He nodded and turned to lead the way back. He went slow enough that I could keep up as we ran side by side. There was still a considerable amount of distance between us. We were zombies and we were a bit finicky over our personal space. I jumped over a fallen log, "I won't be able to hold this pace for long." He nodded amiably, "I will let you set the pace." I tilted my head as I considered how long we had been gone, "You could always run ahead to ensure that they are safe and I will catch up." He shook his head, "They should be fine for a while longer. There were no other zombies around when I left. I gave Nina a really loud whistle in case trouble appears and I should be able to hear it from here." I had a suspicion that he was worried that I could have another change of heart. We ran in silence for some time as my breathing got heavier. I had run hard to get away from him and my stamina was about tapped out. He glanced at me as he slowed down to an easy jog, "What exactly was Nicky talking about when she was rattling off something about you carrying five crowbars?" "I had been carrying a bunch of crowbars in case several Runners came at us. A solid blow can knock them off their feet and give me a bit of time to take the others out." I didn't bother mentioning that it could knock them out cold since that would rouse his instincts. He looked me over, "You aren't carrying them now." I sighed, "I left them at the hotel this morning in hopes that it would remove some of the tension." He thought about my comment for a while, "I am not sure if you noticed, but it seems like the tension has mostly disappeared. I have fewer problems with your presence now than I did with the previous Nightstalker I met." I considered my other zombie acquaintances, "I noticed it as well. The current level of tension is about what I usually feel around other sane zombies when I somewhat know them." There would always be some tension, we were zombies and we had attitude problems. The biggest change was due to Daniel, he wasn't acting nearly as suspicious. Previously he had seemed to be constantly on the verge of attacking me. Maybe we could make it until nightfall without clashing in a scuffle. I wasn't holding my breath though. I glanced at him and changed the topic, "Why does Nicky have a grudge against your left shoe?" He made a face, "Apparently it kept giving her funny looks as we were walking and it winked at her once. She wanted to take a package of rainbow colored permanent felt markers after it as revenge. She had no problems with my right shoe." I chuckled in spite of myself. Leave it to Nicky to insult a Terror's shoe. He shook his head, "She is an... odd... lady." I chuckled, "Just wait until she really gets going." Daniel gave me a disbelieving look, "You didn't see or hear her. I don't think she can get worse than that." My grin was somewhat feral, "If she wasn't throwing things and chasing people, then you haven't seen anything yet." His expression was incredulous. He was having a hard time wrapping his head around it. I didn't blame him, if I hadn't seen it for myself, I probably wouldn't have believed it either. I chuckled and picked up my pace a bit since I mostly caught my breath.

 

Chapter 16

            We were able to head straight back, and since I wasn't slowed with evasion tactics, our return was going faster. It took us only 20 minutes to return. We slowed as we entered the clearing. The humans were all waiting, fidgeting nervously as they glanced between the dead Terror and the surrounding forest. Nicky stood up as soon as she spotted us, "About bloody time. We were beginning to wonder if we had to call search and rescue. Nina said you were the fastest around. Unless my watch is messing with me again, you were gone over an hour. That is not fast in my books when you are trying to catch up to someone who just left." Daniel gave me an 'I told you so' look, "Are you sure we can't leave her behind?" I shook my head with a faint chuckle, "Nah. She tends to keep Ben in line and without her he would be a royal pain in the ass." Nicky looked me over once as she walked up to me, "Huh. He didn't even have to tie you and drag you back. The next time you decide to go on a long vacation I will be the one coming after you to haul you back." My instincts didn't handle people bossing me around well, and they certainly didn't take threats well. Especially from someone who wasn't a match for me on a day when I was out of patience. With a light growl, I swiftly ducked down and threw her over my shoulder. Daniel watched me with sharp eyes, ready to intervene if I had problems with my control. Nicky kicked her legs and pounded her fists on my back, "Put me down you big moose!" It only took me five fast steps to reach the spot where Hank was sitting. I unceremoniously dumped her in his lap, "You get to look after her for a bit." Hank winced as he caught the spitfire I dropped in his lap. She looked up at him with a grin, "Hey big boy, guess you are stuck with me now, huh?" His expression clearly said that he wished to be anywhere else but here. I shook my head as I turned to look over at the sound of small footsteps running towards me. Liz's small body slammed into my legs and grabbed onto my pant legs, "You came back! Daniel said he would bring you back!" I sighed and sent a half glare at him, "Yes, Daniel managed to talk me into coming back." Nicky jumped off of Hank's lap, "All right! Let's get this show on the road because I am not camping beside that dead guy tonight!" It looked like they had just been waiting for us since they immediately started walking. Liz lifted her arms and I put her on my shoulders with a resigned sigh. Daniel once more took the lead while I brought up the rear. Nina walked beside Daniel and spoke quietly. It was too quiet for the others, but I could hear her well enough. "You were gone quite a long time." Daniel sent a slightly accusing glance over his shoulder at me before responding to Nina, "I was trying to track her scent and she sent me on a wild goose chase." They both undoubtedly knew I could hear their conversation, but neither seemed to care. Nina was curious, "How so?" Daniel exhaled slowly in irritation at the memory, "I followed the scent of her blood down the river only to realize much later that she had smeared her blood on a piece of driftwood and sent it downstream while she took off in a different direction. She broke her trail in a few other spots and I had to circle to pick it up again." I grinned, the driftwood one worked very well unless someone was expecting it. Even then they would have to check in case I had actually run alongside the creek. Daniel had likely never tried to track a sane zombie who was attempting to cover their scent trail. I could only imagine how frustrating the unexpected experience would have been for him. 

Nina once more pulled out her notepad and started scribbling in it. Daniel seemed accustomed to her ceaseless note-taking and curiosity. "And when you caught up to her?" He was silent for a few moments, "I am not entirely sure what she did, but I am positive that she had laid a trap somewhere in front of the tree she was standing in. She was not happy to see me and when I didn't immediately leave she tried to lure me closer to her trap." "What kind of trap?" He shrugged lightly, "I am not sure and I didn't go close enough to look for it since she was plainly waiting for me to trigger it." I was quite amused, which was an odd and foreign emotion after being a zombie for so long. I had rarely felt amused once I had turned, possibly because I had mostly avoided humans. Daniel thought that I had built and hidden some sort of trap. He had obviously never spent much time around Nightstalkers. She tilted her head, "How are you sure there was a trap? Did you see anything?" He was patient with her questions, "I looked, but I couldn't see it. After her initial snarl and growls she went completely silent and was waiting motionlessly." Nina nodded, "Clear signs of a Nightstalker in an ambush. I wonder what kind of trap she built if you couldn't spot it..." Nina glanced back and spoke a bit louder, although none of the other humans would hear her words, "Care to join us Trinity?" I snorted lightly, "I'll pass on this interrogation round, thanks. Besides, I might need that trick in the future." My voice was quiet enough that only Daniel would hear me. Daniel chuckled at my reluctance, "She says she will pass." The bugger also edited my response. I stifled a growl of faint annoyance at his actions while relaying my response. Nina sighed dejectedly, "I'll track her down once we make camp and have nothing to do. An unanswered question is a terrible thing and weighs on my mind heavily." I growled very faintly in irritation. That lady was persistent. Judging from how used Daniel was to it, she would obviously keep coming back until she wore you down. Her talking ceased as she saved her breath for walking. It was going to be a long day. 
 We stopped for another break and I headed towards an old car parked beside the road. Ben sighed, "The gas cap is open, no sense checking if it runs or not. If it did, it wouldn't be there." I called back, "I am not after gasoline." I popped the trunk and started digging around inside. People who drove old beaters like this often had tools in the vehicle in likely event that it broke down. I flipped the mat on the bottom over, revealing the spare tire. I bared my teeth in a triumphant grin as I grabbed what I had been digging for. The road was quite close to the tree line in this spot and the others were watching me in curiosity. Nicky gave me a funny look as she looked at my new toy, "I fail to see why we need a big socket wrench when we don't even have a truck." I chuckled, "It is no longer a socket wrench." Nine faces sent me looks of confusion that doubted my sanity. Nicky raised an eyebrow, "Well, it sure ain't a magic wand, so what do you call it?" I bared my teeth in a dark parody of a grin as I tucked it into my water bottle holder, "It is now a broken boomerang." She gave me a look that plainly said that she thought that I was the crazy one in the group, "Uh huh. Just remind me not to play frisbee with you."

Daniel was watching me closely while Nina looked on in curiosity. Their break ended before Nina had a chance to voice more of the questions that were clearly rattling around in her head. This was going to be a long trip if I had to keep evading her. This lady really needed a different hobby. 
 
 Our progress was slow and each abandoned vehicle on the road was also plainly out of gas. I sighed and then lifted my head to sniff the air again. Faint, but it was there. There were houses somewhere nearby. "Ben, can you pull out that map again for a second?" The group paused at my unexpected question. Ben pulled it out with a frown of confusion and handed it to me. I opened it and quickly located where we were on the map. This map didn't show small gravel roads or houses, just paved roads and towns. I lifted my head to inhale deeply, testing the air. Nina came forward, "What do you smell?" I looked over at her curious face, "Houses. They aren't on the map either." I glanced at Daniel, "Care to keep an eye on this group while I see if there is anything useful or edible in those houses?" He nodded and I passed the map back to Ben before putting Liz down. "I should be back in an hour or so depending how many houses there are." Daniel nodded and I turned to leave. I picked up speed and disappeared into the trees. I shifted back to my flowing crouch since it used less energy. I tracked the scent on the air and managed to locate three small houses a couple of kilometers away. There were two garages and four sheds as well. A quick sniff told me that there were two regular zombies present, a big flock of pigeons, a stray cat, and lots of mice. I headed to the closest garage and entered it. My eyes landed on the big pickup truck, its paint was still shiny and new. Its gas cap was closed. There were a set of keys on the workbench beside it. Several jerrycans labelled 'Gasoline' were sitting on the floor. I rubbed my hands gleefully as I opened up the truck door and turned the key. It sputtered for a few seconds after not running for so long before it idled down to run smoothly. It had half a tank. I turned it off and wrinkled my nose at the pungent diesel fumes. I went back to the jerrycans. One was full and a quick sniff told me that it did indeed hold gasoline. It was no good for this diesel truck, but I was taking it anyways. Most vehicles on the highway would take gas. I disconnected the garage door opener and lifted the door so I could get the truck out later. I headed to the next garage. It turned out to be some sort of workshop. I gave it a quick check, but nothing in here used either gasoline or diesel, so no jerrycans were present. My eyes carefully scanned the shelves for anything useful. Various power tools were neatly arranged on the shelves. I went over to open the only cabinet present. One small box caught my eye and I pulled it off the shelf. It was a survival military grade flashlight that could be charged either with the included solar panel or by cranking a handle. According to the claims on the back, once it was fully charged the battery would last for 15 hours. From the picture on the box, it was very bright and lit up a wide area instead of one narrow beam. I put it in my backpack for Daniel. Although if he points that thing at my eyes, I will reduce it to fragments. Nothing else in this garage interested me. I moved on to the sheds. I found one more jerrycan of gas. The sheds mostly held old junk and smelt strongly of mouse. I kicked a corner of the door off so the cat could have an easy meal and some shelter. No cat would ever let me near them now, but I had always had a soft spot for cats and horses. I turned back to the houses, but noticed the front of a quad poking out from behind the first garage. I hadn't noticed it until now. I could only see it because I was well off the side at this point. I moved towards it in curiosity. There was the quad and a leanto hidden against the back of the garage. I lightly pushed on the quad and gas sloshed in its tank. I went to grab an empty jerrycan and came back. I opened it up and pinched the gas line before slicing the soft tubing with my fingernail. I released the pressure and watched as gas flowed into the jerrycan. I left it to drain and went to look inside the leanto. I growled triumphantly, I had found the motherlode. It didn't take long to pick out the six red jerrycans that still held something. Two were labeled gasoline and four were labeled diesel. All six were almost full to boot. I hauled them all beside the truck. By then the quad was empty and I had half a jerrycan of gas from it. I dropped it by the truck before turning towards the houses. I entered the first house cautiously as I tested the air. It was empty of the living and the undead. I grabbed a bunch of canned and dried goods. I couldn't remember the last time I had pancakes and grabbed the unopened box of mix as well as several cans of canned milk. This house was also kind enough to donate a mattress for the back of the truck. I stashed several bags of food in the back of the truck before putting the jerrycans in as well. I decided against going into the other two houses. I had more than what we needed and we didn't need to haul tons of food around if we were only a three day drive away from the Stronghold. Daniel and I were also more than capable of hunting for the entire party. Besides, the next house held a child zombie and those things gave me the creeps. They were also more unpredictable than most zombies. I didn't feel like dealing with a mindless child that was hell bent on biting me. I loaded everything up and started the truck. I followed the muddy rut that they used for a road to the highway. I rolled down the window to sniff the air, I was still ahead of them. The tires creaked on loose gravel as I drove down the highway slowly. 
 
 ----------------------------------------------- Author's Note: Thank you for taking the time to read my story. If you like a particular chapter, please vote on it. It is possible to vote on each chapter. I appreciate every single vote or comment. Such support means a lot to me.

 

Chapter 17


 I saw Nicky and Ben run out towards the road in the distance waving their arms. Well, that made it easy to find them. Daniel would have heard the motor and alerted them. I slowed as I approached them, grinning widely. I put it in park and turned it off before hopping out. Hank winced, "Diesels prefer to run. Turning them on and off frequently is hard on them." I shrugged, "Well, you get to drive now. There is half a tank and more in some jerrycans in the back." Nicky bounced up and down, "Awesome! I don't have to walk anymore. Is there a beer in the back by chance?!" I snorted, "No, but there are some trail bars and a mattress." She somehow managed to jump up and scramble over the side of the tall truck in her eagerness to locate the trail bars. I shook my head, "They are in the green bag, you can pass one to everyone." Hank checked the inside of the truck, "Same arrangement as last time?" Tom nodded, "Sounds good to me." Ben groaned, "Do I really have to sit back there with those two? I was waiting for them to go at each other's throats all morning." Daniel snorted, "Be happy we didn't throw you off the truck. If you so much as touch another can of beans, we will be having words." I chuckled, Daniel had been directly across from Ben and even the wind that whirled around the truck box hadn't spared him the smell. Then again, if Nicky could smell it, it was a given that any zombie could. His beans had mostly run out, so our air supply was more or less safe. Chloe was all for another truck ride with humans. The rest of us took up the same spots we had last time. Nina was eyeing me up eagerly even before Hank started the truck. I pulled my hood over my head to shade my glasses and hunkered down as I watched the scenery pass by in a futile attempt to avoid Nina. Daniel seemed to find my evasive actions amusing since he started chuckling. Nina also sounded amused, "By the way, pretending to ignore me isn't going to work. I know how good your hearing is." I sighed, "Can I pretend to be asleep?" Nina chuckled, "I know it isn't possible for you to sleep in these conditions." I growled in faint annoyance before turning to look at Daniel, "If you can get her to leave me in peace, I did find something at that farm that you will really appreciate." He looked curious and sent a questioning look at Nina. Nina crossed her arms with a faint huff, "Fine, I won't ask her any questions until sundown. The things I do for you..." Daniel grinned at her in thanks before looking back at me in curiosity. I dug through my backpack and tossed the box towards him. He must have good eyesight, since he managed to read the box midair and promptly opened it as he caught it. Nina leaned over to pick up the now-empty box. She blinked in surprise before glancing at me. I guess she had no clue that Daniel had told me his weakness. Daniel skimmed the manual quickly before hooking the solar panel up to the flashlight. Once it was charging he turned his attention back to me. He gave me an honest and grateful smile, "Thank you." I nodded and turned my head to watch as we passed a zombie. It had been worth it just to evade Nina for a few hours. I glanced back at him, "By the way, if you ever point that at my face, I will beat you black and blue with it, and then take it away from you." He growled at my threat and I bared my teeth in response. Nina looked worried about the possibility of a fight for a moment, but Daniel surprised all of us as he started chuckling. Nina gave him an odd look. That made two of us, I had expected another growl before he subsided. I did not expect him to find my idle threat amusing. 

He bared his teeth at me in a light warning, although his voice was still somewhat amused, "Nina may have agreed to not ask you questions, but I made no such promise. So. What trick do you have up your sleeve that has given you this boost of confidence?" He was teasing me and I knew it. I narrowed my eyes as he decided to take on Nina's role of interrogator. "Quite simple really. You have used up my allotment of patience for the day and I am tired of your shit. Surely even you must know that Nightstalkers are not known for their tolerance." It was actually a common fact. Nightstalkers were well known for being temperamental. We were infamous for our fiery tempers. Terrors supposedly had a temper similar to Nightstalkers from the unfounded rumors I heard, but Terrors were much rarer than Nightstalkers. Nicky chuckled, amused by my reply. Ben was trying to make himself smaller in the corner in case a fight broke out the way we were egging one another on. Nina pulled out her notebook in anticipation. It was official. I was traveling with lunatics. My tone and words had no real effect on him, which was quite odd given the usual reaction of zombie instincts as well as his previous behavior. I had no idea how he was maintaining his control so well at the moment. He leaned against the tailgate while watching me, "And if I did start a fight in the back of this truck, what is your plan?" I looked at him like he was an idiot, "I would obviously jump off of the truck." He tilted his head as he watched me intently, "And if I followed?" I snorted, "If I told you, it wouldn't be a surprise." Nina's eyes were bright like a curious child, "What would-" She gritted her teeth as she remembered her deal. I chuckled as she sent a glare at Daniel. "Ask her why she is more aggressive now than she was earlier." I growled lightly, "That is cheating. Besides, I already told you that I was out of patience." I noticed Daniel glance down at her notepad before looking back up at me, "Why did you cut your own hand when I was stalking you earlier?" "Quit reading the questions she has jotted down. That isn't fair either. Besides, you should be able to answer that one for her." They both gave me an odd look. Nina glanced up at Daniel before looking back at me, "He looks as confused as I am. Why would he know why you inflicted self-harm on yourself?" I blinked in confusion. How did he not know? He was a zombie, those unwritten rules were stamped into our changed blood. Sure sane zombies could ignore them, but they were still there. I tilted my head as I considered the Terror in the far corner, "You have never really interacted with feral zombies while acting like a zombie, have you?" He looked startled at my knowing question, "No, why do you ask?" I sighed, that explained it. The rules may be in our blood, but since we were in control, they were closer to suggestions that we could override. Those in control were constantly overriding our instincts, and we often didn't even realize that we were doing it since we were so used to it. If he had never interacted with zombies, he wouldn't have consciously realized the rules. They were a mere unconscious suggestion to him. His instincts would have known about the First Strike rule and pushed him to land the first blow, but his still conscious mind didn't realize that it was supposed to stop there. No wonder he had acted so oddly after killing the Terror. He hadn't followed the human rules since his instincts were so high and he hadn't followed the zombie rules because he was technically sane and didn't know them consciously. He was like an astronaut who got dumped in a remote Amish village. No wonder traveling with him so far has been a complete headache. I shook my head, "We are going to have to rectify that. If you have never acted like a zombie with a group of zombies, you are unaware of the unwritten rules of zombie interactions. That is why you had such problems with control after killing that Terror. Your human mind was partly relying on your instincts for direction, but your mind took it way further than your instincts did." He looked completely confused, "So why did you cut yourself?" "Ever hear of First Strike?" He shook his head, "Not really, you mentioned it earlier and the Nightstalker I met before also mentioned it, but I have no clue what it really means." Oh boy. He didn't even know zombie interaction 101. I sighed, "Once we make camp and the others are safe, you and me are heading off to find a feral zombie. Runners, Nightstalkers, and presumably Terrors often challenge one another to determine where they sit in the ranking hierarchy. You don't see the feral ones ripping each other to shreds because of the unwritten rule called First Strike. Generally, the first one to land a blow wins. Are you following me so far?" He nodded and I continued, "When I cut myself, the scent of my blood would have convinced your instincts that you had won and it should have ended there. Because you are sane, you frequently overrule your instincts. You ignored the point where your instincts said to stop because you overrode the suggestion without even realizing it." Nina was furiously scribbling down notes and Daniel slowly nodded. "What other rules am I likely unaware of?" I shrugged, "First Strike is about the only rule per se, although feral zombies almost never kill other feral zombies. There are lots of various things communicated via body language that you are likely missing as well. Terrors may have some quirks that only apply to your rank, much like the Nightstalkers have the territorial cry at night. But I have no clue if there are or what they might be." Daniel fell silent as he mulled over that information. I bet his lack of knowledge of the rules was why he had such problems with that Nightstalker he met in the past. Body language counted for a lot with zombies and Daniel was practically speaking a different language considering how out of touch he was with the fine details of his instincts. Nina was still writing as fast as she could get her hands to go. I turned to watch the scenery in silence.

 

Chapter 18


 Hank turned the truck off and climbed out as we looked around. It was another small town with maybe fifteen buildings total. Daniel was already jogging to lure the zombies away. Most buildings were houses, and from the smell, quite a few had zombies trapped inside. I went to check the three stores. The hardware store had a zombie inside, but the other two were clear. The corner store had no food left on the shelves. None of the stores were exactly secure enough for my tastes. I went back to hardware store to grab a ladder. It took two snarls before the resident zombie let me shoplift the long ladder. I leaned the ladder against the corner store, this building had a flat roof and it would be a much better spot to camp. I went back to the hardware store to claim two of the big pavilion tents and a raised firepit. The tents would keep any rain off and help the humans stay warm. The firepit was to avoid burning down the store. It struck me as idiotic that most roofing materials were made from oil byproducts and sealed with tar, making them quite flammable. What genius came up with that idea? No wonder my house insurance had been so high. Daniel brought a load of firewood up the ladder. Most of the others were trying to set up the tents. Chloe barked from below and whined. Tom glanced over the edge, "Too bad there isn't any way to get her up here. Poor girl." I walked over to look down at a rather sad looking Chloe. She was too big for a human to carry up and she would panic if I attempted to pick her up. I dropped off the side of the building to go back into the hardware store. I had an idea. I had to growl again at the zombie inside, I must have smelt pretty strongly of humans for him to be bothering me so. I used ratchet straps to secure a dog carrier to a two wheeled dolly cart. This was going to be interesting. I took it back to the store. I went down on one knee and spoke softly to Chloe, "Come on girl. Want to go up? Get in the dog house." She didn't know the word kennel, but she knew what a dog house was. She came up to me a bit uneasily, but went inside the kennel. I closed the door behind her and secured it. I tied a thick rope to the handle of the dolly and ensured the knot was secure. I grabbed the other end before climbing up to the roof. I braced my feet on the edge of the roof and started pulling the rope up hand over hand. The dolly tires gently hit the wall and slowly rolled the kennel smoothly up to the roof as I pulled. I grabbed onto the handle and backed up before opening the kennel. Chloe bounded out excitedly while wagging her tail as she was finally with people again. I went over to help manhandle one of the tent sections. Nicky was discovering her inner pyromaniac as she started the fire. Yeah, I was staying away from that area until she was done. By the time both tents were up and well secured, Nina had already started cooking. I sniffed the air and got up, "Come on Daniel, let's go have a talk with a Runner. We will be back before supper is done." He got to his feet and followed me as we both simply jumped off the roof.  I took off towards the forest while following the scent. He followed me in silence. I paused as I finally caught sight of the zombie. I looked over at Daniel, "Do you want to try first, or do you want to see me do it?" He examined the oblivious Runner, "Ladies first." I snickered before dropping into the typical Nightstalker crouch as I pretended to cross the clearing. The Runner growled at me and I returned it. My sunglasses hid my eyes and the Runner came closer with a snarl to test the truth of my identity. I turned to face the Runner with a louder snarl as my hands were held out from my sides a bit as a challenge and warning. I held no weapons, my fingernails were weapons. 

The second it came into range I slashed while easily dodging its slower swipe. He was left with four bloody furrows on his arm. I knew the minor injuries would heal within the week. He backed up with a growl and I snarled again. Like a wary cat, he slowly moved off. I resumed my walk across the clearing and waited in the far trees. It was Daniel's turn. Having just seen it, he should know what to expect. This was one spot where our instincts didn't need to be curbed, one of the very few situations where we didn't desire to kill. Daniel stalked out of the bushes. I examined his stalk, in some ways it was similar to mine in that it was predatory and graceful, but it was noticeably different from my silent flowing pace. If I was a stealthy mountain lion, then he was a proud wolf. The Runner was more than ready to challenge someone else after losing. The Runner growled at Daniel and Daniel responded with a snarl as his eyes glowed brightly red for a few seconds. The Runner dropped the challenge and went a different direction. Daniel rejoined me in the trees, "It didn't come after me like it did you." I shrugged, "My sunglasses hide my eyes so they challenge me much more often. Did you notice any differences once he turned away?" Daniel slowly nodded, "Yes, it was as if it was over. I had no further desire to go after him or prove that I ranked above him." "Try interacting with more Runners if you come across them and you will start to pick up various types of body language. You can also try keeping your eyes brown and they will likely challenge you, then you can really see the difference. But that Runner is likely going to show up at the store before morning, so we are going to have to break a few unwritten rules." He sighed, obviously not looking forward to what had to be done, "I'll do it. Then I am going hunting. Meet you back at the store." I nodded as I turned to leave. Halfway back I paused to wash my hands in a puddle and carefully dry them with a kleenex. Supper was just being served as Daniel returned. I could smell the scent of rabbit on him. I would head out later tonight to hunt. My mouth watered as I took my plate of pancakes. They had also found the syrup in the bag and the bottle was passed around as we poured the golden stuff on our pancakes. I managed to eat both of my pancakes. Somehow, Daniel managed to almost eat four. We relaxed around the fire. I had brought more firewood back, so we had plenty until morning. Daniel raised his head and gave a low growl. I glanced at the road, but didn't see anything. I tested the air, but that also came up empty. Daniel spoke quietly as he enlightened me, "There is a vehicle coming down the road." He must be able to hear it. I glanced at him, "Should we hide the jerrycans before they get here?" I didn't even finish the sentence before he ran forward with inhuman speed to jump off of the roof towards the truck. "Catch!" My reflexes made it easy to catch each jerrycan as it was thrown onto the roof. He quickly scaled the ladder with our bags of extra supplies in his hands. We quickly stashed everything in the one tent. Hank was watching us, "You have the keys?" Daniel nodded and Hank relaxed. We were all sitting in our chairs when the jeep drove into view. They were coming from the same way we had just come. Daniel's eyes were already brown, as they had been most of the day. He must be accustomed to keeping them that color as he hid what he was. If any of these newcomers were zombies, I was going to kill something. I couldn't handle another short tempered zombie today. I had just started getting along passably well with Daniel. I could see five men crammed into the jeep. I saw one point to our fire and they slowed down as they realized we were here. The jeep pulled up to the store leaving lots of space between the two vehicles. Ben and Hank walked to the edge of the roof. Chloe joined them and barked a few times at the newcomers before Tom called her back. Someone below called, "Hello! Do you mind if we join you for the night?" Ben replied, "As long as you don't cause any trouble, you are welcome to spend the night up here." Thanks Ben. You know nothing about these guys and you happily invite them up like long lost friends. They could have camped out in one of the other stores. Maybe it was just my inner irritable Nightstalker talking. I sniffed the air, their scent was just starting to reach me since there was no breeze and they had just arrived. Four of the men were in their late thirties or early forties. The other one was in his early twenties. It had been a while since their clothes had been washed or their bodies had encountered soap. I murmured quietly, "I am not picking up any gunpowder or firearms." Daniel nodded and relaxed a bit. If it came to a melee fight, they would have to be extremely lucky to even hit either of us. Ranged weapons were a problem though. Bows and arrows weren't that common yet, but there were still some guns kicking around. We would recover from most wounds quickly enough, but a headshot wasn't something to even be contemplated. I had a bullet stop my heart for a while in my early Nightstalker days. I had been slower and weaker than a normal zombie for several days until my heart had healed enough to beat again, but I had still been in control and sane. The two visiting Nightstalkers had told me stories of those who got knocked out by a serious head wound. Those recovering from such injuries had huge problems with bloodlust. Many who had been in control ended up attacking any human companions when they came to after a serious head injury. Even in play or when wrestling with the other Nightstalkers, we had never targeted the head or neck. It simply wasn't done. I watched as the five men climbed up the ladder. They were a rather rough and tough looking group. The two groups eyed each other up as they slowly approached the fire pit. The one burly man spoke, "Thanks for letting us join you. We can share a bit of grub if you don't mind us using your fire." Ben shrugged, "The fire is already burning, feel free to use it. We already ate." They sat on one side of the fire together. I watched them subtly from behind my sunglasses. Three had big hunting knives on their belts, but they were otherwise unarmed. They opened several cans of soup and started heating them in our borrowed pot. The one man was sitting not far from Ben and reached over to shake hands with him, "I'm Frank, this is Kal, Joel, Justin, and Eddy. Where are you guys headed?" Ben replied, "We are heading to Ironwind Stronghold. Where are you going?" The man sighed, "To any other Stronghold still standing. We are the only survivors from the Crooked River Stronghold. It was overrun last week. Mind if we join you on your trip? None of us has traveled and we have no clue where the other Strongholds are." Ben shrugged, "I don't see why not. This place is still three days away though." Frank nodded in relief, "Thank you." I gritted my teeth, more humans? My mood was going downhill. This was turning into a bloody circus faster than I could turn around. I had offered to guide two adults and two kids to safety. Now I had to deal with 13 humans and a Terror. If I start running at sunset, I wonder how far can I get before Daniel catches to me? I stewed quietly without letting the others realize it. I was pretty sure that Daniel could smell my irritation since the smell of it was almost rolling off of me. His brown eyes occasionally flickered towards me as the sky darkened. Tom and Marissa stood up, "Come on kids, let's head to bed." The four of them entered the tent with our supplies. Before too long Ben stood up and stretched, "You can use the other tent if you want." Frank thanked him. Ben and Hank headed into the first tent to get some shut eye. I really didn't want to enter a tent full of smelly sleeping humans just yet, so I decided to stay up a bit later. Nina shifted in her seat before looking at Daniel, "I have to use the washroom, can you escort me down in case I cross paths with a zombie or a snake?" He nodded and stood up. Nicky also jumped to her feet, "I need to use the washroom too, glad someone else is braving the ground in the dark." Daniel pulled out his new flashlight and quickly climbed down the ladder before shining the light up so the others could see the rungs. That left me alone with our five guests. Great.

 

Chapter 19

            They kept glancing at me. The one called Kal spoke first, "Why are you wearing sunglasses? The sun set quite a while ago." I shrugged, "I like them." Just having these guys around put me in a bad mood after today's earlier events. As irritated as I was, there was no way I could change my eyes to brown. Besides, the fire was too bright to look at without them. Another guy snorted, "Well, it is just stupid to wear them now. I bet you can't see anything." He moved his hand to make the crazy sign beside his head. I gritted my teeth at the insult, "I saw that." He frowned, "You were meant to see it and it was meant for you. You must have more than a few screws loose to wear sunglasses at night." Frank ignored us as he watched the fire. The younger guy, Joel, sighed, "Leave her alone guys." He sounded like he was tired of their talk already. That made two of us. Insults didn't do well with my instincts. It had been a long day and I was out of patience. I didn't feel like putting up with this kind of crap right now. I got up to walk away before I got more annoyed. Killing Kal sounded like a pretty good idea at this point though... Kal snickered, "Running away already? Wow, aren't you a scaredy-cat. I haven't even gotten warmed up yet." I took a deep breath to suppress the rage. His words were triggering my instincts and making me fight for control. I stood at the edge of the roof trying to calm myself down. Perhaps silence would shut the man up. I wasn't so fortunate. "I think I know how to make it up to you. I have a set of fluffy pink handcuffs that I bet would look real good on you. I have a pair in my bag if you want to try." I clenched my jaw. "Your bright red blood would look even better if it was on the ground." It wasn't my best comeback, but it should get my mood and my message across. If any of them did start bleeding, I was running at this point. My control was approaching its limit with this man. My vision was going redder, which was not a good sign. The largest man snickered, "You wouldn't have a chance at hurting us. We are simply too strong for you. We would thrash you before you even knew what hit you." His words were another blow against my Nightstalker pride. I took a slow deep breath as my muscles tensed with the heat running through my veins. These two men were managing to press the exact worst buttons if they wanted to survive this night. Numerous insults, check. Accusing me of running away, check. Flirtation from an insulting guy who hadn't washed in a week, check. Declaring that he would win any fight, check. He was cruising for a bruising at this rate. I heard footsteps on the ladder. The three returning from their bathroom trip headed back to their seats. Daniel was looking in my direction with a frown, he had likely heard the entire discussion. He knew the danger that those two were in. Nicky flopped down in her chair with her usual indifference to the atmosphere. Daniel slowly took his seat with half an eye on me. Nina paused in front of her chair as she looked between me and the men, "What is going on here?" She sounded like an irritated parent with troublesome teenagers, although she seemed to be mostly blaming our new guests. Kal shrugged innocently, "We were just having a friendly chat." I growled a correction as I glanced back over my shoulder. Whoops. I was mad enough that the growl had slipped out as Kal tried to cover his tracks. The men looked at me with confused expressions. Kal sounded incredulous, "Did she seriously just growl at us like a dog? Who the hell does that?"

Nina shrugged, "What did you expect? If you push a Nightstalker's temper to the breaking point, you also push their control to the breaking point." Nice way to keep a secret Nina... Kal went pale, "She is a zombie?" Perhaps Nina's tactic was for the best. If it shut him up before I killed him, then it was worth a shot. I raised my hand to pull my sunglasses down for a few seconds. My strongly glowing red eyes would easily be seen. One of the chairs was blocking my view of the fire, so it was more uncomfortable than painful. I pushed my glasses back up. The men were silent in shock. Joel had also gone pale, although he was in the least danger since he had tried to stick up for me. Kal was the first on my hit list and Kal was probably aware of it. Daniel drawled out, "I am not entirely sure you are actually a Nightstalker. You are far too tame." My temper flared as I spun around to snarl fiercely at him. His brown eyes flickered to a bright glowing red as he snarled just as viciously back at me. That overconfident ass didn't even have the decency to stand up to snarl at me. I took a threatening step forward. I could at least blow off some steam with him. He could take anything I could dish out and hand it back just as easily. I was almost guaranteed to end up pinned or facedown on the ground, but today's events had pushed me much too far and I was past caring about such details at this second. I knew he wouldn't kill me at this point and I really needed to blow off some steam. A good fight with a higher ranking zombie fit the bill perfectly at the moment. My train of thought was interrupted by a large thump. I glanced over to note that Joel had fainted and fallen off his chair. Kal didn't look too far behind either. Nicky was completely unfazed by the two snarling zombies as she smirked at Kal in amusement, "Better dump some water over his head to wake him up and take him into that tent. Lots of mosquitoes come out at night you know." Nina grinned at her comment. Kal got even paler as he glanced between Joel and me. I suspected that the mosquito he was worried about didn't have wings. The distraction and dark humor of Nicky's comment had shaken the worst of my mood off of me, although I kind of wished that it had been Kal that had fainted. That would have been far more satisfying... I shook myself like a dog, "I am heading out to hunt before someone else pisses me off. Daniel, you're on guard until I return." He bared his teeth at the men in a parody of a smile. He had obviously decided that the worst threat was already up here on the roof with us. Kal looked unsteady on his feet and the other men paled even more. I stepped off the roof to drop to the ground below. I took off running in my usual slight crouch, although I doubted that they could see me in the dark. I took off my sunglasses to let my red tinged vision pierce the darkness unrestrained. At first I simply ran hard to try to run my temper into the ground. I no longer felt like ending up on the losing end of a battle with Daniel, but Kal was going to be snarled at if he tried any similar comments in the future now that the cat was out of the bag. My eyes landed on a large dead tree that was still standing. I imagined Kal's face on it and launched forward with a snarl as I tried to work off some of my lingering rage. By the time I left, there wasn't much left of the tree besides splintered pieces better suited for kindling. I felt much better. I lifted my nose to the air as I recalled my original purpose for coming out here. I was going to need more than a mere rabbit to handle tomorrow if it was anything like today. I didn't feel like deer, and an elk would be a waste since I wouldn't be able to drink that much blood while I was hunting regularly. I caught another scent and headed after it. It might even put up a bit of a fight. Minutes later I gazed up at the tree the cougar was resting in. It didn't realize that I was here yet. I picked up a fist sized rock and threw it at the big cat.

The cat jumped down with a snarl as it looked back up at the tree, trying to figure out what hit it. I charged the cougar from my hidden location with a snarl and it turned to attack me. It jumped towards me, but I ducked as I dodged its swiping claws with a low growl. It slid in the leaf litter as it landed and snarled at me again. It didn't get the chance to pounce again. A strong blow to its neck shattered the spinal cord, killing it instantly. This was the fourth cougar I had ever hunted. I didn't like depleting any population of animals so I tended to leave the big predators alone. Their blood had a different taste, heavier and thicker. It wasn't something I would want on a regular basis, but it suited me just fine today. Before long I headed back. I circled the town to ensure that nothing lurked nearby before heading to the store. I could still see Daniel sitting by the fire as I approached the building. I paused as I approached the ladder, "It's just me." I put on my sunglasses and climbed up the ladder almost silently. I walked across the roof, letting my footsteps fall loudly enough for Daniel to hear them. His head turned in my direction. I was almost at the fire before his eyes truly focused on me. He really couldn't see that well in the dark even with the firelight. I sat in the chair with a sigh. We both sat in comfortable silence for quite some time. Neither of us needed to sleep and with our five new friends on the same rooftop, sleep was going to be extremely evasive tonight. Daniel had a faint grin on his face as he spoke quietly, "Still feel like fighting me?" I chuckled, "Not anymore. Although if tomorrow is as hectic as today I might take you up on it." "You do realize that you will end up on the losing end, right?" "I know. In the mood I was in previously, I didn't overly care either. I just wanted to blow off steam and you were the only one in the area capable of taking a hit from me." He seemed amused, "I would have let you get a couple of punches in before pinning you." I was somewhat surprised that he would be that lenient in a fight. Our instincts pushed us towards First Strike, not letting others land blows. He seemed quite amused that I had come so close to going after him. Then again, if I wasn't using weapons, then the outcome was a given. He tilted his head as he sniffed the air, "I am surprised that the cougar managed to scratch you. Are they that fast? I never tried hunting any of the larger predators before." I snorted in faint humor, "The cougar wasn't fast enough to claw me. The blood you smell is from small scrapes and scratches on my hands as I took out my anger on a tree. I usually don't hunt the larger predators that often simply because there are fewer of them, but as an occasional meal they are a good change." "What did that tree do to you?" I grinned, "I am not sure, but I reduced it to kindling regardless of the reason." He shook his head in amusement, "You have oddest ways of passing the time." I chuckled in quiet agreement before we both let silence take over. It was oddly peaceful despite the fact that we were across the fire from each other. That same distance would have meant trouble this morning, but it was fine now. The last remaining bits of tension had mostly disappeared. I was sure that some of it would return tomorrow, but I would take the peace and quiet while I could. It had been an extremely long day. I put another big piece of wood on the fire and relaxed in the chair. The moon slowly moved across the sky as we acted like silent sentinels. I even managed to doze off a few times for several minutes. It was closer to a half doze, part of my mind was awake and listening while another part took a break. No one would know from watching me that I had drifted off into a doze. 

I had intended to remain sitting and I did. Most zombies were able to sleep standing up and I could keep my muscles from moving while I dozed off. In theory I should be able to sleep standing up, but I had never bothered to try. Daniel's eyes had closed earlier as he relied on his hearing and nose to alert him to any trouble. If he slept, I was unaware of it. The sky started to brighten slightly and I turned my attention to the earliest hints of the sunrise. I wouldn't be able to watch it long even with sunglasses before it would simply get too bright. The brilliant sunrises and sunsets that I had so enjoyed as a human were too painfully bright to look upon now. It was one of the things that I truly missed about being human. I eventually had to look away. I put more wood on the coals to build it up for cooking. I put water beside the fire to heat it for coffee for our non-morning people. At this point I took care to avoid to looking towards the east. The sun was turning some wispy clouds into a bright glowing brilliant orange color. It was a pretty color, but much too bright. People eventually started to stir and came out of the tents with yawns. I stifled a sigh as Liz once more climbed into my lap. I still couldn't figure out why the child liked me so much. I had to admit that I had grown accustomed to the faint burning in my throat to the point that I barely noticed it. Liz pointed, "Look at the pretty sunrise." I nodded without looking, "Yes, it is very pretty." She looked up at me as she crinkled her eyebrows, "You didn't even look." Her tone was faintly accusing. I was torn between faint amusement at her accusation and irritation because I couldn't look at it. I wished I could. I didn't dare try to explain my light sensitivity with our five new guests present. My sunglasses were a fairly easy target and in the daytime I was dependent on them. Liz pointed again, "Look!" Her imperious voice stirred up my instincts slightly as they detested the command. I overruled them with heavy sigh. I closed my eyes tightly and turned my head towards the sunrise. Even with my closed eyes and the sunglasses I could tell that the sun was starting to peek above the horizon. It was uncomfortably bright. After a few seconds I looked back down at the child and opened up my eyes. With my sunglasses, she wouldn't have noticed that my eyes had been closed. Liz was smiling up at me as she took another bite of the flatbread that Marissa was cooking. I noticed that Nina was watching me with a curious and faintly incredulous expression. Daniel looked curious, but no one else seemed to think anything of me watching the sunrise. The others were obviously not familiar enough with zombies to realize how out of place my actions had been. Nightstalkers never looked directly at the sun. Our eyes couldn't handle the light even if we closed our eyes tightly. Without my sunglasses, I wouldn't have been able to face the tiny bit of the risen sun even for those few seconds. Before long we all started packing up. We left the tents up for any other survivors who may pass through. I once more coaxed Chloe into the kennel before lowering her down to the ground. The five new men were watching Daniel and me closely and nervously. They clearly did not know what to make of the two of us. I looked over at Daniel, "If you want to load the truck, I can toss the supplies down to you." He nodded and headed to the edge of the roof before jumping down. I went to the tent to grab the jerrycans of gas. I watched the men from the corner of my eyes as I tossed the seven jerrycans down. Most of them eyed up the red jugs of precious fuel with envy. Frank had a speculative look in his eyes that I didn't care for. I also carefully dropped the bags of supplies once I knotted the tops of the bags. Daniel's reflexes were even better than mine were and he caught them with ease before carefully packing them in the truck. Hank stood up and stretched, "Well, we better get this show on the road. Daniel, do you still have those keys?" "Catch." I easily caught the keys as they were tossed up. I held them out for Hank. Kal's eyes went wide when Hank came forward and took them from me without any hesitation. I remained on the roof while everyone else climbed down the ladder. As the last person went down, I jumped off the roof to the ground below. I climbed into my usual place in the back of the truck as the others also took their usual places. The five men somehow managed to pile into that jeep. Frank motioned for Hank to take the lead. Hank hit the highway and picked up speed. Frank was probably regretting his offer since I was facing the road behind us. I hadn't heard them discussing the fact that Daniel and I were zombies last night, so it would probably be a hot topic during their drive. Too bad I couldn't read lips. Although that might be for the best, since anything Kal said would probably light my temper up again. I suppose it could be worse. They could be sitting in the truck with us. I turned to watch the passing scenery.

 

Chapter 20


 After several hours I grew bored of watching trees. I looked around at the other people in the truck box. Nicky was somehow sleeping. Ben was watching the scenery on his side go by. Nina was looking over her notes in her notepad. Daniel was gazing at the road ahead of us. I spoke to Daniel, "Remind me to not leave Frank or those others unattended with our supplies. He was eyeing up the gas a bit too much for my liking." His eyes flickered a bit redder as he nodded. Nina was back to scribbling in her notepad. Did she ever go anywhere without that thing? She was worse with it than a 2 year old with a security blanket. I gazed at her for a bit, there were only a handful of pages left in that small book. I was probably going to regret this... "What are you going to do when you fill that book up?" She grinned at me, "I have ten more in my bag." Why did I even bother asking? Nina flipped to a new page and poised her pen over the crisp white paper as she looked at me, "You seem more relaxed this morning than last night." I had worried about that. Starting a conversation seemed to make Nina think that it was an open invitation for her to pelt me with questions. I sighed as I gave into the evitable. Hopefully she wouldn't have too many questions. "I took out most of my frustration on a tree last night and a long quiet night has more or less put my temper back on square one." Her fingers fairly flew as she scribbled down far more words than what I had said. I couldn't see the book from the way she held it though. "You and Daniel seem to be traveling much better today. I was positive that it was going to come to a fight yesterday if that truck didn't run out of gas soon." I turned my head slightly to face Daniel and raised my eyebrow, "How come she isn't pelting you with all of these questions?" He smirked at me, "I have been travelling with Nina since the day I turned. She has asked me so many questions that she simply can't think of any more. With you here, she has a new person to talk to. She likes to hear various views and compare them." Lovely. Just my luck to have crossed such an... inquisitive soul. Nina tapped her pen on her notepad with a grin, "You're evading the question..." She reminded me of my old history teacher. There had never been any way to distract that old woman from something she was bent on doing, although Nina seemed like a much happier and easy-going person than that old boot. It didn't change the fact that I detested questions in general. I am never starting another conversation with this lady again unless it is urgent and possibly life threatening. I shrugged, "I am not entirely sure. Previously we were constantly triggering each other's defensive instincts. Now we aren't." In truth, it was mostly because Daniel had relaxed and was not eyeing me up as if he was going to attack me any second. The encounter with the Runner had probably also helped him recognize the unwritten zombie rules a bit more. As far as his deepest instincts were concerned, I was a zombie and since I wasn't challenging him, he didn't have to worry about my presence. Whether it was a conscious or subconscious side effect was beyond my knowledge. Nina furrowed her eyebrows and scribbled for almost two solid minutes while filling up three pages. Daniel was watching what she was writing with a curious expression. If she was jotting down more questions, I could go crazy by the time we stopped for lunch. I would enjoy her silence in the meantime though. If her questions bothered me, then they should get on Daniel's nerves as well, but they didn't seem to annoy him. I inquired, "How has she not driven you crazy with all of her questions yet?"

He shrugged, "Her questions usually don't bother me. I am not sure why they seem to rile you up." Nicky grumbled, "She isn't much for any conversation. As she told us once, she is pretty anti-social. She still manages to put up with us fairly well all things considered." I guess Nicky hadn't been completely asleep. Nina's eyes lit up as her pen took off with new speed. I wondered how many pens she managed to wear out in a day. I halfway expected the paper to start smoking at this rate... Nina was pretty excited as she flipped back in her notebook, "That makes sense actually. Nightstalkers are known to be loners, and from what you previously said, you haven't been around many humans since being turned. People who are used to being alone tend to either get anxious or irritable when stuck in a large crowd." Daniel tilted his head, "That would also explain why she got grouchier simply due to the arrival of the five in the jeep." Nina looked her attention to him, "Was that before or after they almost met their demise?" I guessed he must have told her what he had overheard before they came back up the ladder, or at least that the men had been pushing their luck. "Before. I could smell her irritation almost as soon as they came up and joined us." "Interesting..." Nina took off scribbling, occasionally pausing with a frown before she took off again. Daniel was watching her write and occasionally murmured something too soft for me to hear over the sound of the motor. They looked like they were trying to figure out the answer to a complicated problem. I was grateful for the respite and turned my attention once more to the scenery. Hank honked the horn. Daniel rose to his knees as Nicky proclaimed, "Runner coming up on your side Daniel." Daniel leaned out of the truck box and snarled nastily at the Runner who was trying to grab onto the truck. His eyes glowed a bright warning red and the Runner growled while sliding to a stop at the sight of the high ranking zombie. My own instincts shifted uneasily although it wasn't directed at me. We passed by the Runner without any issue and Daniel sat down. The jeep behind us wasn't so lucky. I had no clue why he didn't swerve wider around it, but it managed to grab onto the top rail and stand on the runner board. It pounded on the passenger window as the man inside leaned away with a terrified expression. Daniel noticed Nicky's expression and looked back to notice their predicament. He started to get back to his feet again. I sighed and reached for my backpack. I grabbed the socket wrench and took careful aim before whipping it at the Runner. Daniel paused as he saw the missile enter his field of vision and fly past him. The socket wrench hit the Runner in the side with an audible thud. It lost its grip as it swung around to discover what had attacked it. The zombie fell off the jeep and was quickly left behind as the jeep kept going. Daniel slowly sat back down as he turned to face me with a surprised expression. Nicky grinned widely, "Nice shot. I somehow doubt that Ben will let me practice my aim on him with something like that though." I chuckled lightly, "Unless you want him to become crippled zombie bait, I don't recommend it." "Hmmm... I never thought of that." I gazed at Nicky in disbelief, unable to believe that she was actually considering that as a backup plan. This lady really needed supervision... Ben was also watching her uneasily. I asked Ben, "Who exactly let her carry weapons?" He sighed, "She had them when we got out of the Stronghold as it was being overrun. We tried to take them away once, but it didn't go over so well. Hank did manage to steal her gun and dispose of it."

I was very glad that she no longer had a gun in her possession the way she occasionally acted. I had never seen her threaten anyone with a knife or sword yet, but it might just be a matter of time. Nina was more concerned about the overrun Stronghold, "Your Stronghold got overrun? Which one was it?" Ben turned to Nina, "It was the one where the big suspension bridge crossed the Bow River. Someone must have been bitten and turned into a Runner. The place was in flames by the time we got out. Not sure how many more survivors escaped, but there were so many zombies that we had to leave." Nina looked sad as she jotted down those details. I turned my gaze back to the jeep behind us as I heard its engine cough for a split second. Daniel also turned his head to look back over his shoulder for a moment. He looked at me and I slowly nodded. Nina glanced between us, "What?" Daniel answered her, "The jeep behind us may be running out of gas." I growled faintly in irritation. No wonder Frank had been eyeing up our jerrycans. Ben frowned as he sat up, "We can't spare any gas. We are going to need all of it to get to the Stronghold. As it is, we don't have quite enough to make it there." Daniel glanced at the jerrycans wedged into the only empty corner, "I agree." Nicky sighed, "Can we attach a small trailer for them to sit on?" Daniel shook his head, "No, a trailer would reduce our gas mileage noticeably. Besides, we haven't seen any small trailers." Nicky groaned, "It is going to be so cramped back here if they have to ride in the box." Ben sighed, "Well, if they do have to ride with us, I think it would be best if Daniel traded places with me. Otherwise they are going to be sitting right beside a zombie and I am not sure how everyone will survive the rest of the trip." Daniel raised an eyebrow, "I am not letting Nina sit beside them after how some of them acted last night." Nina rolled her eyes at his comment although her words were kind, "I doubt they would try anything if I was sitting beside you. If you are that worried, then I can sit between you and Trinity. I am sure that Nicky could be persuaded to move to the other side of Trinity. Ben can sit beside you, that way they have the entire back half of the truck box to themselves." Daniel's jaw tensed as he glanced over at me. I could see that he still didn't really want me right beside Nina. Perhaps he was scared I would steal her pen if she tried to ask me more questions. That actually sounded really tempting. It was too bad that Daniel would probably throw me off the truck for such a stunt. Nicky yawned, "The other option is to have Nina sit beside me and put the two of you side by side." Both Daniel and I winced at that thought. There was no way we could sit side by side for hours on end. We would end up in a fight in such close quarters. My eyes tracked back to the jeep as it spluttered again for a few seconds. It was definitely starting to run out of gas. Less than ten minutes later the jeep's sputtering engine finally cut out and they steered it to the side of the road as their momentum slowed. They started honking their horn and Hank slowed our truck to a stop. His window had been open and he had heard our conversation as well as the dying truck. Ben got up and started moving. With a faint growl of displeasure, Daniel moved into the corner with his back against the cab. Nina sat between us, closer to Daniel. Nicky moved to my other side as Ben cautiously sat beside Daniel while giving him some space. The five men came forward, "We're out of gas. Got any to spare?" Ben shook his head, "No, we need everything we have. Feel free to hop in the back though." Frank eyed up the jerrycans, "Those have gas in them and this truck is a diesel." Daniel gave a growl as his eyes became red, "When we run out of diesel, we will find a truck that uses gas. End of discussion. Get in or walk." It looked like Daniel was just as impressed with our company as I was. The men looked wary as he growled, but got their backpacks and two bags of supplies before climbing into the truck. Hank started driving even as they were still putting their stuff on our pile of supplies in the middle. I grumbled as I pulled my hood over my head and turned to face the scenery. Nicky ignored everyone as she started fiddling with the shoelace again. The three from last night were silent as they tried to avoid drawing attention to themselves. Joel was seated beside Nicky and watching the string tricks she was going through. Daniel was mostly watching the five men suspiciously. I had a hunch that he didn't do well with strangers until he got accustomed to their presence. Nina had closed her eyes and leaned back against the cab. For the first time in two days, she didn't have a notepad in her hand while riding in a truck. I found it odd, but since she wasn't asking me questions I remained silent. I wasn't about to open up that can of worms again.

 

Chapter 21


 We pulled up in front of a shabby looking house. It was the only thing resembling shelter we had seen for over an hour and it was already 7pm. I sniffed the air, "There is another human around here somewhere. Been here for a while from the smell of it." Kal gave me an odd look as he climbed out, as if he hadn't realized that zombies could actually smell. How did he survive this long? Ben stood up and called out, "Is anyone here? We are just looking for shelter for the night." Silence greeted our ears. Perhaps the man was too scared to approach or respond to such a large group. Then again, highway bandits weren't exactly unheard of and the man might think we were one of those groups. Ben shrugged, "I guess we make ourselves at home. Someone care to check that place for zombies?"  Daniel jumped out of the truck with ease and headed for the beat up house. I stood and jumped off of the truck and stretched, grateful for more space. It didn't take Daniel long to return, "It is clear. Pretty secure too, so we won't have to overly worry about zombies breaking in." Nicky snickered, obviously finding his comment hilarious. I chuckled and saw Nina grin as well. Daniel gave her a look before half-way grinning at his own unwitting joke. Most of those with us were looking at us as if we were crazy. We hauled everything inside. Marissa promptly claimed one of the rooms for herself, Tom, and the kids. Our five newest companions chose the second room, leaving the rest of us with the living room and kitchen. Hank went out to start a cooking fire and I headed off to find him more wood. Whatever guy was hanging around here, he clearly had no problems walking through the forest. His scent was all over the place. I came back with two big armloads of wood, it would be more than enough for supper. I picked up an unfamiliar voice talking with Ben as I approached. I dumped the wood by the fire that Hank was tending and looked around. A rather shabbily dressed man was just inside the door talking to Ben and some of the other guys. The others eventually came to sit around the fire. Ben was still talking, "It is a pretty tight squeeze, but we have room if you want to join us as we head to a Stronghold." I reined in my temper before I growled. He was trying to pick up another stray?! What gives? I almost never saw humans in the foothills, but apparently out here the land is just riddled with them. And, true to my luck, all of them seem to be on foot and in need of help. The man's gruff voice replied, "I'll think about it and let you know come morning. I can't believe how this world went to shit after those zombies showed up. Bloody zombies, wish we could push them all into a giant pit and dump gasoline over 'em before throwing a match in." I kept a straight face and watched the soup start to bubble. Daniel had his poker face on as well. I hoped that this man declined to take Ben's offer. Although the expression on his face if he learned he traveled with two zombies for days would be priceless. Who am I fooling? If Daniel and I can keep from growling at each other for 4 hours in that truck I will be amazed. With our luck, the fool would jump right off of the truck to get away from us. Nicky opened up a bottle of water and I turned my head as something caught my attention, "Can I see that for a second?"  She made a face at me, "Promise me that you won't drink out of it, because I don't want whatever germs you might have. The last thing I need on this trip is the stomach flu. Ben might kill me if I puke on his shoes." I sighed in exasperation, "I won't drink out of it." She passed it over reluctantly. I held it up to my nose and took a careful sniff before glancing at the expiration date. The expiration date proclaimed that it was still good. I passed it back, "It's gone bad, I wouldn't drink that if I were you."

Others were watching and glancing at their own unopened bottles of water. Nicky blinked at me in shock, "What? Are you sure?" I nodded, "Quite sure, where did you find that?" Nicky pointed towards the store, "There are several cartons of water bottles inside." It wasn't a brand we had picked up earlier. I was suspicious. The water hadn't simply gone stale and developed bacteria growth, there was some sort of drug in it. Which was odd since I had heard her crack the safety seal on the bottle as she opened it. I subtly glanced over at our new guest, but he was frowning at his own water bottle in his hands. It looked like all of the others. Daniel cracked his own water bottle open and sniffed before making a face. He did the lid back up and threw it over his shoulder towards the forest. He held out his hand to Nina and she passed him hers as well. He opened it and it likewise took a flight after a quick sniff. That was enough for the others to abandon their bottles. I guess if a zombie won't drink it, then you know it is bad for your health. Marissa was watching some sort of odd stew while it cooked. A dozen empty cans were nearby and I recognized them from our supplies. Tomato soup, vegetable soup, beef stew, and alphabet soup had all been dumped into one pot since we only had a few cans of each type. This was going to be an interesting meal. In the end, it actually tasted pretty good if you didn't mind tomato flavored soups. Everyone downed their bowl and the humans went back for seconds. Our latest guest managed to eat two bowls, "Thanks for the meal. Been a long time since I had something that good. Bloody zombies had to wreck everything..." This could be a long evening if everything he said blamed the zombies. Nicky glanced at me with a smirk, obviously aware that such comments would slowly annoy me. At least this time I was not trapped in a grocery store with a group of humans. Our recent five additions kept glancing at Daniel and me, they seemed a bit pale as if they were waiting for us to blow up and attack the man. The others talked a bit and the man kept blaming all of the world's problems on the zombies. Daniel was ignoring it fairly well, although Nina kept watching me to observe my reaction. The man's indirect comments against zombies were nowhere near as annoying as Ben's previous teasing about my sunglasses. Most were yawning nonstop as the sun started to set and decided to head inside. Those who had claimed rooms went to them. Hank and Ben rolled out their sleeping bags on the kitchen floor. I sat on the floor in one corner with a thick blanket. Nicky put her sleeping bag beside me. Nina got the couch and Daniel claimed the chair beside it. Our mystery man went to the cabinets and pulled out some bedding to make a bed in the other empty corner. I laid down and pretended to sleep, although it was easy to watch the darkening room from behind my sunglasses with no one else the wiser. My instincts shifted in suspicion. I inhaled slowly and deeply, trying to figure out what was out of place. I had carefully scented the air when I had been outside, and I had come up empty. I hadn't picked up any other human scents and there had been no wind to blow scents away from me while I was outside. I wasn't sure why my instincts were slightly restless. It was getting dark out though, and my instincts were strengthening with the approaching night. Nightstalker instincts were notoriously suspicious, and this wouldn't be the first false alarm I had received from them. After an hour of trying to figure it out, I simply gave up and tried to relax a bit. This night was going to be long enough as it was. It would feel much longer if I was being paranoid. Nicky started snoring like a trucker and I sighed in faint annoyance. I wasn't going to be able to hear anything over that kind of racket. I rolled over and pushed her shoulder until she rolled onto her side and her snoring subsided. Since when does Nicky snore like that? Usually you had a hard time telling if she was actually asleep or just resting while ignoring everyone.

My muscles tensed as I realized that almost everyone was snoring. That was not normal. Sure, Hank and Ben were known to shake down buildings with their snoring, but I had never heard Marissa or Nicky snore before this evening. I murmured quietly, "Daniel, have you noticed anything odd?" He would be able to hear me, but it was too quiet for an average human to pick up. He was silent for a bit before replying, "No. Why do you ask?" "Everyone except for us and the mystery man in the corner is snoring." He sounded confused, "And...?" I snorted lightly, "When is the last time you heard Marissa or Nicky snore? This is a first for me." He was silent for some time. His voice sounded a bit frustrated, "I don't recall either of them snoring, but I am not sure what you are trying to hint at. At least we know that they didn't die in their sleep. Humans snore, it happens when they get really tired." He sounded as if I was being dense and my observation shouldn't have surprised anyone. I couldn't exactly blame him. I was bothering him because a couple of humans were snoring. I hummed lightly, "It may just be my suspicious Nightstalker instincts talking, but I don't plan on napping tonight." He didn't reply. I kept a silent vigil while listening to my snoring companions. I had a sneaking hunch that the soup had somehow been drugged with some sort of sleep aid. Zombies were immune to every drug that I ever heard of. I tested the air carefully, wincing slightly as the overpowering human miasma burned my throat lightly. I sifted through all of the other scents, minutely examining each one. It wasn't as if I had anything else to do. One could learn a lot about their sense of smell and the odors around them if they spent a couple hours consciously focusing on that sense. The world of scent was a complex one and it was packed full of information. Nicky's scent was getting closer to what it had been the day she chased Ben around the store, which meant tomorrow was going to be fun trying to keep her under wraps and out of mischief. I could still smell that rabbit that Daniel had caught sometime today. Chloe had some nasty gas from the leftover soup. Our mystery man had drunk several energy drinks sometime this evening and I could smell them on his breath. Interesting... What is he up to? I highly doubt that he wanted to stay up just to listen to the new snoring orchestra, his taste in music can't be that bad. Sometimes my Nightstalker instincts surprised me. One minute I was my usual irritable and suspicious self while I tried to keep myself from constantly snarling at people. The next minute I could be endlessly patient if I was waiting in ambush. Some days I was so bipolar that I made Nicky look normal. My instincts stopped bugging me as I realized what they had subconsciously detected. Now I waited patiently for the man to make his move. I had a pretty good idea what he was after and I made several plans of action. I always preferred to have several backup plans for any backup plan. It gave me options I could use instantly since I had already thought them and their potential consequences out. Around midnight the faint rustle of cloth told me that my time for contemplation was over. My eyes tracked over to our mystery man. He was sitting up and cautiously peering into the darkness. Faint star and moon light came in through a few boarded up windows, but that was it. If he could see his own foot when he stood up, I would be amazed. For me, even the darkest shadowy corner was a red hazed detailed view. I could see the dust bunnies on the floor around him. He turned towards the pile of supplies and started carefully crawling across the floor. He may think he was silent, but I could hear his clothing rustle and tiny bits of rock grind into the floor under his knees. If I could hear it, then Daniel could as well.

I chuckled darkly as I whispered, "Come into my parlor, said the spider to the fly..." I silently got up and crept across the floor. I was a silent shadow in a black room. I didn't pass close to Daniel, lest my invisible presence rile him up. Even if he couldn't hear me, he would be able to smell me if I got too close. I got to the pile of supplies before he even made it halfway across the room. I sat down in front of our pile and pulled one knee up in front of me as I draped my arm across it. It was the same position that had so fascinated Nicky in the grocery store. I dimmed my eyes to brown and took off my sunglasses. Daniel must be used to keeping his eyes constantly brown to avoid spooking the humans he was always around, but it was a conscious effort for me to keep mine brown. I kept my sunglasses in my hand though. I was positive that I was going to need them very shortly. Humans had a bizarre attraction to flashlights and other light sources. They also liked to use them as soon as it got dark. I could see that Daniel's eyes were open and he was roughly facing the direction the man was in, but he was obviously relying on his hearing. His jaw was tense as he tried to figure out what was going on. He was possibly very much on edge from my comment and the fact that he couldn't hear me moving – and was assuming that I was, in fact, moving. I noticed that he had his flashlight in his hand, although it was pointed towards the roof. Even if it was pointed up at the roof, it would allow even him to see the entire room clearly. That bright light seems to think that it is a spotlight in disguise. At least he seems to be keeping my threat in mind, I do not want it pointed at me. I waited until the thief was mere feet in front of me. I changed my eyes to a glowing red as I faced him with an unblinking gaze. He froze as my eyes appeared in the middle of the darkness. I noticed that Daniel's gaze honed in on my glowing eyes, some tension left his body as he finally knew where I was. He must really be worried that I would attack him in the dark one day. The mystery man finally gathered his wits as he scrambled backwards, "Zombie!" Several heads lifted in groggy alarm. I winced and closed my eyes as Ben shone a flashlight in my direction. I slid my sunglasses on and sent an irritated look at him. Nicky sat up and blinked in confusion, "What is going on?" Her voice was slurred in sleep. The man was still backing up in a panic, "Her eyes were glowing red!  She is a zombie!" Nicky blinked at the two of us sleepily and yawned. Her voice dripped with sarcasm, "That is just... fascinating..." She flopped down and pulled the top of her sleeping bag over her head as she rolled to face the wall, "I am going back to sleep, wake me if she goes on a murderous rampage. All else fails, there is a bar of soap in the bathroom." The man stared at her in utter disbelief before turning his panicked gaze back at me. Nina was groggily blinking as if trying to memorize what was going on when she was half asleep. Daniel was frowning in confusion at Nicky. That bar of soap reference is going to drive him mad at this rate. Ben was blinking as he tried to wake up from his drugged slumber. Hank hadn't even woken up, considering how much soup he had eaten, I wasn't overly surprised. I slowly stood up and took several steps towards the man. My silent Nightstalker stalk was fully visible and he practically shook in terror. I kept my voice low and sinister, "I know you were the one who drugged the water. You drugged the soup, too, didn't you?" The man's eyes went wide in fear. Daniel inhaled sharply and his eyes started glowing red with his anger. I gave a low growl, "What did you use in the soup and how did you get it in there?" The man whimpered in fear. I snarled as I pulled my lips back from my teeth, "Answer me!" He was literally shaking in fright at this point, "M-melatonin. I-I put it in the w-water that I gave the lady t-to cook with." I regarded him silently. He was so scared at this point that I was very certain that he spoke the truth. Melatonin was a common extract used as a sleep aid and it was found in most drug stores and organic herbal shops. You could buy it as easily as vitamin C tablets in the old world. To the best of my knowledge, it had no real side effects. I watched as he slowly kept backing up until he got to the back door. He jumped to his feet and threw the door open as he ran as fast as he possibly could. The door ricocheted so hard against the wall that it actually swung back hard enough to fully close the door again. Nicky softly snored in the background. I slowly stood up out of my slight crouch and walked back to my corner. Ben sounded confused and his voice was still groggy, "What was that?" I glanced back at him, "A thief after our supplies. I highly doubt he will return. Go back to sleep and turn off that light while you are at it." He blinked sleepily at me before yawning and turning off the light. Rustling around the room showed that everyone was more than willing to succumb to sleep again. Minutes later snores once more echoed from all sides. I leaned my back against the wall as I resumed my vigil. I didn't expect him back, but the possibility of a zombie coming for a visit was there. Daniel's eyes were still glowing a faint red, reflecting his anger that the man had drugged everyone. He seemed to take any threat against Nina seriously. I wondered how these two had ended up traveling together and what had inspired such loyalty in the Terror towards the slender lady. I did somewhat doze off, but it was a light alert doze. The slightest sound or human shifting in their sleep instantly woke me. I rested as the night wore into morning.

 

Chapter 22

            The room was quite light by the time that Marissa came out of her room blinking sleepily. I turned my head slightly as she entered the room, letting her know that I was awake. With my sunglasses, they really had no way to tell. She yawned, "How did we sleep so late?" I spoke quietly, "Our mystery guest managed to drug the soup water with melatonin in an attempt to steal our supplies. He didn't realize that there were two zombies present who were immune to such sleep aids." Nicky grumbled as she sat up, "Is that what that ruckus was about last night?" It looked like our non-morning bird was ready to rise. I didn't have any coffee ready either. Nicky looked around with a scowl as she realized the same thing. She stood up as she wrapped her sleeping bag around her. She stomped off towards the kitchen. I sighed and glanced towards Daniel, "This is going to be an interesting day. It looks like Nicky is about to take another trip to the dark side. You may want to shake Nina awake." He gave me a confused look, "Why?" A large bang resounded from the kitchen as Nicky dropped a huge metal pot upside down on the useless stove. She grabbed a metal spatula and a large whisk before she started beating on the pot like a deranged drummer. Nina jumped as she propped herself up on her elbow at the sudden racket, "What the..." She blinked drowsily at the world around her while trying to figure out if the noise was an emergency alarm or something more mundane. I sighed from my corner, "It is just Nicky, you can go back to sleep." She sent a look of sleepy disbelief in my direction, "I don't think that is even remotely possible." Considering that everyone else had sat upright in alarm, her observation was valid. I stood up with another sigh. I headed towards a still drumming Nicky and glanced at a surprised looking Marissa as I passed her, "I will distract her for as long as I can, but try to get the coffee going before she returns." She nodded her understanding. With one swift move, I disarmed Nicky and threw her over my shoulder before heading for the door. She struggled in my strong grasp. "Hey! If you want to join the band, you can be the soloist or play the guitar! I call the drums!" I managed to get her out of the doorway despite her trying to use her feet to stop my progress. I finally came to a pond in the forest that I had found yesterday and put her down, "Here, why don't we grab a bath before the boys get here and dirty up all the water? Look how warm it is." The water was quite warm in comparison to the chilly morning air and bits of steam drifted above it. Nicky was successfully distracted as she paused to examine the water, "Well, why didn't you say so in the first place? I haven't been able to really clean up since the Stronghold got overrun. Did you bring the towels?" Thankfully I had put two in my backpack earlier just in case she bought my odd excuse. "I didn't mention it because the boys would have tried to beat us here. Yes, I brought towels. Here they are." "Ohhh... I call the green one. I can't believe we got here first. Those guys would have hogged all of the hot water for themselves and our shower would be cold by the time we got in. They did it all the time at the old Stronghold." She was really off her rocker if she was comparing a shower to a small pond. She tested the water before unceremoniously stripping to her birthday suit and diving in, "The water is great! Come on in!" I guess I had to pay the piper too. With a grumble I took off my pants and shirt to enter the warm water in my undergarments. I wasn't about to go skinny dipping, so my undergarments acted like an impromptu bikini. I had clean underwear in my backpack so it didn't matter if I got these wet. It had been a while since I had a bath, so being clean managed to improve my mood.

In the end, I had to literally pull Nicky out of the pond because she didn't want to get out of the warm water. She was in a better frame of mind as we returned to the house. The entire group was outside with a big pot of coffee and another batch of soup. Ben looked up at our approach, "There you are. We were beginning to wonder if you decided to murder her after all." Nicky skipped over to gracefully collapse into an empty chair with a grin, "Nah. She likes me too much. She even took me to the spa." I took the other empty seat as I rolled my eyes. The fact that I had shampoo, conditioner, fingernail clippers and a set of scissors to trim hair in my backpack had sent her over the moon in joy. Her faintly damp hair was neatly trimmed and all the split ends were gone. Nicky eyed up the coffee pot and my Nightstalker instincts once more sounded the alarm. The absolute last thing that Nicky needed in her current state of mind was caffeine. I thought fast, "You know Nicky, it might be best if neither of us drank coffee today. That way the boys can't blame us if we need to stop for a bathroom break every half an hour." I never drank coffee, but that was beside the point. I wasn't sure I wanted to know how Nicky would act if she ended up on a caffeine high today. Ben had nowhere to run and the back of that truck was crowded enough as it was. I had been more patient during the last hour than I had been any other day put together. My patience and tolerance had limits and she was likely to find them before too much longer. Nicky frowned, "I don't know... I really need my morning cup of coffee." I heard Ben inhale in surprise as he finally connected the dots. I smirked at Nicky, "I bet I can go without drinking coffee longer than you can." Her eyes flashed over to me at that challenge, "You're on!" I grinned smugly at her. I never made bets unless I was very sure that I was going to win them, but I wasn't about to tell her that anytime soon. Ben snorted, "Nicky is so going to lose that bet." I sent Ben an irritated look and wondered how long it would take him to get duct tape off his mouth if I wrapped it around his head a couple of times. Nicky jumped to her feet, "What did you just say?!" The crazy lady had just turned into a little spitfire again. She could pull a mood swing at the drop of a hat. I think she may actually be more temperamental than a Nightstalker when she is like this. Ben realized it as well and took off running. "Hey! Get back here!" Nicky took off in hot pursuit after him. Ben did a lap around the house in record time and looked at me desperately as he ran by the group again, "Trinity, help me!" I snorted, why did he think I was going to bail him out when his problems were caused by his own words? "I am not her babysitter. You riled her up, you deal with her." Nicky rounded the house with a branch the size of a baseball bat and a demented grin on her face. Ben kept running around the other side of the house trying to get away from our armed lunatic. Nina was watching with a slightly incredulous expression while Daniel had a faint look of confusion. Hank ignored the two as he dished up the first bowl of soup and passed it to Marissa. Two high laps later, everyone else had a bowl of soup. Hank eyed up our two immature companions who were doing a lovely job of wearing themselves out for the truck ride ahead. He obviously didn't want to get into the middle of this. I held out my hand, "If you pass me a bowl of soup, I think I can get her sitting and eating as long as Ben keeps his mouth shut." He immediately took me up on my offer and passed me a big bowl of soup. I waited until Nicky rounded the corner to come into view once more, "Hey Nicky, breakfast is ready. Come eat before it gets cold."

She slowed as she made a face at me, "But I am having so much fun!" Nicky had more in common with a four year old when she was like this, but she had the quirks of a mischievous teenager mixed in... I smirked, "If you leave the stick there for now, I will show you a few tricks with it later on." A grin split across her face, "Deal!" She dropped the stick and swiftly came over to take the offered bowl of soup as she sat down beside me to eat. Ben realized that he was finally off the hook. He swiftly took advantage of her distraction and quickly claimed her stick before putting it in the fire. She protested around her mouthful of soup, "That was mine! I wasn't done with it yet!" I sighed gustily as my quota of patience was rapidly running out, "Nicky there is an entire forest behind us. I am sure that there are other branches somewhere in there." She grumbled incoherently and kept eating her soup. She finished the huge bowl with a big sigh, "Wow. What a morning..." I think that was the understatement of the year. I examined Nicky, her mood had settled closer to normal. I made a mental note to try to get her to eat a big bowl of soup as soon as she woke up if it made that much of a difference. She noticed me looking at her, "Do I have soup on my face or something?" She wiped her face, but came up empty. For the first time since I turned, I attempted a light teasing tone. Even more miraculously, it actually came out that way, "Did you ever take medication for your mood swings other than coffee?" She grinned at me, "Oh yeah, the doctors did a bunch of tests and gave me some pills, but I stopped taking them. They made the voices in my head actually get along. It is much more fun when they are fighting with each other." I nodded slowly and took a drink of my water to save myself from having to reply. I wasn't overly surprised, but it did reinforce the fact that traveling with this bunch was going to cause more than a few headaches. In theory, I could easily tie up or forcefully restrain Nicky if she went too far off the deep end, but it wasn't really her presence that concerned me. I was used to being the strongest and being able to strong-arm my way through arguments if I had to. I couldn't get away with such stunts with Daniel. He was strong enough to force me to do something I didn't want to do if he chose to. That fact was a constant thorn in my side. We managed to cram ourselves in the truck again. I pulled my hood over my head and stared at the scenery. Nicky was once more tormenting the shoelace as she unraveled the braiding in it strand by strand. Oddly enough, Nina didn't have her notepad out. She seemed deep in thought and didn't even attempt to speak. Daniel was a tiny bit more relaxed than yesterday, but that wasn't saying much. The other five men talked quietly amongst themselves. Nicky eventually got bored and gazed at the road behind the truck, "What does that yellow sign by the road say?" I glanced back to see two signs in different shades of orange. The red tint in my vision made it impossible for me to truly see a bright yellow color, or any really light color for that matter, they always had a slight red tinge to them. Nicky nudged my foot with hers, "Well? Your vision is better than mine." I sighed gustily in annoyance, "I can read the words on the signs easily enough, but I can't see the color yellow. I see two orange signs." I noticed that Nina's eyes opened in curiosity and Daniel looked surprised. Nicky blinked at me, "Well that sucks. I never heard of a color blind zombie before." I growled lightly at her tone. Nina pulled out a brand new notebook and a pen, once more full of curiosity, "What exactly can you see?" The interrogator was back. I didn't dare growl in annoyance at her either with Daniel so close. Some days pretending to be polite sucked, "I can see details fine, it is just the color. There is always a slight red tint in my vision, like looking through faintly red colored glass. I have a pretty good guess as to which sign is yellow, but if she hadn't said it was yellow, I wouldn't have known." Nina was scribbling as fast as she could, "Is the tint always present? Does it ever change?" "It has been present since the day I turned. It has never gone away. The red tint does get worse if I start to get fairly irritated or mad." Nicky tilted her head, "Are you sure it isn't just your sunglasses?" I shook my head, "No, I take my sunglasses off when I go out at night. They make no difference, they just dim the amount of light that gets through to something I can handle." I glanced over at Daniel, "The other Nightstalkers I spoke to all see this tint, do you see it?" He shook his head slowly, "I only see that tint if I get really mad, otherwise every color seems brighter and crisper than when I had been human." I could barely remember what bright yellow and white looked like after all of this time. Nina kept scribbling and I resumed my scenery gazing. Nicky had started rebraiding the shoelace threads.

 

Chapter 23


 We decided to stop for lunch so we could stretch our legs. I welcomed the return of my personal space and suspected that Daniel did too. He didn't seem to mind Nina in the least, but no one else had been immune to his watching. Tom was starting a fire at the side of the road, presumably for more soup. I inhaled deeply as I watched him. I could smell a small flock of partridge nearby. It wouldn't take long for them to roast and the meat would tide the group over better until supper than just soup. "There is a flock of partridge nearby. Shouldn't take me more than ten minutes to catch most of them if you want them." Tom looked up in surprise, although Marissa was the one who answered, "If you could, that would be great. It has been a while since we had any kind of poultry that didn't come from a can." I nodded and headed into the forest. If nothing else, it was a good excuse to get away from them for a while. I easily traced the scent of the birds and snuck up on them. It would have been much easier if it was night, but I would just have to plan my attack carefully. I came up behind them and drew my sickle. It would give me the edge I needed to take down so many birds. I darted out at full speed and managed to behead three birds before they realized that they were being attacked. In the end, five birds escaped while 16 headless birds lay on the ground. I quickly cleaned them and headed back. It hadn't even taken me the full ten minutes. I took a deep breath and took note of a few lingering scents as I approached the edge of the treeline. I walked over and passed the small birds to Marissa who started laying them out in a frying pan. My Nightstalker instincts shifted and I was pretty sure I knew the cause. I subtly scanned the treeline as the familiar scent once more reached me. They had to be nearby. I was amazed that Daniel hadn't picked up their scent yet. I left my backpack by the truck and casually headed back towards the trees. A few watched me go, but made no comment. Once I entered the trees I switched to my soundless Nightstalker crouch as I skulked through the shrubs further back along the road. I could now see the familiar Nightstalker woman at the edge of the treeline peeking out at the group having lunch up the road. I bared my teeth in a silent grin I slowly stalked up behind her. The wind was in my favor. I was mere feet from her when she must have finally caught my scent. She started to turn as I launched myself at her with a snarl. We went rolling out of the trees onto the grass as we both snarled at each other. I heard the others shouting in alarm up the road. I grabbed her shoulder so I could roll over, it was easier to fight if your back was on the ground. It gave you much more leverage if you were a zombie. I was careful to keep my nails from breaking her skin as we tussled, growled, and snarled at each other. To the others it would probably look like a fierce dog fight, but in reality, this was just a friendly, if rough, wrestling match between old friends. Neither of us was doing any damage to the other as we kept rolling around on the grass. I took a quick glance over to see Daniel in front of the humans in a defensive fighting crouch. Good, because even a Terror can't win against three Nightstalkers, even if he didn't know about the third one yet. Kelly took advantage of my second long distraction to grab both of my wrists in her hands. I brought up my knee to knock her off me. She fell to the side with a thud that jarred her sunglasses loose. She hissed in pain as light hit her unprotected eyes. I immediately let go and rolled to my knees, "Sorry." I grabbed her glasses off the grass as she tightly squeezed her eyes shut against the light, "Here you go." She held out her hand and I handed her the sunglasses. She swiftly put them on before shaking her head, she was probably trying to blink her eyes clear as they would be watering from the painful exposure to light. I heard faint footsteps coming up behind me and recognized them as her brother. I heard murmuring from the human group as the third Nightstalker made his presence known.

I remained kneeling beside Kelly as Travis crouched down beside her, "You okay?" Kelly exhaled gustily, "That hurt like hell, but it happens." Both Travis and I nodded. My sunglasses had come off a few times in previous bouts of play. All of us had them come loose at one time or another. We always immediately stopped and handed the other their sunglasses. At night we didn't bother wearing them, so those wrestling matches could get really interesting. Her eyes would be sore for a couple hours as they recovered. I tilted my head, "I am quite surprised to see you here. Although it was nice to meet up again. There isn't much friendly company near the mountains." Travis chuckled, "We were quite surprised when we picked up your scent. We crossed the road just a few kilometers down the road shortly after you passed by and saw the truck parked here." Kelly glanced back at the rather shocked looking group behind us, "Well, I think we managed to scare the crap out of them with that little bit of wrestling. I bet they thought it was an all-out death match." I chuckled, "Very likely." Kelly looked over at me, "If you don't mind me asking, why are you traveling with a group of humans so far from home? I have to admit that I have never seen a Terror before though." I sighed heavily, "To make a very long story short, I came across two defenseless adults and two kids trying to reach a Stronghold. I offered to escort them since they had no chance of surviving otherwise. One thing led to another and I somehow ended up stuck with this rag tag group." Travis looked a bit confused, "It can't be easy traveling with a Terror. If he is here, then there is no reason for you to continue with them." They must not have known about a Terror's lack of sight at night. I stood up with a sigh, "The fact that you two got so close without him picking up your scent should tell you why I am still with them." They also stood up. Travis shook his head, "Well, I sure couldn't do it. I can now guess what a Runner feels like when they are around us." I shrugged, "Once they are safely at the Stronghold, I am heading back north. Where are you two headed?" Travis bared his teeth in a grin, "We are heading back towards the ocean. We loved it so much when we were growing up that we are going to see if we can find the old summer cottage that our parents built." Kelly shook herself off with a sigh, "Well, we are going to continue on our way before your friends burn that food to complete charcoal. Nice to see you again. We will have to visit again one day." I nodded and watched as they easily disappeared into the trees with a Nightstalker's deadly grace. They didn't bother to hide it like I had been doing this entire trip. I had known that they wouldn't hang around more than a few minutes with the humans so close. Travis had a hard time with control around humans so both siblings just avoided humans as a rule. The wind had been blowing very lightly towards us, which was why Daniel hadn't picked up their scent. It had also been blowing the burning smell of the humans at us the entire time. Travis would have wanted to get out of the downwind area. I dusted myself off and headed back to the slowly relaxing group. Daniel still seemed suspicious and on edge, "Who were they and why did you attack them?" I leaned against the truck. The appearance of my friends had brightened my mood momentarily, but it was already fading with the distrustful Terror. "Those were the two Nightstalker friends I mentioned previously. I didn't attack her, that was just a rough wrestling game between two Nightstalkers."

Nina had her old notepad out and was rapidly filling up another page. Most of the others seemed uneasy and kept glancing at the trees. Daniel frowned, but didn't comment. He seemed to think that my actions were odd. He obviously had not interacted with sane zombies enough while ignoring his higher rank. Marissa hadn't burnt the strips of partridge too badly, but I had no desire to taste it. They rushed through their meal in their haste to get back on the road in case the Nightstalkers had lingered around in hopes of a straggler. We dumped another jerrycan of diesel into the tank and resumed our drive. I resumed my watch of the scenery while keeping tabs on the scents flowing by. No wonder my dog had always enjoyed having his head out the window, the smells could change so fast. In an odd fashion, it was like listening to music. We made it the rest of the day with nothing else happening. We found a small town with about fifty buildings. Daniel and I lured off the zombies, although it took us several trips. Some would undoubtedly return by morning so we decided to camp on another flat roof for the night. This house had a staircase on the inside that went to the roof, which made things easier. I went to gather wood for a fire while Daniel went in search of a fire pit and other supplies. I didn't pick up any recent human scents. That was a relief, if we kept picking up strays every single evening we were going to have an entire circus by the time we reached that Stronghold. We already had the crazy lady, Hank could be the strong man, Ben could tell jokes, and Nina might be able to convince Daniel to walk a tight rope while juggling. I would be escaping out the back while pretending that I didn't know any of these people. A rabbit made the mistake of running out in front of me. I caught it before it had gotten very far. It didn't take me long to drain it. I wouldn't have to hunt tonight and Chloe could have the rabbit for her supper. I headed back to the house and went up to roof. I tossed the rabbit in front of Chloe who immediately picked it up and went to a corner to enjoy it. I put the armloads of wood by the fire pit and went to help setup the big tents that Daniel had scavenged. Daniel came back with several bags of food supplies. He looked over at me, "Would you mind checking the buildings on the east side of Main Street while I check the other half?" I nodded and vaulted over the edge of the one story building. Some places had zombies inside and these tended to be the ones that were untouched by looters. We didn't have much room for food and we should have enough to reach the Stronghold, so I packed some into my backpack and took note of the better stuff. I could come back if they wanted something specific. I growled lightly as I entered another house. I silently stalked down the hallway. I got about halfway down it before a small body rapidly staggered out of a room with a snarl. I snarled back at the small boy. As per usual, the child zombie didn't take the hint. I ended up grabbing him by the back of his neck and pinning his hands before shoving him into a bathroom and closing the door. His strength hadn't been a match for mine, but his attempts soured my mood. I checked the house, but there wasn't much here besides a few food items. I moved on to the attached garage. No vehicle was present, but I did find a lawnmower and two jerrycans of gas. I emptied the tank from the lawnmower into an empty ice cream pail. It would have to work until I found an empty jerrycan. I moved on to the next place. I wrinkled my nose against the foul odor. Either they had a huge freezer full of meat that was slowly decomposing in here or something had died. I bet it was the latter scenario. I cautiously checked out each room. I quietly looked at the sad scene in the one bedroom. A child and mother lay dead on the bed. Both had died of gunshot wounds to the head and the gun still resided in the mother's hands. Judging from the hundreds of kleenexes on the floor, they had been sneezing. The mother would have known that they were infected and she had taken matters into her own hands. There had been a chance that they could have turned into something other than a regular zombie and retained control, but they had ignored that slim chance at life. I still had a grudge against firearms from what had occurred four months ago. I closed the door and moved on. It took me a couple of hours to thoroughly check out each house, garage, and shed. My keen sense of smell helped me find things that other looters had missed. In the end, I had a decent haul. I had also found another diesel truck that refused to start and drained the tank, so we had ten jerrycans of diesel. We had more than enough now to get to that Stronghold. Nicky was cheering from above as she spied me pulling a wagon loaded with red jerrycans. I emptied as much of the diesel into the truck's gas tank as I could. That was four jerrycans less that we had to try to pack into the back of the truck. I left the wagon just inside the front door and went up to the rooftop. There was an empty chair beside Nicky waiting for me. Everyone else was already sitting. Ben looked up, "So, what did you find?" I dropped the three big bags of food by Marissa and went to take my seat, "Some food, there is more if you want me to get it, but we don't have much room. Two jerrycans of gas. Found a truck that refused to start, so I drained it and we have ten more small jerrycans of diesel. I dumped four of those into the tank and left the empties against the house." I growled lightly, "I am positive that a bunch of sabotagers came through at some point, because not one vehicle would start. Most already had their gas siphoned out. I got lucky with that truck. Probably because there was a zombie in the garage." Ben shrugged, "It is more than what we had. Daniel found five jerrycans of gas." Daniel nodded, "I tried every vehicle and they were either out of gas or wouldn't start. Several groups of people probably came through this town looking for supplies. They likely took any working vehicle." I sighed, "We should have enough to make it to the Stronghold now, so that is the main thing." They all nodded and the mood seemed to lighten with that knowledge. Liz climbed into my lap as we watched Marissa insist on cooking. She didn't trust Ben's ability to cook. Liz started fiddling with my fingers. "Careful, my nails are sharp." She paused to examine my slightly pointed nails. It was just how they grew now and I had given up trying to trim the tips with fingernail clippers long ago. The entire edge of my fingernails were very sharp. Liz dug in her pocket and pulled out a piece of paper before lightly pushing my fingernail against it. My nail sliced through it without much resistance. Liz's little informal demonstration clearly startled Marissa. She called the child, "Liz, can you come help me make some bread?" Liz slid off my lap and went over to her. It slightly irritated me that Marissa still didn't trust me with the child even after so many days. It was almost like a slap in the face considering I had never so much as growled at the child. I clamped down on the irritation and tried to force it down. We had found this place pretty late and it was going to be dark soon. I tilted my head back to watch the sky as it started to darken.

 

Chapter 24


 The yeast had obviously expired and Marissa's attempt at bread had more in common with a brick. It wasn't too bad if dipped into the soup. We all ate slowly by the light of the campfire as the stars slowly brightened overhead. A piercing cry in the distance had everyone's head turning. I growled lowly at the sound as my instincts stirred. Nicky looked back at me, "If you are here, then I somehow doubt that you made that noise." Nina frowned in the direction of the Nightstalker's cry, "That is the same way we came. It must have caught our scent on the road and is following it back here." I gazed in the direction of the cry as I finished the last bit of my soup. It was far enough out that I hadn't caught its scent yet, but it would undoubtedly show up within the hour. Nicky raised an eyebrow at me, "You don't seem overly concerned." I glanced at her, "Those cries really carry, so it is further away than you likely realize. I see no point in me running for at least fifteen minutes to meet it halfway if I can let it run most of the distance and tire itself out a bit." I pulled out my grain sickle and my sharpening stone. It was still extremely sharp, but the extra bit of sharpening wouldn't hurt if I was going up against a feral Nightstalker. I wasn't overly worried about the fight. Feral Nightstalkers were always loners and never used weapons. After a few minutes, I sheathed my weapon in its special holder on my back. I noticed that Daniel already had that flashlight in his lap, although he was watching me intently. I decided to mess with his head just for the hell of it. I looked over at Nicky, "Still have that bar of soap in your backpack?" "Yep." "Mind if I borrow it?" She fished it and lobbed it at me. I easily caught it and tucked it into my coat pocket, "Thanks." Nicky gave Daniel an odd look, "Aren't you going with her?" Other than Nina and myself, no one else here knew about Daniel's poor sight at night. Daniel shook his head, "After what happened last time, no. I don't feel like chasing her halfway across the country again to convince her to come back." She nodded and looked at me, "Need any backup? Although I have to confess that I would feel more like bait if you did accept my offer." I chuckled and shook my head, "No, I will manage against a feral. They are unarmed and have no strategy." I stood up and headed for the edge of the roof. Nina called out behind me, "How do you plan on finding that Nightstalker?" I bared my teeth in dark humor as I looked back over my shoulder, "I don't have to find it. It will come to me." She blinked in surprise and I turned to jump off the house. I was glad that every place we camped was only one story tall. I wasn't sure if I could drop down two stories without sustaining damage. I took off down the road. After five minutes of jogging I paused to throw my head to the sky and loose my own Nightstalker scream. Mere seconds later the feral responded with its own enraged cry. It was still some distance away and clearly did not appreciate me contending its hunting ground. Well, I didn't appreciate its approaching presence either. I kept heading down the road. Several minutes later, I let my voice pierce the night again, only for the Nightstalker to answer me immediately. It wasn't that far away. I picked up a fist sized rock and waited on the road for it to make its appearance. I felt the heat in my blood shift in preparation for the upcoming fight.

A Runner or Terror would have run down the middle of the road, but that was not the way of Nightstalkers. We were a hidden assassin in our hunt and travels. I spotted it as it moved stealthily through the trees. It knew I was here and it was eyeing me up. The red tint in my vision intensified as I geared myself up for the fight. I had yet to fight a zombie my size or smaller. Then again, even as a human I had always ended fighting with those larger than me. It could practically be called tradition at this point, another tradition that survived my turning was that I always like to cheat to tip the odds in my favor. I dropped into a crouch and snarled at the red eyed creature in a challenge. This Nightstalker was just as temperamental as the rumors made us out to be. It ran forward with a snarl and I drew my sickle. It thought we were in a First Strike competition over who had first dibs on the hunting grounds that smelt like humans. How wrong it was. I threw the rock at its head and it fell to its knees, stunned, but not unconscious. I really have to find another crowbar... Rocks are clearly not a weapon of choice. With a snarl of rage, I closed the space between us. It was still stunned and trying to regain its feet. I grabbed its hair, pulling it off balance as I slashed the sickle towards its neck. It shrieked a high pitched challenging snarl as it realized the game we were playing. It tried to slash my face, but I managed to dodge it. My sickle hit its spine and its other hand managed to graze my forearm before I could force the sickle through a joint in the spine. I snarled as I felt its nails slice through my skin. I jumped back as its head rolled free. I shook myself off with a growl as I settled my Nightstalker instincts. I was breathing somewhat hard even from that short battle. It may have been a feral, but we were both Nightstalkers and pretty equally matched. Luckily this one hadn't been much bigger than me. I always tried to knock a feral unconscious before killing it, it reduced the risk of me possibly ending up on the losing side of a battle. Ferals wouldn't kill me since that went against their instincts and they had no control over their instincts. However, if I tried to kill them, they could still do some serious damage when they retaliated. I cleaned my sickle with some water and a tissue before sheathing it. My shirt had a few spots of blood splatter on it. A quick glance around and a sniff told me that I was alone. I took off my shirt and washed off the cloth where the bloodstains were with Nicky's soap and some water. My arm had four slashes that were slowly oozing blood. It didn't really surprise me, I had not expected to come out of this fight unscathed. I carefully dabbed it clean, it should stop bleeding by the time I got back. With a deep breath and with a heavy exhale, I started heading back at a slow pace. There was no need to rush after all. It wasn't long before the fire on the rooftop was in sight. I hadn't removed my sunglasses, so there was no need to put them back on. I let my footsteps fall heavier as I approached the door so Daniel knew it was just me. I came up on the roof and was somewhat surprised that all of the adults were still awake. Nicky looked over, "I assume that you won? Any injuries?" I shrugged as I took my seat, "Yes, I won. It is dead. A couple of scratches on my arm, but that is it. They'll heal up in several days." She sighed in relief, "That is good." "Oh, here is your soap back." I handed her back her bar of soap. Nina was watching inquisitively as Daniel wore a puzzled expression. He could probably smell the soap residue on me, but had no clue what I had done with it. Score one for messing with his head. Nicky took the bar of soap I held out, "Thanks. Did it work well?" This was too priceless. "Meh, not bad. Liquid dish soap works better on the higher ranking zombies." Nicky grinned, "Thanks for the tip. I saw some downstairs, I will have to grab it in the morning." At this point Daniel looked thoroughly confused and Nina was scribbling in her notebook again. How she could see what she was writing was beyond me. I restrained a chuckle, that would have surely given me away. Most of the adults headed to bed now that they knew they weren't going to be attacked. I turned my chair to the side so I could see the majority of the town. Daniel remained in his chair across the fire, watching the firewood slowly burn. The night was oddly quiet and almost no animals moved around. They had likely been spooked by the Nightstalker screams that had torn through the night. I had gotten my one wish – we had not found any stray humans tonight. Although I now realized that I really should have been more specific. I wanted at least one night without any drama or new people. No new human strays, no nighttime zombie visits, no fights, nothing. The nights had been that peaceful when it had just been the two adults and two kids, but that had completely disappeared when we found Ben, Hank and Nicky. I had not had a completely uneventful night since, and that had been eight days ago now. Things had gotten even more complicated when Nina and Daniel had shown up. Even the days had been fairly stressful with Daniel around. Most of that original tension had eased, but some still remained and it was constantly triggering my Nightstalker instincts to a degree. Was I really asking too much out of life? I didn't think so. A shooting star flashed across the sky. Hell, why not? Star light, star bright, First star I see tonight, I wish I may, I wish I might, Have this wish I wish tonight. I want a peaceful night tomorrow night. No drama, no bad luck, just a peaceful quiet night. Yeah, I feel like an utter fool now. At least I didn't have to say that aloud. That would have been awfully embarrassing. I turned my gaze back to the forest. Several rabbits scurried around and I watched a fox quietly trying to sneak up on them. An hour later a rabbit screamed as the fox finally succeeded. Daniel's head jerked in the direction of the sound. From the way his head jerked, I was pretty sure that he had been drowsing and the unexpected noise of a rabbit's death cry had startled him awake. I spoke quietly, "It was just a fox out hunting." He grunted his thanks for the information. He was silent for some time before he spoke, "What does dish soap do to a zombie?" I chuckled deeply, "If you haven't figured it out by now, then I am holding that tidbit of information in reserve in case you come after me again." He growled lowly as I kept potentially important information from him that could possibly cause him to lose a fight. I bared my teeth silently, fairly certain that the firelight would reflect off of my white teeth enough for him to see. "You may be faster and stronger than me, but if you can't hear or see me, there is a good chance that you won't be able to catch me in a game of hide and seek in the dark." He gritted his teeth as his muscles tensed up. That challenging comment riled him up much more than I had anticipated. Although it did make sense, I was targeting his only real weakness and his instincts would not appreciate that. I turned my head back to town, relying on my ears in case he decided to try to force the answer out of me. I doubted that he would go that far though, especially at night. The night was my element while the day belonged to him. That thought was quite intriguing. It might even distract him from thinking up plans for revenge. I spoke contemplatively, "Have you ever thought about how odd it is? Nightstalkers normally only come out at night and Terrors have full run of the day, yet all of the other zombies have no problem moving during either the day or the night. I know that Runners don't see nearly as well at night as I can, but they can see better than humans. It was almost as if our two kinds were purposefully designed to never cross paths." I watched him from the corner of my eye as I continued to face the town. His eyes focused on me as a look of surprise crossed his face. He had never considered that angle either. His expression showed that he was thinking hard, "I hadn't thought of it quite like that before." He didn't elaborate, but the new puzzle clearly had his attention as he stared into the fire. His mind had something new to chew on for the rest of the night. In that fashion, he seemed a lot like Nina. Any complex or abstract thought held his attention.

 

Chapter 25

I put more wood on the fire as the sky started to lighten up and started sifting through our supplies. It was light enough that Daniel could see me.
 "Since when do you make breakfast?" "Normally never, but I want to test out a theory." He raised his eyebrow in interest, "Which theory?" I had grabbed certain supplies when raiding houses with this in mind, so it didn't take me long to locate everything. I brought the armful of stuff closer to the fire. "That a big breakfast helps keep Nicky mellow. I don't think I could handle her again today if she is acting the same way she did before breakfast yesterday." He watched me put a package of spaghetti noodles in the boiling water. I opened up a couple cans of spaghetti sauce and put them to the side. Two cans of mushrooms and a container of powdered parmesan cheese also joined the waiting pile. "Spaghetti for breakfast? I thought Marissa's soup was breaking a few rules." I snorted, "No one is going to want me cooking anything that requires me to taste test the food. Hopefully it will keep Ben full for longer as well, so we don't have to listen to him start complaining around 10 O'clock." To my surprise he actually chuckled, "Spaghetti will be a welcome break from soup." I put more water on to boil for drinking purposes. It wasn't much longer before people started coming up. Marissa looked surprised to see pots on the fire. The spaghetti had finished cooking and simply sat near the fire to keep warm. Nicky stormed up the stairs in her usual morning fashion. Her eyes flickered to my empty hands before she turned to Marissa, "Has she drank coffee yet?" Marissa looked confused, "No, we haven't even made the coffee yet." Nicky grumbled, "Bloody bet. What the hell was I thinking?! I have never even seen her drink coffee!" I smirked, "The spaghetti is ready." Her eyes focused on the pot of pasta and she stomped over to grab a bowl. She yanked the ladle out of Kal's hands to fill up her bowl before heading to her chair. Kal gritted his teeth, but made no comment after glancing in my direction. It seemed to be a hit and most had two helpings of it. I even had a few forkfuls of the spaghetti. It tasted pretty good. Ben had his head on straight and didn't provoke Nicky. After Nicky had eaten and woken up some, she seemed pretty normal for Nicky. It was a promising start. If it worked, I could handle making an easy breakfast for a few days. People seemed to have loosened up a bit. They were talking more amongst themselves. It was still a rather long day in the back of a pickup truck with only a handful of breaks. We had lost some time when our last truck died. If Nina's calculations were right, we should arrive at the Stronghold late tomorrow. I couldn't wait to be free from this group. We were starting to look for shelter for the night, but weren't having any luck. No towns were nearby and there didn't seem to be any houses around. There wasn't even a gas station. What kind of road has no houses or stores on it? I exhaled in growing irritation. I was tired of being cooped up in this truck. I had never sat so much in my life. I lifted my nose to the air and closed my eyes in concentration. It was very faint, but it was there. It was the smell that shingles gave off in warm weather. I opened my eyes and knocked on the back window of truck cab, "Hank, stop the truck for a moment. Ben, can you pull out that map of yours?" Everyone in the back was watching me as Hank rolled to a stop. I stood up and tested the air again. Detecting direction was nearly impossible in a moving vehicle with the way the air swirled around the truck, but now I had my bearings.

I glanced at Ben and pointed towards the east, "There is some sort of building in that direction. Probably a good fifteen minute run for me on foot if I had to guess distance." Daniel stood up and peered in that direction with narrowed eyes. I blinked as I noticed that his pupils were going from a normal size to a mere pinpoint as he tried to spot anything. His eyes reminded me of an eagle's the way they were focusing. "There are powerlines in that direction, so there is possibly something along them." Hank had his window down as he waited patiently. Ben spun his map around and ran his finger over the roads, "Hank, not far ahead is a road, turn left on it. We can check along that set of powerlines for anything like shelter." Daniel and I sat back down as the truck started moving. I looked in that direction, but couldn't see anything resembling powerlines. Hank turned at the specified crossing and followed the road. I still didn't see any bloody powerlines. Minutes later I finally spotted them. Shit, remind me to never play I Spy with that guy in the daylight. There was a T intersection that allowed us to go in either direction. Hank stopped right in front of it before calling out the window, "Trinity, can you give me a direction?" I tested the air again, "Hang a left. I don't think it is that far, so keep your eyes open." Daniel stood up and held onto the edge of the open window for balance as he looked ahead. Seconds later he spoke, "It looks like there is a driveway not that far ahead, another cable comes off of the power lines and heads in that direction as well." Minutes later we rolled into the driveway of a large house. I sniffed, but didn't scent a zombie or a strange human. Everyone got out of the truck, eager for a break from sitting. Nicky looked at me, "Anything around that we should worry about?" I took another deep breath, the burning started in the back of my throat from how close she was to me when I was focusing on my sense of smell. I shook my head, "No zombies or humans. Watch out for venomous snakes though." She nodded and started grabbing bags of supplies. Daniel was already heading towards the house to check it out just in case. Kal and Frank headed for the garage. I grabbed some supplies to carry in, we could leave the jerrycans where they were tonight. I was making my second trip when Frank started whooping in joy, "We hit the jackpot!" I looked over at Joel, "What would he classify as a jackpot?" Joel shrugged, although I noticed that the other two from that group were running that direction to see what had the man so worked up. I packed my load inside and heard the sound of a motor start up. They must have found another working vehicle. I went outside to see Frank talking with Ben, "There are big fuel tanks behind that barn for both diesel and gas. Both are full! No offense, but our group is going to pile into the car and keep driving. We plan to take turns behind the wheel. I got the directions from Nina, so once we get a good meal over the fire we are going to grab our supplies and head off." I noticed three others in his group carrying big five gallon water jugs behind the barn, presumably to fill up with extra gas. I grabbed another load of food supplies and carried them inside just in case they got a bit greedy when packing their new vehicle. 
 
 True to their word, after cooking themselves supper all five of them got into that car and drove off. I noticed that I wasn't the only who one relaxed a bit as they left. I headed over to scour the garage. They had taken the only vehicle, but there were a dozen empty water jugs in the back corner. A quick check outside around the back of the garage revealed that the raised fuel tank was indeed full.

I grabbed some of the big five gallon water jugs and started filling them with diesel. They had once been meant to hold water for a water cooler in a house or office, but they could never be used for water after this. I carried four of the big jugs back to the truck. With what we already had, we could drive for over a week and not run out. It was severe overkill, but I had no desire to end up walking again. Supper was ready by the time I finished. Marissa had made another soup concoction. I was dubious about trying this one, she had somehow combined mushroom soup, beef stew and some other cans into one questionable looking brew. I took a bowl, but seriously hoped that it tasted better than it smelled. It was tolerable, but that was all I could say about it. I hoped that she never tried to make it again. Marissa had been keeping Liz away from me, worried about the scratches on my arm bleeding and infecting the child. A scab had formed over each finger long scratch and it hadn't cracked or bled yet, but there was always the chance. As I sat by the fire, I realized that the evening had been quiet so far. Perhaps wishing upon that star had helped. I am still not holding my breath until the sun rises though. I stretched as the sun started to set, "I will be back in a bit." Daniel nodded although most of the others ignored my comment. I headed out into the forest behind the house, carefully checking for any odd scents. My instincts came forward as I loosened my control a bit, but nothing triggered them. I didn't even smell any big predators. I headed back after hunting and took a seat by the fire. I turned the chair so I could face mostly away from the house. I noticed that Daniel had already done that, but it was probably more to protect his back in the dark than to watch the night. We were once more silent sentries throughout the night. I actually managed to doze on and off all night, which was more sleep than I had gotten in weeks. I watched the horizon start to brighten. Huh, that shooting star must have helped. I haven't seen a night that quiet in a long time even at the cabin. I watched the sunrise before starting the pancake batter. 
 Nicky wolfed down several pancakes with a few longing glances at the pot of coffee. She didn't take any though. I was curious to see how long she would hold out. I doubted that it would last long, Nicky didn't strike me as the person to stick with a diet so I hadn't expected her to manage three mornings in a row without coffee. She managed to stay on the bandwagon though, much to my surprise. Her mood had also seemed to level out. I knew I could blame some of it on the lack of caffeine, but if it was a true disorder, then it was only a matter of time until it reared its head again. I hoped I dropped them off at the Stronghold by then. Nicky yawned, "That was good. Why didn't you eat any though, did you poison it?" I shook my head, "No, it wasn't poisoned. I wasn't hungry." She gave me an odd look, "So why did you make it then?" I shrugged, "I was awake and it wasn't like I had anything else to do." Daniel looked amused at my evasion of the truth. Nicky looked at the coffee, "Once you leave us at the Stronghold our bet is off since I would have no way of knowing if you drank coffee or not." I smirked at her, "I don't drink coffee." "Then there is obviously something wrong with you." I chuckled, "Even if there was something wrong with me, it sure wouldn't be caused by a lack of coffee." She grinned, "You never know until you try, right?" "Better safe than sorry and I have managed this long without coffee." She sighed heavily, "Drat." I chuckled and very gently mock punched her shoulder, "If you are done, let's go load that truck. As much as I am not looking forward to sitting all day, the sooner we get on the road, the sooner we will get to our destination." Nicky punched me back, "I think you are just trying to get rid of us. You should stay there with us for a few days. You might like it. If they accept Daniel, then they can't have an issue with sane zombies." I shook my head, this one wasn't even open for debate, "Nope. I don't do Strongholds." She gave me an odd look at my hard tone, "And why not?" I huffed in irritation as I stood up to leave, my good mood was disappearing with the memories. "The last time I was invited to stay in a Stronghold, they set a trap and I barely made it out alive." I walked into the house to grab an armload of stuff before hauling it to the truck. At least we would have more room with five less people in the back of the truck. Chloe sensed my mood and moved out of my way with a wary look. Nicky, Hank, Ben, and Daniel started packing the truck as well. Daniel kept glancing at me, but didn't comment. He was likely curious about that story, but didn't want to pry into something that obviously riled me up so easily. We were on the road fast enough to satisfy me. We took up our original positions that gave us more space. The trip didn't seem so bad when you had more room. It chafed against my instincts less at any rate. Daniel also seemed more relaxed. It might just make this trip tolerable.

 

Chapter 26


 Shortly after lunch my bad luck made its appearance again. A thump sounded from the engine as it lost power. Hank steered it to the side of the road. I gritted my teeth. You have got to be kidding me. I have had more vehicles break down in the last week than I did ever since I started driving. That was a terrible track record considering that I had always driven cheap beaters that were on their last wheels. Once it stopped Hank popped the hood and got out. Ben also went to investigate the damage. We hadn't seen any abandoned trucks for some time. There was no way we would fit eight humans, two zombies, and a dog into a car. We hadn't seen any vehicles actually... Ben sighed as he came back to grab his map. Nicky questioned him, "How bad is it?" He made a face, "Not that bad, but bad enough. We blew a part. It is easy enough to fix if we can find a spare or raid any other diesel truck for it, but we need that part." Daniel came over to inspect the map that Ben was unfolding. Ben pointed to the map, "There is a truck stop over on this road. There is a chance that other vehicles were abandoned there." Daniel tilted his head, "That is a ten kilometer cross country walk through the forest to get to that road though. So the big question is, do we all go and return or do just a few of us go check it out?" Hank spoke to Daniel, "You are the fastest. I doubt it would take you long to get there and back." Daniel made a face, "Unfortunately, I know nothing about engines. I would have no clue where to start." Daniel turned to me and tilted his head in a silent inquiry. I shook my head, "Don't bother looking at me. I was very good at driving my cars into the ground, but other than the basics like jumpstarting something or changing oil, I am clueless." Nicky stood up and stretched, "Well, if it isn't that far, I wouldn't mind a walk. It is probably safer if we all stuck together. Besides, we might find something that is simply out of gas over there. Then one of our red eyed friends can come back to grab enough gas to drive it back here and collect the rest of our supplies." Daniel gave her a look of disbelief, "One, even I can't see Trinity's eyes through her sunglasses, so you have no idea if she is camouflaging them. Two, my eyes have been brown the vast majority of the time." Nicky raised her eyebrow in equal disbelief, "One, with her mood, her eyes would undoubtedly be red most of the time. Two, I am not sure I can really call that brown. It is more of an orangey color and it creeps the hell out of me since it makes me think you are a wolf trying to hide in sheep's clothing. I think I prefer you with red eyes, it makes you seem more honest." I gave her a light growl for that comment, and partly as a warning not to tick Daniel off. Daniel gave her an odd look, as if he didn't quite believe her opinion. Ben shrugged and looked around, "I'm all for a walk since I doubt I have anything to worry about feral zombies if these two are around." Marissa looked at the big piles of supplies stacked in the middle of the truck box, "What if someone comes while we are gone? There is no way we can pack all of this with us." I smirked, "We can easily hide it in the forest. What human in their right mind would be digging around in a forest? Just prop the hood and gas cover open. No one will even stop to look at it then." Nina started chuckling, "She is right on that score. If we put the food in the trees then we don't even have to worry about wild animals getting into it." Hank nodded, "Good enough for me." He grabbed a couple of bags and hoisted them over his shoulder. I grabbed two of the big jugs of diesel since they were the heaviest. Even if most here were taller and more heavily built than me, only Daniel was stronger. One perk of being a Nightstalker.

It didn't take us long to stash everything in the trees and throw some branches over it for extra camouflage. Ben had a compass out and Daniel took the lead once more. I followed behind as rear guard. The ground was pretty flat so it was an easy walk. Marissa hadn't let Liz come to me since she was still worried about my small scratches. Marissa had put Liz on her shoulders and was keeping up just fine. We were most of the way there when one particular scent started getting quite strong. I kept my eyes open, but I wasn't overly concerned. Once the animal realized that we were here, it would likely avoid us. Considering how Daniel's nostrils occasionally flared as he tested the air, he was quite aware of it. He would probably hear it before we got near it. We rounded a corner and the big grizzly rose to its feet with a pissed off roar. We had obviously disturbed its nap. I looked at the angry animal, it was a big old male who was in the same lovely mood as the Nightstalker had been the other night. The humans had frozen with wide eyes at the massive animal. I nonchalantly walked up beside Daniel and glanced at him, "I hunted well last night, so I am good, feel like a snack?" I subtly tilted my head slightly towards our shocked and terrified audience. At this point I wasn't sure what disturbed them more, that there was an angry grizzly roaring at them, or the thought that Daniel would consider that creature a snack. Even Nina looked startled. Daniel grinned widely as he caught on, showing his wickedly sharp teeth. "Sounds good to me. I didn't hunt last night. Keep going, I will catch up shortly." He swung his head to face the irritable animal that had come closer while huffing in threat. His eyes flickered to a glowing red as he dropped into a hunting crouch. He snarled at the bear viciously. The bear stopped and turned to run as he realized that he was facing a zombie. I could smell the fear rolling off those behind me in thick waves. My own instincts wanted me to back away from the hunting Terror, but he was in control and the bear was his target, so I overruled my instincts to remain standing there while looking relaxed. It was harder than I had thought it would be. My instincts had no desire to challenge a Terror over its meal. The bear crashed through the bush out of sight and Daniel was on his trail seconds later as they disappeared from sight in the trees. I glanced at those behind me and kept my tone bored, "Well, let's keep going." The looks I got were priceless. I fought to keep a grin off my face. Apparently none of them, even Nina, quite understood zombie humor when we decided to mess with the minds of the humans around us. Humans who got used to our presence often began to think of us in human terms despite our growling and discrete hunting. They tended to forget the hidden bloodthirsty nature that we constantly fought to contain and control. That made our occasional demonstrations and comments come as quite a shock to those around us. I started walking, and after a brief hesitation, they followed me. I listened to the noises off to the side. Daniel was letting the bear run far enough away that the humans didn't have a chance of seeing or hearing him go for the kill. I doubted that even he could drain a bear that large. I expected him to catch up in about fifteen minutes or so. The footsteps of the bear and Daniel were almost too faint for me to hear as they crashed through the underbrush. Daniel's footsteps hit the ground harder for several strides before his footsteps disappeared. The bear roared as I heard a faint crack. Daniel had likely launched himself at the bear and shattered its neck. The others behind me jumped at the roar. I noticed that they picked up their pace noticeably. They probably wanted to get out of this forest. Liz looked at me in curiosity, oddly enough, she seemed the least shaken from what she had seen, "How is he going to find us if we leave?" I lifted my nose to the air and deliberated took a loud sniff. I ignored the faint burning in my throat and commented dryly, "Our sense of smell is very good. I somehow doubt that he will have any problem tracking a dozen humans." Considering that half of them hadn't put on deodorant this morning, he could probably smell us clearly from where he was. I could smell the bear's blood at any rate. There is absolutely no way he can miss the smell of Hank's socks. Those things can practically be used as a weapon. It was a classic case of sweaty gym socks and he must have worn them for five days in a row now. I made a mental note to check for socks the next time I went through a house or store. I sniffed the air again, I could smell hot pavement and shingles so we had to be getting close to the road and truck stop. I frowned, "Speaking of humans, there are some ahead. Smells like they have been there for a while for their scent to be so heavy." Ben and Hank perked up before moving closer to the front of our small procession. A minute later we exited the trees and looked around. We were right in front of the truck stop and chances were that we would find the part for our truck here. There were several dozen vehicles with open gas caps. Hopefully we could find the part we needed and leave before encountering the humans that I could smell.

 

Chapter 27


 Ben took the lead as he and Hank headed towards the nearest diesel truck. Movement caught my eye and I spotted one of the humans I had scented. The man was lounging on the roof of the gas station. He noticed us fairly swiftly and hailed us, "Hello there!" Ben called back, "Hello!" Several men came out of the building, looking surprised to see us. I let Ben and Hank take the lead as I followed them. The man from the roof came over, "Wasn't expecting company, so we can't offer you any food. What are you doing all of the way out here on foot?" "Our truck broke down. Do you mind if we check these for parts?" The guy shrugged, "Go for it. They are useless as they are. Where are you headed?" Ben headed towards a nearby truck, "A Stronghold that is about two days from here. Mind if I ask why you are out here?" The guy's shoulders sagged and he sounded tired, "Our truck broke down and we haven't been able to get any working. They are all out of gas." Hank popped the hood and leaned over the motor as Ben replied, "We have some room in the truck if you want a lift." I wasn't impressed with the thought of more human strays joining us. We had just gotten rid of the previous five. The guy nodded happily, "That would be great. But we have different plans, put your hands in the air." My muscles tensed as three of the men present drew guns. The guy smirked, "Don't do anything foolish or we will shoot. Hands above your head. Now!" I gritted my teeth as I lifted my hands up with the rest of our group. Even if Daniel had been here, there was no way the two of us could take out three gunmen without the risk of someone being shot. Chances were that it would be one of our human companions. Especially with the way my luck ran. "Good. Now walk into the gas station with us nicely." My muscles shook lightly in my anger as my Nightstalker instincts raged against what I was being forced to do. I managed to walk with the others into the building without snarling or growling, but I was so close to it that it wasn't funny. There were seven men present and they swiftly tied our hands up before tying our hands to hooks embedded in the wall behind us. They tied Chloe up to a desk. This room had plainly seen better days and we were clearly not the first group that this bunch of bandits had ambushed. The first man walked along the line, taking jewelry, watches, and any valuables visible. He skipped me as I had nothing obvious. A second man was taking weapons while a third was checking pockets. The second man took my belt knife. I gritted my teeth as the third man somehow noticed the sheath straps for my sickle and removed it from its sheath. The second man stared at the now visible weapon with side eyes, "Shit, she had that hidden under her shirt? Glad you found it. You had better check each pocket carefully." He took the weapon and dropped it inside of a filing cabinet where it banged into other metal objects already there. My muscles were rigid in my rage as the third man carefully pulled each pocket inside out. I detested having these men touch my clothing as they ensured that I had no more surprises hidden. I gritted my teeth as my can of mace fell out of my pocket and rolled on the floor. The man tossed it to another man who also stashed it in a drawer. The rest of my pockets were empty, but he had the nerve to reach for my most valuable possession. I jerked my head back as he reached for my sunglasses. My muscles trembled in rage as I fought to keep myself from attacking the man. The guy pointed the rifle at the others beside me, "Hold still or I will shoot them."

I exhaled slowly through gritted teeth as I battled my ever growing rage. I closed my eyes tightly as he took my sunglasses. Even with my eyes completely closed, the light in this boarded up gas station was bright enough to be uncomfortable. "How the hell can you see through these? I can't even see my hand in front of my face!" I heard a clatter on the far side of the room as he threw them away. If I recalled right, there had been a fair bit of clutter and junk piled in that corner. I would have no chance of finding my sunglasses until the sun set or I managed to get my hands on my spare pairs in my backpack that resided on the far side of the room. My companions were either enraged or terrified at this ordeal. We had all been lined up against one wall while the men were scattered around the room. They had already gagged Nicky since she wouldn't stop insulting the men. The rest were voluntarily silent. I listened to the movements of the various men since I couldn't open my eyes. At this point I was just as handicapped as Daniel would be at midnight on the new moon. Where the hell is that Terror? I am ready to go back and throttle that bloody bear for distracting him. I wasn't even picking up his scent, nor was I hearing his footsteps. I heard the main guy walk in front of the line, "We can keep the children. This pair of adults seems quiet and easily frightened, it won't be hard to keep them in line. Considering we already had to gag that red haired woman, she definitely has to go. Those two men will go. Not sure about those last two women, might have to see how they act." Another man spoke, "Come here sweetie." I knew from his position that he was speaking to Liz. I didn't want her anywhere near these men. I twisted my bindings lightly, testing their strength. It was mere rope, my nails could shred this like confetti if needed. My voice was low and rough, but I managed to keep the growl out of it, "Leave her alone." The first man snorted in derision, "That isn't up to you to decide." I gritted my teeth as my muscles tensed even more, my control was near its limit. It was as if that shooting star had delayed my bad luck and it had returned with a vengeance. I was never wishing upon a star again. Nina was right beside me and whispered, "Try to keep calm, Daniel should be here soon." I exhaled gustily as I tried futilely to rein my instincts in. Where was that guy anyways? He was taking more time getting here than it took any woman to put on makeup. Perhaps he washed his shirt and is waiting for it to dry in the sunshine... I heard the one man walking towards where Liz stood shaking by Marissa. I wasn't sure what he did since I had my eyes closed, but it clearly pissed off Nina. Her furious voice rang out, "you bastard! Let her go! She is only a child!" What the hell was going on?! I very carefully cracked open one eye the tiniest bit. Even though this room would be considered very dim by human standards, the light felt like daggers in my eye. The world was blurry shapes since my eye was open just the barest crack and watering from the brightest light I had seen in months. The man pulled the terrified child into a hug while smirking as he replied in a cocky voice, "Make me." Red hot rage rolled through my muscles as my control was pushed right to its limits. This wasn't sitting well with either my human or my zombie mentality. My vision was rapidly becoming redder, but the man was still holding that rifle and the safety was almost certainly off. He was clearly just looking for an excuse to shoot someone to set an example. Apparently his actions, words, and tone didn't sit well with Nina either. She struggled in her bindings wildly, "Oh! If you are still living by nightfall, I will be very surprised and most upset!"

I guess she didn't plan on following her own advice. The man wasn't actually hurting Liz, although I was pretty sure I didn't want to know what the man had done to make her so angry. It would probably have shattered my struggling control. Even just the thought of the possibilities made the heat in my blood build up to uncomfortable levels in the desire to kill this man. The man frowned and pointed the rifle at Nina, "You are clearly far too much trouble to keep alive." His finger moved towards the trigger and my temper snapped. My snarl was closer to a roar in volume and it promised violence as I used my razor sharp nails to shred the ropes binding me. The man backed up a step in surprise as his eyes traveled in my direction. His rifle also moved away from Nina in his sudden distraction. I freed myself within seconds and charged towards him with another snarl. My blood was up and ready for the kill. I could barely see and the bit that I could was so blindingly bright that I had a hard time making things out. The man realized that I was not human and swung his rifle back towards Nina, "Call her off!" He thought I could be commanded like a dog... I snarled at the insult as I angled myself so that my charge put me between the two. He had obviously not expected my speed and I had already crossed half of the distance between us. I heard the other men yelling, some were ducking down behind cover while several were running out of the building to get away from the raging zombie. His eyes widened in fear as he gripped the rifle tighter. Two shots rang out. Pain erupted in my shoulder as one bullet skimmed the underside of my collarbone and lodged itself in my shoulder. I stumbled as the second bullet hit my chest and carved a white hot line of pain through my body before exiting out my back. The pain had my control close to shattering. I launched myself at the man with an enraged snarl. He dropped Liz just before I tackled him. I ripped the gun out of his hands and threw it out of a window, breaking the glass in the process. I slammed my forearm against his throat and felt his neck snap before he slumped lifelessly to the floor. I twisted to face the others with another snarl. I felt blood bubbling in my chest as I breathed. The one bullet must have punctured my lung. It would rapidly sap my strength and slow me down if this fight went on too much longer. I just hoped that my lung didn't actually collapse. That would slow me down to a mere shuffle. A third shot rang out and I winced at the loud noise even as agonizing pain erupted in my thigh. I snarled in pain as I faced the direction of the noise. My blurry sight finally allowed me to spot another man with a rifle hiding behind a desk. My world was mostly sound and scent. I charged towards him as he aimed at me again. I tried veer to the side. Another bang made my ears ring while agony exploded in my chest as the bullet hit me. My steps faltered. I felt my heart skip a beat and struggle. From the pain, I knew that the bullet had grazed it. If my heart stopped beating, I would be the next thing to useless until it healed. I knew from experience that even if my heart stopped that I would remain conscious, but I would be even weaker and slower than a normal zombie. My limited sight was so red in my fury that I couldn't even see any other colors. It was just all different shades of red. The excruciating pain from my wounds wracked my body and slowed me. My rage was the only thing keeping me on my feet at this point. I reached the man before he could reload and a quick blow shattered his neck. I whirled around in time to catch the arm of another man who tried to sneak up on me with a knife. My chest heaved for breath as my body tried to keep up with the demands I placed upon it with the amount of damage I had taken. I fought against the bloodlust that blazed through my veins as I twisted the man's arm. I kicked my attacker in the chest to send him flying into the wall. The move caused white hot pain to lance through my body from the wound on my leg. I heard the click of the safety on a gun being flicked and spun around to search for the source. A man across the room stood up to aim a handgun at me. He was all the way across the room, I wouldn't be able to get to him quickly. I tried to jump backwards out of his line of fire. For the first time in a very long time, I felt the true tang of fear. I couldn't move faster than a bullet and I already had several major injuries that were starting to severely sap my speed and strength. I couldn't take too many more bullets before my body would say hell with it. This band of bandits would know that they could kill a zombie by cutting off its head and there were more than enough swords and axes here to accomplish that. I stumbled as I landed on some debris that I hadn't noticed with my extremely limited sight. I heard a bang as he fired and pain exploded above my ear. My body went limp as I fell to the floor like a rag doll. I had no control over my body. My ears rang like a muffled bell and I couldn't hear any other noises. My limited blurry vision started to go dark. The man straightened as he lowered his gun. He picked up a sword and took a step forward. I saw Daniel launch through a window at the gunman as glass silently shattered and spun through the air in a graceful dance, catching and reflecting light in painful flashes. I couldn't even summon a thought as things went dark. 
 ------------------------------ Author's Note:
Please refrain from using swears in the comments. Most of my readers are under 18 and I do not wish this book to be flagged as mature.  :) I hope you are enjoying the story so far. If you do like it, please vote on each chapter. Such support means a lot to me.

 

Chapter 28


 My mind was dark and heavy as it buried me in the depths of my subconscious. I wasn't exactly sure when I started to become aware of my body. Once I started feeling it, I wished I could retreat back into the depths of my mind and hide. My traitorous body and mind wouldn't let me though. The feelings were dim as I slowly floated into awareness. It felt like my chest was being crushed in a steel vise. It was insanely painful and it was only getting worse. Just when I thought I couldn't take any more, my heart gave a huge thump as it once more started working. The worst of the pain disappeared, it must have come from my heart trying to jumpstart itself. My lungs automatically pulled in a deep breath and the darkness in my mind cleared a bit more. Pain radiated from several spots and my hazy mind pinpointed them as spots the bullets had hit. I also had a splitting headache. The heat from the virus burned like fire in my blood as it battled me for control. The mouth-watering scent of my human traveling companions was very strong. I hadn't had this much trouble with my control and bloodlust even when I had first turned. Daniel's quiet voice broke the silence around me, "Her breathing has changed noticeably, she may be waking up." Nina sounded relieved, "Already? That is a surprise." Her footsteps came closer and I struggled to simply battle back the bloodlust. I took another breath that burned the back of my throat, but the scent of a Terror so close had my instincts backing down a bit. I was thankful for the break. Daniel spoke again, "Trinity, are you awake?" I wasn't sure I could answer just yet, my mind was still clearing and my body wasn't quite responding to me. I slowly cracked my eyes partially open. My deeply red tinted vision made out a rather dirty ceiling above me. I could open up my eyes a crack without severe pain, so this room was probably so dark that the humans would have a hard time seeing my body where it lay. I knew that my eyes were glowing strongly from the bloodlust and they would surely see the glow even with my eyes being mostly closed. I turned my head slightly. I was in a very tiny jail cell that was barely big enough for the bed I was lying on. The jail cell was a good thing, my control was still uncertain and I didn't dare get close to a human at this point. Daniel was sitting on a chair beside the bars. His presence helped with my control, since my instincts knew they had no chance of winning against him while I was injured. Nina was just behind Daniel and the heat burned in my veins a bit more at the sight of a human. I could smell the others just out of sight, although they weren't in this room. Nina stepped up beside Daniel, "How are you feeling?" She was far too close for my comfort or my control the way the bloodlust was raging. My voice was tight from the level of control I was using to keep from trying to attack her, "That might be a question for another day." She tilted her head, probably analyzing my faster breathing rate and tense muscles as I tried to remain in control. She reached down before passing something to Daniel, "Daniel took down a deer and we bled it out. Here, this might help." Daniel held a large McDonald's drink cup through the jail bars and I could pick up the scent of deer blood in it. It was wise of them to have another zombie stick their hands through the bars. I slowly sat up, my body was actually stiff. I held my breath to stop myself from growling as pain flared in my wounds with the bit of movement. My head pounded both from the headrush of sitting up and from the bloodlust. The injury from the bullet probably wasn't helping either. My zombie instincts were stronger than I had ever felt them in the past. I held onto control with an iron fist, it took all of my concentration to not lunge against the bars towards the human. I slowly reached out and took the cup before sticking the straw in my mouth.

I managed to mostly drain the cup before I paused to take a breath. Seconds later the straw pulled air. Nina was already passing two more cups to Daniel. I glanced down to see a cooler beside Daniel's chair with several more cups. I drained the rest of the cups in a similar manner. It was distinctly odd to drink blood that was cold. It had a stale taste to it, but I wasn't about to complain since each cup helped me gain the upper hand on my control as my bloodlust faded. Once I had drained all eight cups, I felt much more like myself. I was quite full, although I knew with large healing wounds that I would be hunting more than normal as my body burned through resources to try and heal me. I didn't have to fight for control any more than usual now. My headache had faded to a dull pounding. The sore and painful spots from the bullet wounds still reminded me of their presence. I really wished that painkillers worked on zombies since my wounds were throbbing painfully even while sitting still. I was not looking forward to moving. I wondered how long I had been out cold. A gunshot to the chest took about a month to heal into a scar. I knew that from experience. I couldn't have been out for more than a few days with the amount my injuries hurt. I felt recovered enough that the room lighting was now my biggest issue. It would be fairly dim by human standards, just about right for a haunted house. It was too bright for me. I glanced around the room, but with my eyes mostly closed I couldn't see anything in detail. "I don't suppose anyone found my spare pair of sunglasses in my backpack?" Daniel handed something through the bars and I took my sunglasses. I put them on with a sigh of relief as I could finally open up my eyes. The good news was that I was alive and in control. The bad news was that it felt like I had been run over by a semi. I carefully stretched my arms as I tried to work the kinks out of the joints. Even that movement hurt. "How long was I out?" Daniel replied, "Two days." That was a bit surprising, usually it took four to seven days for Runners or regular zombies to wake up from head wounds caused by a bullet. Maybe it was different for higher ranking zombies or maybe my head injury hadn't been that serious. Nina pointed a flashlight at the ceiling and turned it on so that they could see me now that I had my sunglasses on. Nina spoke again, "How are you feeling?" "My control is mostly back in place, although I doubt I could handle a hug from Liz at the moment. I feel like I got run over by a bus. How bad was the damage?" Nina sat in a chair and sighed, "Pretty bad. Had you still been human, you would have been dead regardless of how fast you arrived in the ER. You were hit by five bullets. One in the shoulder, a second in your upper leg, one partially collapsed your lung, another damaged your heart and the last one did a bit of damage to your head. Thankfully the one that hit your head was from a small handgun, the rest came from rifles." Oh boy. I was going to be healing for some time. It would be probably two weeks before I could attempt things that I normally did, but until then, I was going to be quite weak. It would take much more time after that for the injuries to heal into pale scars. My body may heal fast the first week or so, but that was because my body would put everything it had into healing. That meant that it left me no reserves of energy for any kind of activity, and if I did try even something as simple as walking, I would tire very quickly. "Do you think you can stand up?" This was going to hurt... I took a deep breath and felt the three wounds on my chest protest against the movement. I slowly stood up while putting most of my weight on my good leg. Considering the pain radiating from my other leg, I probably didn't want to see how bad the damage was.

Nina tilted her head, "Are we safe to open up the door?" I nodded, "Yes, just don't touch me without warning." Daniel stood up and opened up the door. It hadn't even been locked. He kept a careful eye on me in case my control was shakier than I was letting on. I slowly walked out. The pain was too bad to go any faster. Nina led the way out of the room and I followed her. Daniel followed behind me. The hair on my neck prickled as the Terror followed behind me. I think I preferred it when he remained between me and Nina... We entered a main room in the building where the rest of the group was relaxing. They all looked up as we entered. Nicky whistled, "Wow. You are in rough shape." I growled half-heartedly at her, "Thanks..." My sarcasm was definitely recovering faster than my wounds. No surprise there. Nicky chuckled, "I told them that I would probably be the first to get a growl out of you. Guess I win that bet. Welcome back by the way." There was a chair a bit to the side, away from the others, and I sat in that one. Daniel took one not that far from me while Nina sat by him. Hank was sitting by a fireplace and held up an empty bowl, "Want some soup? The rest of us already ate lunch." I nodded, "Half a bowl would be good, thanks." I was trying to be polite since I knew my manners weren't going to last long. Nightstalkers were known for being easily irritable for good reason, injured ones were even worse. They were likely going to figure that out very shortly. Daniel got up to take the bowl and pass it to me. As much as my instincts didn't want the higher ranking zombie so close to me, my human mind preferred him over the humans at the moment. I was full from the deer blood, but I managed to down the soup. My stomach ached a bit from the amount of food I forced into it, but I knew I would be burning through calories like a fire through dry kindling. I may have been awake, but even that small walk had tired me. Ben stretched, "We will stay here until tomorrow morning. Think you are up for a truck ride tomorrow?" They must have found the part for the truck. At least they weren't asking me to walk. I didn't feel like being jounced around in the back of a truck, but I nodded anyways. Nina perked up a bit, "I know that you originally planned to head home once we hit the Stronghold, but it might be best if you stayed there until your injuries healed." I turned my head to examine the lady who I was quite certain had patched up those very injuries, "I don't like Strongholds. My past experiences with them have been anything but good." She nodded with a kind expression, "I can see that. This place has no problem with Daniel, so your presence won't bother them. Besides, you took two bullets meant for me. I can't exactly let you go off alone when you are barely able to walk." Daniel fixed his eyes on me as he knew her last sentence would have triggered my instincts. I didn't dare growl at the lady while her bodyguard was watching so intently. I settled for sighing gustily in annoyance at her high handed assumption that she could control where I went, "I prefer to avoid large groups of humans, so I would rather not stay in one of those places." Nina looked amused, "I'll make a deal with you. When we get there, if you can outrun me for half an hour then you can head wherever you like. If you can't, then it shows that you are still recovering and you stay with us." I gritted my teeth as I looked away from the crafty lady. I wouldn't be able to win that bet for at least five days and I knew it. Apparently she did too. Daniel sighed, "I'll tell you what. If anyone gives you trouble, I will set them straight. Very few dare to irritate Nina and even fewer want to cross me."

Daniel was offering to protect me instead of threatening to flatten me into a Nightstalker pancake. This had to be a first. I also had no clue what to say in response to that. This scenario had never even crossed my mind. Nicky rubbed her hands together gleefully, "Count me in as well. If anyone tries to pull any underhanded tricks, I get to go after them. I have four cans of tomato juice in my backpack that I have been dying to use. If they work on zombies, they will probably have some effects on humans too." Daniel gave her an odd look. This time she noticed it and grinned at him, "No worries, I have a bar of soap as backup in case a zombie appears. I even found a tiny bottle of liquid dish soap last night." He narrowed his eyes in suspicion since Nicky looked eager to take on a zombie with just soap. Odd as it was, I knew that she wouldn't dare let a zombie close enough to her that she could stick soap in its mouth. I noticed her grin triumphantly at Daniel's expression and it clicked. At this particular moment, this was not the insane Nicky. This was the somewhat crazy, but far too observant Nicky. She had figured out that Daniel had no clue what the soap reference was about and was using that to torment him. For the first time today, I felt humor cross my mind, although I let no trace of it be seen on my face. Nina ruined the moment, "So, what do you say? We aren't going to let anything happen to you." I turned my head to face her. Her question hadn't really seemed like a question. "I somehow suspect that if I try to decline that you are going to get Daniel to force me to stay." She found my observation amusing and shook her head, "Unless you heal much faster than I anticipate, even I have a good chance of winning any fight with you." Her amusement did not help my already smarting pride. The worst part was that she was also correct. The extra strength, speed, and stamina that came with being a Nightstalker were currently on vacation. For very short periods of time, I would be able to use them, but unless I was trying to win an arm wrestling match, it wasn't going to be doing me any good. I was more or less a badly wounded human with a dangerous virus in her blood and a short temper. I huffed in annoyance as I turned my gaze to the flickering fire. Nina apologized, "Sorry, I shouldn't have found it funny, but I never thought that I would ever have the upper hand over a Nightstalker if it came to a fight. I will be honest, that guy would have killed me if you hadn't intervened. I don't think I could live with myself if I knew you were off on your own with serious injuries caused by saving my life. So please, for my peace of mind, please stay with us at the Stronghold while you recover." I knew that this wasn't an argument I was going to win. The human part of my mind did understand Nina's perspective and on some level agreed with her. I had managed two weeks with a group of humans already. Could I manage another two weeks in a Stronghold? Considering I knew that I didn't really have a choice until I was well enough to evade a Terror, it was a pointless question. I sighed gustily in resignation, "Fine, but you could very well regret your persistence. Injuries like these make a Nightstalker's temper even worse." Nina grinned, "I am sure we will manage just fine. Besides, we survived Nicky yesterday, so we are ready for anything you can throw at us." I glanced at Nicky, who was shamelessly eavesdropping with a big grin, before I looked back at Nina, "She had another insanity blitz?" Daniel snorted, "I think that is far too mild of a term for what we had to deal with. I ended up tying her to a chair, not just once, but three times because that little rat managed to get loose within minutes. I have no idea how you dealt with her that one morning." Nina was amused as she elaborated, "She severely tried Daniel's patience and wasn't at all intimidated by him even when he snarled at her, which is something I have never seen before. Daniel hates cooking, but he has started making breakfast before everyone gets up just so we can stuff her full of food the second she wakes up." Nicky chuckled, not at all embarrassed by their tales, "It turns out that it is hard to be cranky when you are full of good food. That is our plan for you too. Daniel already has some rabbits locked in crates by the back door so you don't have to go hunting." That was a kind, if odd, gesture. It may have taken me an hour, but I could have caught a rabbit once night fell. In a way, I was glad I wasn't going to have to stalk through the forest tonight to land a kill. Even that small walk down the hallway told me that it would be days before I could walk without pain. I shrugged, "Interesting plan, but I wouldn't bank on it working as well as you are hoping." Nicky wasn't fazed by my pessimism, "It is worth a try and it can't hurt." I had no way to argue with that. Nicky started sharpening her sword. Nina seemed content now that I had agreed with her plan. I had a feeling I could regret it if I was constantly trying to dodge her questions every time I turned around. Daniel seemed relaxed. I didn't recall ever seeing him this relaxed. It was as if he knew that I had no chance of even attempting to fight him and his instincts weren't bothering him at all. I wondered how long that would last.

 

Chapter 29


 I jerked my head to the side a bit as I jolted out of my light doze at the sound of approaching footsteps. I bit back an instinctive light growl when I saw that it was only Nina. Nina paused, "Sorry, I didn't think you would be sleeping." I shook my head and closed my eyes before pushing my hand under the edge of my sunglasses to rub my eyes tiredly, "Don't worry about it. There was no way to tell." I pushed my sunglasses back against my face and reopened my eyes. About half of the others had headed to bed and the other half were watching us. Nina resumed her walk forward while Daniel kept watch from a nearby chair. "Let's go into one of the back rooms. I want to check those injuries and change the bandages." I didn't feel like moving, but I doubted she was going to give up and I was too tired to argue. I had been awake all afternoon and most of the evening, my healing body wanted sleep. I knew that I would have peace the rest of the night if I humored her. With that thought, I stood up with a sigh. I hadn't left this chair since I had sat in it earlier and my leg once more protested being forced to work. Daniel frowned, but remained where he was as I followed Nina out of the room. She went into a different room with several windows that let in a fair bit of light. She gestured to a stool, "Sit down and take off your shirt carefully." I had no idea how Daniel managed to be around her with the amount of orders she gave out. I exhaled slowly in annoyance as I did what she said. The bandages were pretty blood stained from what I could see. The bandages were above my bra, so at least I didn't have to take it off. I could pretend I was wearing a bikini top. That made this situation slightly more tolerable. I still didn't like it though. Nina put on long plastic gloves to protect herself from my blood and started unravelling the bandages. I sat still and watched her, "I assume you were the one who patched me up?" She nodded without removing her eyes from her work, "Yes, I pulled the bullets out too. Getting the one out from behind your heart was a gruesome task. I never want to see another human heart again. The creepiest part was that it had already stopped beating, but would occasionally quiver. I have no idea how your body managed to heal your heart that much in two days to allow it to actually beat." She glanced up at my face, "The bullet from the handgun barely entered your head. I was able to pull it out with a pair of eyebrow tweezers. We weren't expecting you to wake for several more days." I was glad that I was only out for two days; I suspected that if I had been out for longer that the bloodlust would have been even worse. Daniel had likely never had a serious wound or the swift healing that occurred to major organs during the first week would not have surprised her so. Nina unwrapped the last of the bandage and I got my first look at the damage. The one under my collarbone was just a thumb-sized scab over red irritated skin. The one above my lung was larger and looked pretty bad. It also ached with each breath I took so I knew that the wound was barely staying closed. The one above my heart was the size of a walnut and had a finger long cut mark where Nina had opened it up more to get the bullet out. Nina hummed, "The scabs are holding together, which is a good thing. Not much I can do at this point other than to put some polysporin on and re-bandage it. It will keep the scab soft so it doesn't pull or tear. Try not to move too much for several days." She dabbed some polysporin on the scabs. She paused and gently ran her finger over an old pale scar the size of my pinky nail on my shoulder. I growled very faintly, that injury was old news. I heard a growl from Daniel in the other room, although the faint warning was low enough that the humans likely hadn't heard it. Nina looked disappointed when I didn't comment on the scar's origin, but started to bandage up my currently healing battle scars.

I couldn't see the wound on my head as Nina looked at it, "This one is healing beautifully. Thankfully the entrance wound is small. Just don't brush or try to move your hair." I was glad she didn't try to touch it. Having someone bring their hands near my head or neck was a huge trigger point for any sane zombie. I guessed from the radiating pain that it was just above my ear. I was glad that it had been the handgun that had managed to hit my head. I didn't want to contemplate how long I would have been out if one of those rifles had managed a similar shot. It may have taken a month, but it would have healed as long as my head remained attached to my body. Nina crouched down in front of me to push up the pant leg of my shorts. She unwrapped the blood stained bandage swiftly enough, revealing the most painful injury. The bullet must have hit at a bad angle, because it was a mess. It probably hadn't helped that I had been trying to run with the bullet in my leg during the fight. It hadn't healed that much and the barely hardened scab had a few tiny tears in it where blood beaded to the surface simply from my slow walk. My body would have put its energy primarily into healing my head, heart, and lungs. In that order. My shoulder and leg were last on the list. Nina carefully put more polysporin on and re-wrapped the nasty wound. I was kind of surprised that Nina was using polysporin, either she hadn't consulted with Daniel, or Daniel was so far out of touch with his zombie instincts that he was unaware of the secret that allowed zombies to heal faster. I suspected the latter scenario. She stood up, "That should work unless you do too much and open up those wounds." I left the room as Nina went off to a different back room. The others had gone off to bed in various side rooms, so I went outside. Nicky was correct, there were three rabbits outside the back door. Despite drinking all that blood in those cups around noon, I had enough room for a rabbit at this point. I also had another plan in mind to help this leg of mine heal faster. My arms had not been injured and were swift enough to kill the rabbit before it realized what was going on. I still didn't have my belt knife or my grain sickle. I would have to rectify that tomorrow, but in the meantime, my nails were sharp enough to shave the hair away. Since the sun was mostly set, Daniel was probably not going to leave the building unless he had to. I bet he was listening as he tracked where I was and what I was doing, even if only for the lack of anything better to do. I drained the rabbit and went inside. I headed to the bathroom and sat down. I quietly slid the leg of my shorts up, glad that they were soft material and not jeans. I carefully undid the bandages on my leg. I took notes on how they had been wrapped so I could replicate it afterwards. I didn't want Nina to notice anything unusual. I examined the wound. Polysporin worked so well on minor human injuries mostly because it kept the scab or wound moist so the new skin didn't scar or pull. The antibiotics in it were pointless for a zombie since we didn't get infections. I had kept a small amount of the rabbit blood in my mouth. I used my finger to scoop a few drops out and let them fall into the wound. Blood and zombie saliva. They would speed the healing up by a noticeable amount despite how fast the wound would already be healing due to accelerated zombie healing. It was a potent mixture that only sane zombies could truly enjoy. I watched as the blood seemed to be magically absorbed by the raw flesh in the wound. It wouldn't absorb my blood, but any non-zombie blood would disappear almost like water in sand. Once the tiny amount of blood I had carried in my mouth was in the wound, I carefully wrapped my leg back up the way it had been. There was no way for me to put the bandages back on my chest if I took them off, so those injuries would have to go without for now. I left the bathroom to sit back in my chair. Daniel hadn't moved, although he watched me enter the room that was lit up by the fire in the fireplace.

He didn't say anything and I didn't feel like talking. My instincts stirred a bit as the last of sunlight left the sky, but they didn't do much. I was full and my body hurt. My instincts were all for remaining holed up to heal. Sure, I could survive wounds that would kill a human, but they still hurt. Humans tended to sleep a lot more if they were sick or injured and the same held true for zombies. I dozed a good chunk of the night, although I kept one ear alert for movement or trouble. I woke as Daniel turned on his flashlight and started a pot of stew. Even if Nicky did cross to the dark side, someone else would be dealing with her today. If Daniel's snarl didn't bother her, then mine wouldn't faze her and I simply didn't have the energy to deal with her. Physically or mentally. I stood up and walked out of the room. My leg wasn't quite as painful, but the improvement was barely noticeable. I would still take it. Five minutes later, there was one less rabbit outside. I retreated to the bathroom to add more rabbit blood to my leg wound. I could actually see the faint difference that the first application had made. My headache had faded to a very faint ache. I was in my seat before any of the humans were up. 
 
 Nina watched in surprise as I accepted a bowl of stew for breakfast. This was the third meal in a row I had eaten with the group. I usually only ate one meal a day so the change likely had her curiosity piqued. Great. A curious and bored Nina in the back of a truck is not how I want to spend my day. I glanced over at Daniel, "Where are my belt knife and sickle?" I really hoped that they had recovered my weapons. "In my backpack. For the safety of anyone within throwing range, we think it is best if you don't carry weapons. Your temper was a bit unpredictable before and I trust it even less right now. You can have them back once those wounds have healed." I gritted my teeth with a low growl of frustration – how dare he take my weapons! I needed the advantage they gave me if I ended up having to fight while injured. Daniel growled back as his eyes flashed red in a light warning. I turned my head away from him while I silently fumed, conceding defeat. I was no match for him in a fight and he was likely more than willing to keep me in line. Daniel stood up with a huffing noise, "I had better go hunt. Can you possibly stay out of trouble for at least 20 minutes?" I snorted, "I have no plans on getting out of this chair anytime soon unless I have to." He faintly growled at my cynical tone before he left the room. I was not looking forward to the rest of today considering how growly the two of us were already. I leaned back in the chair and stretched my sore leg in an attempt to ease the throbbing. It was a pity that I had never found anything that was capable of easing pain. I listened to the others as they were packing up. Ben came over, "We should be packed in another 15 minutes and ready to roll once Daniel comes back. If you need anything, speak up now or forever hold your peace." My backpack still had all of the food I had stashed in it, so I was good on that front. I highly doubted that they would hand me any weapons. That may be a good thing though, at least if they wanted to arrive alive. I shook my head and Ben grabbed some sleeping bags to haul out to the truck. I watched as Liz gazed around at the bustle of activity and looked at me. I was the only one sitting down. She wandered over and I shifted my injured leg out of the way. I didn't really feel like having the child near me, but let her approach. She carefully climbed up on my good knee and sat to watch the others working. She leaned back against me and I put one arm lightly around her to prevent her from shifting to the side and brushing against any of my injuries.

Her voice was quiet, "I am glad that you are okay. They were worried that you wouldn't wake up." That had never been my doubt. If my head was on my shoulders, I would eventually come to. My worry had been what I would have been like when I woke up. I replied quietly, "I will be some time healing, but I will eventually recover." I was waiting to see how long it would take the adults to realize that the child was with me. Their reaction could be entertaining. They were all uneasy about my control, but it was back to normal even if I was grumpier than usual. My throat burned lightly from her smell as it always did, but Liz was in no danger. Marissa paused as she looked around and finally spotted Liz on my lap. She froze in shock. Tom noticed her reaction and followed her gaze before also beginning to look quite uneasy. Liz finally noticed the look on Marissa's face, "Is something wrong Marissa?" Hank and Ben walked in and paused at her question. Ben hesitated, "Uh... Trinity, are you sure that is wise?" Nicky snorted as she kept packing and ignored the reactions of the others, "I am pretty sure if she was having problems with control that she wouldn't be sitting there so calmly." I bared my teeth in a silent grin at the unconcerned woman, "I managed to put up with you that one morning. Liz has never yet pushed my patience to its limit." Nicky chuckled, "Oh, I know. Daniel practically blew a gasket when he had to deal with me. He actually tied me up so I couldn't chase Ben around!" Daniel chose that moment to walk in. He sent a glare my way as he noticed Liz perched on my leg, "Can't you even stay out of trouble for ten minutes? Is that truly too much to ask?" I snorted and sarcastically responded, "I said that I had no intention of getting out of this chair. My lazy ass has been parked here all this time while I watched everyone else industriously packing." Daniel growled in frustration. Nicky groaned, "You two are worse than a couple of 4 year olds! You two aren't even in the vehicle yet and you two are tormenting each other." Both of us sent Nicky a dirty look. As if she had any room to talk. Nicky grabbed a bag of food and packed it out to the truck. Ben sighed as he ruffled up Chloe's fur, "You have no idea how lucky you are to ride in the front girl." Chloe wagged her tail happily as if to rub it in. Ben stood up, "Well, the truck is now packed." I exhaled gustily, I was not looking forward to this. I gently put Liz on her feet and stood up. Marissa held out her hand to Liz and Liz crossed the floor to take her hand. I went outside and eyed up the big jacked-up truck as I approached it. No matter how I did this, getting in or out was going to hurt. My Nightstalker instincts hating showing weakness or pain. Stepping onto the bumper before swinging my leg up and over into the truck involved three steps that would be sure to cause some decent pain in my leg. There was nothing wrong with my left arm though, so I jumped and used my arm to vault into the back of the truck. I carefully bent my knees slightly as I landed while letting my uninjured leg take most of my weight. It hurt, but not as badly as it could have. I took my usual seat and got comfy as the others climbed into the back of the truck. We took up the seating we usually did. Nina was not impressed with how I had gotten into the truck, "Stuff like that is what you shouldn't be doing if you want those injuries to heal anytime soon." I raised my eyebrow, "This truck isn't exactly low to the ground. How else did you expect me to get in?" "Certainly not by pretending to be a kangaroo. I am sure that Daniel could have lifted you in." Daniel gave Nina a startled and disbelieving look, he clearly had not expected that suggestion. I gave Nina a look of pure disbelief, "Not likely. In case you haven't noticed, we haven't even come into direct contact yet." We could barely stand being in the same vicinity with each other. Nina needed her head checked with ideas like that. Nina looked a bit disgruntled, but let it slide as she noticed Daniel's apparent aversion to that idea. Now that I thought about it, it had likely been Daniel who had packed me into that room while I had been out cold. It would have been far too dangerous for a human to attempt it. Had I woken up, I probably would have attacked whomever was carrying me as an instinctive reaction. Also, any of my blood was quite dangerous for humans. The thought of someone touching me while I was unaware of it didn't make this any easier. Zombies were not much for contact. Liz may keep coming back to me and I had interacted with Nicky somewhat, but other than that, I hadn't come into direct contact with any other person here unless you counted when Nina had changed my bandages. I pulled the hood of my sweater over my head and looked at the road as Hank started the truck. This was going to be a long drive...

 

Chapter 30

            Nightstalkers did not make good patients. I was no exception. Especially when being jounced around in the back of a truck. We hit another bump hard enough to cause everyone to hold onto the sides of the truck. Pain lanced through each injury when he hit those holes like that – and he had been hitting lots of them. I threw a peeved look over my shoulder at the window of the cab behind me, "Hank, are you trying to hit every pothole? Driving is supposed to be like Minesweeper where you avoid potential deathtraps, not like whack a mole. Besides, I severely doubt that there are moles hiding in those craters you keep finding." Nicky perked up, "Oh! Let me drive!" Ben and Hank both immediately replied, "Not a chance." Nicky crossed her arms as she grumbled. I made a mental note to never let her behind the wheel with a reaction like that from Hank. Hank replied to me, "Sorry Trinity, this road has more holes in it than swiss cheese and it is tough to tell which holes are worse until I am right on top of them." I glanced at the road behind us, but there weren't nearly as many potholes as he was making out. That last one had been the only one in that section of the road. The truck moved a bit to the side as Hank dodged another big pothole. I jumped a bit as Nicky suddenly cheered, "Awesome! Hank finally drove over the yellow center line!" I glanced at the road behind and realized that Nicky was correct. Hank had been remaining in the proper lane even if it meant hitting a pothole. That idiot... He is so lucky that he is inside the cab at this moment and I can't reach him. Now that Hank was driving like a thinking person on a deserted road I could relax a bit. The others were also silent. It was barely 10am and I was tired. It was pathetic. I gazed towards the trees and tried to nap. Nina had said that it was impossible for a zombie to sleep in a moving vehicle, but in reality it was just extremely difficult. I managed to lightly doze as time passed far too slowly. Every bump or noise caused my mind to stir as I tried to force it to rest. I gave up after a couple of hours, although I did feel more rested. I opened my eyes and reached for my water bottle. Nicky was watching me with a crazy grin. I narrowed my eyes in suspicion, "And just why are you grinning like the Cheshire cat?" Nicky chuckled, "I simply can't figure out how you are sleeping in this truck. I can never sleep in a moving vehicle." I was surprised, I had been sitting up and my head hadn't even been leaning against the cab as I faced the forest to the side. Nina shook her head, "Sorry Nicky, but zombies are light sleepers and they wouldn't have been able to sleep in the back of a truck. Even if she had, you wouldn't have been able to tell." Nicky chuckled, "Oh, I was watching. Normally her head moves a bit as she watches things going by, particularly zombies. She has barely twitched a single muscle for over an hour and her breathing was steady without those deeper breaths she takes when sniffing the air. She never did that before on previous trips, so she was either attempting yoga or napping – and I highly doubt it was yoga." I also highly doubted that any amount of yoga would help my temper since it was fueled by my Nightstalker instincts. Especially if Nicky was around. I snorted, "I think you need your head checked." I contemplated different ways to toss the bizarrely observant woman off the truck, debating on which moves would disturb my injuries the least. The biggest wrench in my plan was the fact that Daniel was plenty fast enough to rescue Nicky. That led to the question if he would actually help her after everything she put him through.

Nina had pulled out her notepad and started scribbling things down. Daniel was watching me in curiosity, "Did you really fall asleep?" I might be able to pick up some information since they would all assume I had been sleeping regardless of what I might say. I turned my head so I could look at Daniel easier, "Nightstalkers can't fall into a deep sleep. Can Terrors?" He shook his head, "A light fitful sleep for a couple of hours a night, but that is about it. How heavily can you sleep?" "About the same." He was watching me intently, "I thought you were oddly still, you really were sleeping, weren't you?" So much for my evasion. I made a face, "I can't really call it sleep, it was more like a resting state. I was still aware of sounds and strong scents." Nicky chuckled, "Sure... I call that a nap. On a side note, when is lunch?" Ben's stomach rumbled, "Hopefully sooner rather than later." He pulled out his map, "Not much in the way of human habitation for quite a ways." He moved from his spot to start shuffling through our food supplies. He put a few cans of soup to the side, presumably for lunch. He paused and held up a can of beans. A growl rumbled warningly in my chest as the same time as Daniel growled. That can must have gotten into our supplies while I was out of the picture because I knew that I had raided the bags to ensure that none of those despicable things were left for Ben to get his grubby hands on. Daniel's eyes flashed red in warning, "You eat any beans before we get to that Stronghold and we will be having words." Ben paled and swiftly put the can back under the intense gaze of two unimpressed zombies. Hank pulled over to the side of the road and turned the truck off. Everyone got out of the truck, although I remained where I was. Nina kept glancing at me in concern, but didn't comment. Now that the truck was stationary, the throbbing in my injuries was fading a bit. It didn't take long for a fire to be lit and soup to heat. Nina brought me half a bowl, "How are you holding up?" I took the bowl, "Thanks, about as well as I was this morning." She nodded, "Let me know if it gets worse. I am worried about those wounds opening up." My mouth was full of soup, saving me from having to respond. A couple of the biggest bumps had jarred me enough that the injuries had bled a bit. There was nothing to be done though, the bleeding had already stopped and it wasn't as if medication would work on me. The stop was brief and it wasn't long before the truck was making miles down the highway. I resumed my silent watch of the treeline while occasionally dozing. 
 
 We had managed to find a house around 7pm to take shelter in for the night. The moment we stopped Daniel dropped the tailgate and gave me a pointed look that plainly said that he did not want me vaulting over the side of the truck box as I had this morning. I hated to break it to him, but being stationary for roughly ten hours had allowed my wounds enough recovery time that a small arm-assisted drop like that shouldn't cause them to bleed at this point. Daniel grabbed several bags and carried them in. I slowly stood up. My muscles were stiff and sore as they protested the movement. My leg was still telling me to go to hell. I walked to the tailgate and used my arm on the side of the truck to slow my drop. My landing still jarred my injuries enough that they blazed in pain. I held my breath at the renewed fire in my wounds. I hid my pain and grabbed my backpack as I walked towards the house. This house also had a fireplace, which meant that everyone would stay inside tonight. I sat down on the ledge beside the fireplace and got the fire started while the others kept unpacking. There was dry wood, kindling, paper, and even a lighter just to the side, so there was nothing to starting it. I moved to a rocking chair just to the side as I watched the others finish packing stuff in. It wasn't as if we had much, it was mostly food and sleeping bags. Marissa started boiling more water for our water bottles. Nina wandered in and looked at me, "While we are waiting, let's go to one of the back rooms and check those injuries." Nina was beginning to remind me of a mother hen or an over-vigilant nurse. I reluctantly got to my feet and followed her. There wasn't much of a difference in how the injuries appeared since I last saw them. The fact that there was a difference showed just how quickly they were healing. The injury on my head was definitely healing the fastest. I still didn't see any sign of Daniel as I went back into the main room. Marissa had stolen my rocking chair so I took a seat on one of the kitchen chairs. Half an hour later Daniel walked in and glanced at me, "There are two rabbits and a pheasant in the shed out back." I blinked slowly, somewhat taken aback by his consideration, "Thank you." Daniel nodded as he took a seat in an overstuffed armchair. Nina noticed my surprise and grinned silently. Marissa started passing out the soup. I was beginning to wonder if that was the only thing she knew how to make. Then again, most cans in houses contained things that were easy to dump into a pot of water. Once supper was done, Nina grabbed my sleeping bag and dropped it on one of the two couches in this room. She noticed me watching her, "I would prefer if you laid down most of the night. There are enough beds and couches in this house for almost everyone." Seriously? I think she was taking this nurse act a bit too far. Ben turned around, "Aw... I was hoping to get a couch in here close to the fire." Nina regarded Ben, "You can sleep in front of the fire on the floor if you like. Trinity gets the one couch and I get the other. Daniel already called dibs on that big chair." I made a face. I really didn't care where I spent the night, but Nina had obviously thought long and hard about this little detail. Her one track mind had found a new outlet to focus her energy on. I was now the focus of her new obsession, much to my dismay and misfortune. I think I preferred it better when she was simply taking notes. Ben tried again, "One of the rooms just has a single bed, I am sure she would be more comfortable there." That did sound much better than being in a living room with a Terror and a watchful nurse. Before I could speak up Nicky corrected Ben, "I call that room. I need my beauty sleep after all. You and Hank can share the room with the bunk beds. Tomorrow we will arrive at the Stronghold and you will get your own bed then." The sky outside darkened and people headed to bed. I went outside. The shed stood in the middle of the backyard, so it wasn't exactly possible to miss it. I took a few silent breaths of the cool refreshing air. I had a hard time believing just how accustomed I had been getting to the constant smell of humans. I shook myself a bit and headed to the large shed. I closed the door behind me and looked around. Two cat carriers each held a rabbit and a box on top of the carriers likely held the bird. I put the box on the floor and reached into one of the cat carriers. It took me only a moment to snap the rabbit's neck. I sat down on a chair and drained the rabbit. I unwrapped my leg before grabbing the box. There wasn't that much blood in any bird, but I drank half of it and dripped the other half into my wound. It never ceased to fascinate me as to how fast an injury could absorb blood. Undamaged skin didn't absorb it, but it instantly disappeared into injured skin or through scabs. I wrapped my leg back up and headed back inside. Chloe was curled up in a corner of the kitchen and I left the rabbit by her. Daniel was watching the fire dance in the fireplace as it burned brightly. Nina was already on her couch lying in her sleeping bag as she watched me as if to make sure that I was following her directions. I unrolled my sleeping bag on the couch and laid down in it carefully. I gritted my teeth as the wound on my back protested against me laying on it. The pain dulled after a bit and I could relax somewhat. I had sat up last night, so I had no clue why Nina was so adamant about me laying down on my back tonight. Nina fell asleep shortly after she watched me lay down. The night was quiet and I fell into a light doze.

 

Chapter 31


 I watched as Ironwind Stronghold slowly came into view. For two weeks I had been impatient to get here so I could complete my promise and make myself scarce. Now I kind of wished that our road trip would have taken another two weeks just so I wouldn't have to go inside of that place. The high chain link fence was at least four times my height as it surrounded the complex of buildings. It looked like they used telephone posts when they built the fence. Despite my protests, I was going to be going inside that place with this group. I had been trying all morning to get out of it, but not a single person would take my side. They all agreed with Nina that I should recover before heading out on my own. Tom and Marissa had been silent, but after glancing at Daniel they didn't object against Nina's claims either. I eyed up the treeline at the side of the road. Nina noticed my preoccupation and shook her head, "I don't care if you are a zombie, no one recovers from being shot five times in just four days. Honest, spending a couple of weeks here isn't going to kill you. You might even like it and decide to stay." I had my doubts about that one. Several hundred humans and two zombies all crammed inside one fence? That is just asking for trouble. Hank slowed down as we approached the gate. Several guards had noticed our approach and waiting for us. I saw several guns and other weapons present. The men looked surprised and grinned when they spotted Daniel and Nina. "You made it back. We were starting to wonder if you got lost. Who are your friends?" Nina smiled, "We had more than our fair share of vehicle problems. We came across some people on our way back." He chuckled and waved the truck in, "Welcome to Ironwind Stronghold. Go on in, take your second left and then the first right." Hank drove the truck slowly ahead as I watched the gate closing behind us. I didn't like how they clanged closed so ominously. Both Daniel and Nina were watching me. I didn't bother to remove my slightly irritable expression as I watched dozens of people going about various tasks. Hank pulled up in front of the building that Nina directed him to. A big man who resembled a drill sergeant came out, "Hello Nina, so who did you bring us this time?" Nina began introducing everyone, leaving me for last, "This is Trinity, she is just staying until she has healed. She is a Nightstalker, so don't be surprised if you see her going outside of the fence on a regular basis." The man looked at me in surprise, but he wasn't scared. He shrugged, "As long as she doesn't come after me I ain't going to complain. I will get the others to help unpack and then show them the ropes. I assume you will give her the tour?" Nina nodded, "Yes, she will be staying in the secondary building since it is smaller and has fewer people in it." He didn't seem surprised as he nodded and turned to the rest of the group who were climbing off the truck. Nina waved me forward, "Come on Trinity, I will give you a slightly different tour. The secondary has private showers and a different setup, so most of the stuff he is going to show them won't interest you." I carefully jumped off the opened truck tailgate. My leg twinged when I landed, but it wasn't anywhere near as bad as it had been the other day. The special attention I had been giving my leg meant that although it ached and hurt, it no longer felt like someone was twisting a nail in the wound. Nina walked beside me as Daniel walked on her other side. She pointed to one building, "That is the secondary building. It has its own bathrooms and showers, courtesy of a cistern on top that we fill with a hand pump. You won't have to use the large communal facilities that most have to use."

That was good. I would refuse to use large communal shower rooms while getting gawked at by dozens of humans. I had bathed in a creek and occasionally warmed up water over the fire for months already. I didn't feel the cold as badly as humans so cold water in a river wasn't exactly a hardship. Nina pointed to the building beside it, "That is the main building. The mess hall is to the left and the rest is mostly offices and bedrooms." She pointed out various garages and buildings as we walked down the paved street. Two men approached and waited politely for a break in the conversation. Once Nina looked at them the one spoke up, "Good afternoon Nina, can we borrow Daniel? We need help replacing the east gate and we can't lift it." Nina glanced at Daniel in a silent question; he nodded and went with the two men. Nina continued our tour. I was surprised to see how much land was inside this fence. They had obviously expanded it several times to make room for new buildings and barns. We walked past quite a few people and I got many curious looks. Word apparently spread faster in this place than wildfire. Less than ten minutes into the tour I heard whispering. "She is actually a Nightstalker. I wouldn't have guessed from how she looks." "I thought they couldn't come out during the daytime?" "If it is just because they are light sensitive, then that could be why she is wearing sunglasses. I heard she is injured and she is just staying here until she heals enough to travel. I wonder how she got injured..." I pretended that I didn't hear their soft whispering. I didn't appreciate being gawked at like a new animal in the menagerie. The tour wrapped up once we reached the fence. We turned to head back as three men came out of a nearby garage. "Hey Nina, how is it going? This is the new Nightstalker, huh?" Nina didn't seem overly surprised at how fast the news had traveled, "Things are going pretty well. Yes, this is Trinity." My muscles tensed slightly as the heat rolled through my blood as I picked up their scent. I had met these men before. The man wasn't fazed by my presence as he stepped closer and clapped me companionably on the shoulder, "Nice to meet you. I am sure that we will get to know one another real well later on." I picked up the meaning behind his words. They were the same words he had used last time. I backed up a step as I snarled viciously at him. It was a true warning snarl, not one of the halfhearted sound effects that reflected my state of mind. Nina raised an eyebrow in a reprimand, "Don't you think that that snarl was a bit much for someone who was only trying to be friendly?" My eyes never left the man as my vision took on a redder hue and my instincts raged behind my control. My voice was a growl, "This isn't the first time we have met and I know his exact opinion about zombies from the last time he tried to kill me." The man's eyes widened in surprise as he took a step back and grabbed his knife handle. He gritted his teeth as he realized that I already knew his game. Nina's eyes narrowed as her eyes darted between the two of us rapidly. The man drew his knife as he dropped into a crouch with an almost gleeful smile, "I heard that you are injured and I can see it in your movements. I also know that you are unarmed. You have no defenses at the moment. This will be a short fight." I dropped into a crouch and pulled back my lips to show my teeth as a threat. It was all I could do to not attack this man. My instincts knew that he was threatening me and he had seriously injured me in the distant past. At least he didn't have any guns this time. I growled again at him, "You won't win against a Nightstalker with just a knife. My fingernails count as weapons in a fight."

I spotted his two friends pulling out their weapons. One had a baseball bat, I didn't dare get close to him. It wouldn't take much of a blow to my head to knock me out with my still healing head injury. As much as I hated to admit it, three armed men against one injured Nightstalker was a fight that I was not going to win. Anyone who passed by would automatically assume that the zombie was the bad guy and attack me as well. He grinned savagely at me, "Well, I guess I get a second shot at killing you then. I won't mess up this time." My control was at its limit. If I tried to fight there was a good chance I would lose control and an even greater chance that I would lose this battle with my current injuries. The man took a step forward as he brought his knife into a fighting position. His friends started coming forward to join the fight. With another snarl of thwarted rage, I turned and bolted. With a powerful jump I managed to get most of the way up the chain link fence. I felt a searing pain as the scab on my leg ripped open from the force of my jump. I heard the men running after me as Nina swore, "Shit!" before shouting in an urgent tone, "Daniel!"  I glanced back, but the men were chasing me and not going after her. Had they been, I would have returned to try and protect her. Not that I would have been much help. I managed to scale the fence and dropped to the ground on the other side with a grunt as pain lanced through my injuries. I took off at a run. I headed for the forest since I had a better chance of losing them in there. They would also be unable to bring the quads after me. I snarled in pain as I felt several branches strike the injury on my leg. I tried pushing for more speed anyways, but my injuries were sapping my speed and strength quite noticeably. I was barely running as fast as most humans and I couldn't go any faster. As it was, I felt the scabs on my injuries pulling open more and the scent of my own blood was easy to pick up. Mere minutes later I heard swift footsteps coming up behind me. Daniel was having no problems following the heavy scent of my blood as it escaped from re-opened wounds. I growled as he put on a burst of speed while circling widely around me hidden just out of sight in the trees. I slid to a stop as he darted around me to cut me off. My chest was heaving for breath as my heart pounded hard as it tried to keep up. The injuries to my heart and lungs were barely healed enough to keep them working. I stepped back with a frustrated snarl. The snarl was pretty pathetic since I was out of breath. My mind was somewhat hazed from exhaustion, that run had taken a huge toll on my recovering body. Even my instincts didn't push me to try for First Strike. They knew that he was a Terror and that I was far too injured to even attempt it. I took another step back as I turned sideways with a growl, any feral zombie would know from my stance that I wanted no part of a challenge. It had been an instinctive action though, so it would have no real effect on sane zombies. Daniel slowly walked towards me. His stance held no hint of a threat. I blinked as I noticed that he actually looked somewhat concerned as he approached. My wounds felt like they were on fire and I knew I wouldn't be able to go much further. The lack of an escape route didn't sit well with me. I took another step back with a faint growl, I wasn't exactly thinking clearly. I just wanted to get away from any human or zombie at this point. Daniel seemed to realize that I wasn't exactly in control at the moment and stopped. He hesitated, uncertain of exactly how to approach me. He spoke softly, "Relax Trinity. I am not going to attack you. Let me check your injuries, from the smell you are bleeding quite a bit." He took slow steps forward and my vision hazed a bit redder as the powerful zombie approached. I knew I had no chance of outrunning him on a good day, but in my current state some humans could outrun me. My head was pounding in time with my heartbeat and mind still wasn't working clearly. 

He reached out to touch my shoulder and I backed up a step out of reach with a faint growl. He sighed faintly as he took another slow step forward, "Take it easy. I just want to make sure you didn't injure yourself too badly. You have fresh blood stains where each of those bullets hit you." I glanced down to see that he was correct. Huge splotches of red marked each injury that was hidden beneath my clothing. Half of my pant leg was soaked from the wound on my thigh. My shoulder wasn't too bad, but it still throbbed and bled. The two spots from the lung strike and heart had merged, although it looked as if the wound that damaged my lung had bled the most. It was a small miracle that the scab on my head hadn't re-opened. No wonder I wasn't thinking straight, the bloodloss would be affecting me, not to mention that I had managed to run myself into near exhaustion. My body's energy had been channeled into healing since I had been injured and it had nothing in reserve for strenuous activity. He slowly reached out again. I gave a faint growl, but didn't move. He ignored my growl and carefully peeled back my shirt sleeve until he exposed the wound in my shoulder. Blood was slowly seeping out of various cracks in the scab. He held up something that looked like a pepper shaker and I narrowed my eyes at it. He explained, "This is cayenne powder, it will help stop the bleeding. I can do this wound, but I am pretty sure that if I try to patch up your other wounds that you will take a swipe at me." I growled a light warning. If he tried to take my shirt off, I would try to take a swipe at him regardless of how injured I was. It had been bad enough having Nina change the bandages, Daniel did not need to see my bra. No man did. I had always valued my privacy as a human and it had become far more pronounced as a Nightstalker. Daniel shook the red powder onto the wound until it was completely covered. He passed me the shaker, "Here, go put that on your other injuries so they stop bleeding. You can go behind that clump of trees, I will wait here." I took it with a reluctant growl as I stalked off. It was closer to a slow painful walk. I could feel each step now that I had slowed down and my body realized just how much it hurt. Once I was out of sight I took off my pants to inspect the worst injury. The scab on my leg had completely come off and the wound had re-opened and torn even further. With a sigh I started applying the cayenne powder to try and control the bleeding. I pulled a pair of loose soft cloth shorts out of my backpack and put them on, they would rub the least. I took off my shirt to inspect the other two injuries. The one to my heart had mostly stopped bleeding on its own, but I put some powder on anyways. My heavy breathing had obviously opened up the other wound above my lung more, since it was bleeding worse. Considering that I still hadn't completely caught my breath, I knew that there was internal damage that was still trying to heal. The lung probably had some blood in it as well from internal bleeding. It would slow me, but it wasn't dangerous for a zombie. The bullet that hit my lung had exited my back, but I couldn't see it or reach the exit wound. I shook some powder over my shoulder, it would have to do until the bleeding stopped on its own. I put on a clean dark shirt that would be less likely to show future blood stains. I could still clearly scent Daniel, so I hadn't been fortunate enough for him to leave. My head had cleared some, but I knew my control was not good enough to return to the Stronghold at the moment. In truth, I had burned a lot of energy and lost more blood than I had realized at first. Human food wasn't going to help me in this situation either. I needed to hunt again. Running around after an animal was the last thing I felt like doing at the moment, but there wasn't any way around it. I wandered back to where Daniel was patiently waiting. He watched my slow walk, "Ready to head back?" I had enough control back that my voice and sarcasm had also returned. I snorted at that idea, although the action caused my chest some pain, "I have no desire to go to a place where several people are just waiting to kill me." Daniel sighed as he leaned against a tree, "No one had any idea that they would have tried to harm you. They were new here. They have already been exiled from the Stronghold." I glanced over in surprise. They exiled humans because they threatened a zombie? I failed to see the logic in that one. My tone was flat, "Any that came from the same Stronghold they originated from will likely be more than willing to finish the job that they started." Daniel didn't seem affected by my worsening mood. "There were only two others that came from the same place and they won't attempt anything." This guy reminded me of Google, he had an answer for everything, even if it was wrong. My head may not be up to full speed, but it still had a few working brain cells capable of doing math, "You caught up to me in less than five minutes. I don't see any possible way that you could know that." He growled lightly at my accusing tone before responding, "Nina went off with a dozen fighters to locate them and lay down the rules. Not many will dare cross her." I rubbed my forehead, trying to massage the headache away, "Let me guess, because of her bodyguard?" He grinned at me, flashing his sharp teeth, "Exactly. No one wants a pissed off Terror coming after them." I knew exactly how they felt. How can I convince this guy to go back without me? "All the more reason not to go back and annoy her. My general constant state of irritation tends to annoy many people." He sighed gustily, showing that I was trying his patience with my arguing, "Good thing it doesn't annoy her then. I can tell that your injuries are paining you more than you are letting on, let's go back so you can get some rest." Blast it, this guy had a one track mind. I bet I wasn't going to be able to argue my way out of this one either, if I didn't come willingly, he would probably tie me up and throw me over his shoulder before hauling me back by force. He was probably just waiting for me to realize it and give in gracefully. Too bad my Nightstalker instincts made me as stubborn as a cat faced with a swimming pool. I may be able to take injuries that would kill any human, but they took a serious toll on me until I healed. I was tired, tired enough that even being irritated and stubborn felt like too much work. That was quite a feat for a Nightstalker. I sighed, "My control is not up for being anywhere near humans at the moment." I raised my nose to the air and sniffed lightly before turning and slowly walking off. Daniel sent me a confused look, "Where are you going?" "Hunting." He had a look of disbelief on his face, "You can barely walk. Anything more will open up those wounds again." I shrugged, "I've hunted with worse and managed." This time I could at least run for a few steps or jump out of an ambush, unlike the previous time I had been shot. Nightstalker ambush abilities counted for a lot when sneaking up on something. It was much easier at night, but it could be done in the day if you were okay with some failed attempts. Daniel shook his head, "Wait here." He took off, running easily and effortlessly through the trees. I narrowed my eyes at his retreating figure, unsure of exactly what he was up to. Not as if I had much choice though, I didn't stand a chance of keeping up to him. I sat down on a log and waited, half expecting him to show up with a petrified rabbit.

 

Chapter 32


 I lifted my head several minutes later. I could hear a deer approaching me rapidly. Could he be chasing a deer towards me? I hadn't expected that, but I wasn't going to argue. I moved behind a bush along the edge of the trail at the far end of the clearing so I could ambush it when it ran by. I could hear Daniel's footsteps not far behind the deer. I watched as the deer raced into the clearing. To my surprise, Daniel bolted forward with inhuman speed to slam his fist down on the back of its neck. I heard the spine shatter as the deer collapsed lifelessly down in the middle of the clearing. Daniel looked around the clearing, his sight must be phenomenal since he managed to spot me despite the fact that I was mostly hidden in my chosen ambush position. "Here you go. I'll be back in about fifteen minutes." With that, he turned and left the clearing. I remained motionless for several seconds longer to ensure that he truly wasn't coming back to claim his kill. My eyes examined the deer as I walked towards it, it looked like his strike had come close to pulverizing the neck instead of simply shattering or breaking it. If he ever got mad and started swinging his fists, I was leaving the area as fast as possible. I didn't have a knife, but with a bit of work my sharp nails shaved the hair away from the skin. My teeth sliced easily through the skin to get to the artery. The hot blood was welcome and seemed to bolster my energy levels almost instantly. The pain in my wounds also subsided a bit. By the time I drained the deer I was quite full. I walked away from the deer to the far side of the clearing where I sat on a log to wait for Daniel's return. I thought hard about seeing if I could try to sneak away, but he would easily catch up with me. I suspected that until my wounds healed that he would haul me back to the Stronghold by force if needed. I examined other possible ways to leave, but came up empty. Even if I left right at sunset, I wouldn't be able to get that far on foot. It may take Daniel a few hours to catch up, but Nina would probably send him after me again with her newfound mother-hen rationality. Chances of finding a vehicle or gas around here was non-existent. The locals would have checked every place three times over. If I stole one of their vehicles, they would definitely come after me and they would be rightfully quite upset. I gritted my teeth as I realized that I was stuck here until I had healed enough to run at full speed, which would probably take another two weeks after today's stunt. I had been walking slowly to hide a painful limp after Daniel had caught up with me. Admittedly, most badly injured Nightstalkers tended to hole up until their injuries healed, but a Stronghold was not my first choice. I wasn't being given a choice though. If I thought that the last week of traveling with this group had felt like forever, I suspected that the next week was going to set an entirely new precedent. I didn't know what to expect from Nina. At this point I wasn't sure what was worse, her acting like a mother hen or her curious questions. Both were a form of cruel and unusual torture. I looked up as I heard Daniel's footsteps approaching. He walked over to me with a relaxed expression, "We can go whenever you are ready." I managed a half smile, "I am really good at procrastinating." He chuckled as he leaned against a nearby tree. He watched me in silence for some time. I was quite surprised that he was being so patient. I knew that I wouldn't have had nearly this much patience with a bullheaded lower class zombie that was bent on being stubborn. He spoke quietly, "You said that the guy had tried to kill you before. Nina had mentioned when she patched you up that you had some scars that looked as if you had been shot in the past. Did he do that?"

I was silent for a bit before responding just as quietly, "It happened about a month after I turned. I found half a dozen men cornered by a couple of Runners and helped the men fight them off. They thanked me and invited me back to their Stronghold. They said that they would welcome me in if I could help keep other Runners and Nightstalkers at bay. I agreed and went back with them." I took a deep breath and exhaled slowly, I didn't like these memories, "I had been there less than two hours before the same group tried to ambush me with guns and other weapons. I easily dodged the melee weapons. I twisted that guy's arm to get the gun out of my face, I am still not sure if I actually broke his arm. I managed to get out of the Stronghold without any serious injuries, but there was a lot of open ground between the walls and the nearest cover. They caught up in cars before I crossed the field." I gritted my teeth with a low growl, "Six bullets managed to hit me before I fell into a big river. One struck my heart dead on and managed to stop it. Did you know that even if your lungs fill up with water and blood that a zombie doesn't actually pass out?" He shook his head. I snorted lightly, "Well, we don't. Good thing for those of us who are sane, but it is a horrendous sensation." I shrugged, "In case you weren't aware, if your lungs give out or if your heart stops, you are even weaker and slower than a normal zombie. You are lucky if you can manage a shuffling walk until they heal to the point where they can work again. I eventually washed up on a river bank and managed to crawl out. Took me almost two weeks to heal to the point where I could function halfway normally, and longer to fully heal. After that I decided that I wanted nothing to do with humans and found a remote cabin on the edge of the mountains." His eyebrows were furrowed as he thought, "How did you hunt?" "I waited until night. My Nightstalker abilities allow me to move silently, even if I am reduced to a shuffling walk. I was able to sneak up on rabbits and large game birds until I had regained enough strength to manage larger prey. I set up some live traps as well." He was silent for some time before he looked up, "Well, let's get going. If we don't get back soon, Nicky might come looking for us." My time had come to an end. I gave in as gracefully as I could. I sighed as I stood up. Daniel went over to the deer before throwing it over his shoulder. I gave him an odd look. He started walking slowly, "The humans will either bring it to a boil in soup or turn it into jerky. The virus can't survive high temperatures or drying out. No sense wasting the meat." I nodded, the waste of the meat and hide had bothered me in the past. I was still somewhat surprised that the humans would chance it since most were paranoid about being infected. Then again, they had welcomed Daniel into the Stronghold and most had been welcoming enough towards me. Daniel was obviously setting his pace to match the slow one I had been using earlier. By the time we reached the edge of the trees it was obvious that my previous run had not been a good idea. I had undone all of the healing that had occurred in my leg and it was complaining fiercely about its mistreatment. Even with the slow walk I was breathing noticeably hard. I narrowed my eyes at the sight of Nicky sitting on a side by side atv while putting nail polish on her toenails. She looked up, "About bloody time you showed up. If you took much longer I was going to have to break down and do a full makeover. Get on, you're passenger by the way. Nina said that if I let you touch the steering wheel that she would kick my behind. I, of course, expressed my disbelief on her ability to do so and she said that if she didn't succeed, then she would send Daniel to trounce me. And honestly, I don't think a one liter can of tomato juice or a bar of soap is going to stop that guy."

Daniel gave me a frustrated look, obviously still confused about the tomato juice and soap reference. I tilted my head in slight disbelief, "And you have no problem with a zombie sitting right beside you?" This thing was narrow, our arms would be brushing. We hadn't sat this close even in the back of the trucks. To my surprise, she grinned at me, "If you were going to kill me, you would have done so long ago on one of the great many occasions when I pissed you off. At the moment, I am offering you a lift, which you will secretly appreciate although you will probably just grumble at being forced to accept the ride." I examined the lady who was far too observant at times, "I think you are beginning to know me too well." She chuckled, "I also know how much your leg probably hurts at the moment. I recognize that slow walk from my own attempts at learning kick boxing years ago. I bet you would have a pretty good limp if you went any faster. In fact, I think I even see a slight limp as it is." I growled lightly in annoyance, I thought I had been keeping the limp under the radar. I did not appreciate having my injuries pointed out in this manner. She rolled her eyes, "Oh, just climb in already, before someone realizes that I hot-wired this thing instead of taking the dinky quad that they tried to give me." Yep. This lady clearly could not be left unsupervised. With a heavy sigh I climbed into the passenger side as Daniel started leading the way back. Nicky bent under the dash and with a faint zit the motor rumbled to life. She grinned at me, "Hang on." Oh shit. I swiftly grabbed onto the handles and braced my feet as I realized my mistake. I had just gotten into a vehicle that Nicky was driving. My head injury was obviously affecting my better judgement more than I had realized. She only managed to burn a few doughnuts and drift a bit before Daniel returned and glared at her, "Cut that out. Drive as if you were trying for your driver's license. You can torment one of the older quads later tonight." Nicky frowned as she started driving straight, "All right, all right. Don't get your panties in a knot, it was just a bit of fun. Besides, the guy I tried to get my license with actually jumped out of the moving car within 5 minutes of us starting." I shook my head and grumbled, "I think I was better off walking back to the mountains..." Nicky turned her head towards me, "What are you mumbling about?" I smirked, her hearing was obviously nowhere near as good as mine or Daniel's was, "I said that you should pretend to drive like Hank does." She made a face, "That is a terrible thought. He actually reads the signs and says that the lines on the pavement mean something." I made a mental note to never get into any vehicle if Nicky was behind the wheel. I glanced over at Daniel who was looking as if he had learned something that he would have rather not known. I made a face, "Despite Nina's threat, it is probably safer if I drove." Nicky grumbled under her breath as Daniel sighed, "We are almost there." We rounded the bend and I saw that we had come out of the forest in a different place than I had entered. Seconds later we drove through the gate and Nicky pulled up in front of a building where Nina was sitting on a step, obviously waiting for us. Nina raised her eyebrow, "Just why did you steal that side by side when they gave you the keys to a quad?" Nicky snorted, "Every once in a while I do actually use my head. It wasn't too bad getting Trinity on this thing. It would have been a lot harder to get her behind me on that tiny quad. Honestly, did you even look at that thing? It was designed for one person, not two." Nina sighed as she stood up, "Daniel, could you possibly have a word with the guy in the garage so he doesn't freak out on Nicky?" Daniel nodded, "Sure, then I can drop this deer off with the kitchen." Nina smiled at him, "Thanks." She turned her gaze to me, "Let's go inside so I can check on those wounds." I made a face as I got out of the side by side, "You are aware that zombies don't get infections right?" She merely grinned and waved for me to follow her. I sighed as I started following her. As much as I didn't want her cleaning the wounds while they were still sore from my run, I wanted to be in that deathtrap that Nicky was driving even less. She took me to what looked like a small exam room where a bowl of steaming water and wash clothes were waiting. There were some other supplies as well, including a needle and some rather fine thread. Nina closed the door behind me, "Take off your shirt, let's see how much damage you did." I carefully took off my shirt and sat on the tall stool while Nina put on a pair of rubber gloves. She carefully used the water and a rag to wash off the disaster of a mess that the blood and the cayenne powder had left. The bleeding had stopped. "Well, the one that hit your heart doesn't seem to have gotten any worse, the scab just cracked a bit. The one on your shoulder isn't too bad. This other one had a good chunk of the scab come off." She moved to my back, "Oh my, this one is going to take a bit. You should have let Daniel clean it since you couldn't reach it." I remained silent as she started gently scrubbing the exit wound on my back. I gritted my teeth against the pain. She reached over to grab a small bag of supplies from the counter, "Hold still, I am not sure what you did, but the scab almost completely came off. I am going to trim it so it doesn't stick to the bandage later on." I felt cold metal against my back with some tugging and snipping noises. I exhaled slowly at the pain from the irritated wound. I gave a low growl as some tugs caused several sharp flares of pain. She didn't comment. After far too long she finished and put large bandages over the injuries. I put my shirt back on. She came around and lifted up the leg of my shorts. She inhaled in surprise at the angry red injury. It looked worse now than it had before. In fact, it looked worse now than it did when I first regained conscious. I had definitely done a lot damage to it in that run. It looked like a few of those branches I hit must have snagged the injury or had further injured it. Nina started trying to clean the wound, it really did look like something that would make an ER doctor do a double take. The scab had been completely ripped off and it still bled somewhat. Nina carefully dabbed the cayenne powder and congealing blood away with a damp rag until the extent of the damage was revealed. She sat on her heels and sighed, "Well, you aren't going to be moving much for some time. It is a very good thing that you can't get infections, otherwise this would have me quite worried." She moved to the counter and grabbed the needle, thread, and some salve. She started gently applying the salve, "This will numb it a bit, the effect only lasts a minute or two with a zombie though. I am going to try and sew it up some, but I am not sure how long it will hold. In theory these stitches should dissolve in about three weeks, but when we used them earlier they dissolved even before you woke up." She threaded the needle and turned to my leg. I narrowed my eyes, but the salve was already working and I barely felt the prick of the needle. Four stitches later she wiped on some polysporin and put a large bandage over it. "There, we will see how that holds up. I want to take a look at it tomorrow as well." She tossed the rags and gloves in the garbage, "I doubt you are up to doing much at the moment and you probably don't want to be around a bunch of humans. I can show you your room if you like." I nodded, "I am not exactly fit for company at the moment." It was a slow walk to my room. It turned out my room was on the second floor. The stairs were torture. Once I was inside the room Nina left. I closed and locked the door as I inspected the small room. It was barely large enough for the small bed, but at least I did have a room to myself. I sat down on the bed and stretched out my leg while I pulled a book out of my backpack. I would probably nap more than I would read. Not much else I could do at this moment.

 

Chapter 33


 Hours later someone rang the supper bell below, but I ignored it. I didn't feel like being in a big room with two hundred humans. Besides, I wasn't hungry after that deer. I heard footsteps outside my door before someone popped the twist lock on the door. I officially have a serious grudge against whoever invented the twist-to-lock door knob that can be so easily opened from the other side. I sighed, I was really going to have to install a lock that was more dependable. "Either come in or go away Nicky." The door knob twisted and she skipped into the room as she closed the door behind her. I was still sitting on the bed with my back against the wall as my leg was stretched out in front of me. She sat on the foot of the bed while she grinned at me, "You won't believe it, they are going to let me drive the side by side as long as you are passenger and I try to drive like Hank." That was very surprising, I was amazed that they were going to let her drive anything other than a bicycle at this point. "How did you manage to pull that off?" She grinned at me, "Daniel did it actually. I get to take you north to a place where there are lots of rabbits when you want to hunt. Nina doesn't want you walking that far on your leg for a while." I regarded her, "That vehicle is loud enough to scare anything away. What are you going to do while I have to leave to hunt?" I didn't trust her to behave herself for even two minutes, let alone for the amount of time it would take me to sneak up on a rabbit in the daylight. She chuckled, "Daniel is currently out there setting up three large live traps for rabbits. You won't even have to hunt. We are being asked to clean the rabbit and bring back the meat though." "And just why are you up here when supper is being served downstairs?" She made a face, "Whatever they made looks like porridge and smells like my gym socks. I know you have food in that bag of yours and I am hoping that you will share instead of subjecting me to food poisoning." My instincts didn't like sharing, but my humanity could overrule those compulsions. Besides, Nicky might tell me about how things worked in a place like this if I bribed her. This was the longest I had ever been in a Stronghold after all. I reached over to snag my backpack and dug through it. There was no way I was sharing my can of pineapple. I lightly tossed her half a dozen trail bars, some jerky, and a thing of dried fruit. "Thanks!" I watched her shove food in her mouth, "So, what do you think of this place?" She swallowed her mouthful and frowned. I blinked at the sight of her frown, I thought she would have been ecstatic to have new people to torment. "It's... weird..." I tilted my head, "How so?" She took a slow bite of her trail bar and chewed in thought, "I have been in six Strongholds already and this one looks like the rest on the surface, but when you start looking, things just don't line up." I waited silently. I had no basis for a comparison since I could count the total hours I had been in a Stronghold on both hands. She looked at me with a serious expression, "The day you decide to leave, take me with you." That shocked me, "Why?" She furrowed her eyebrows, "Something isn't right here. I have walked into rooms to have conversations suddenly change over a dozen times today. That is very odd, even if I am an untrusted newcomer. Some common questions seem to either confuse the locals or make them a bit defensive, which makes no sense." I slowly blinked as I regarded Nicky. This was the very observant side of her and if she said that things weren't normal, then I was inclined to believe her. I sighed heavily, "It isn't as if I am here willingly. I won't be going anywhere for some time though. Daniel could outrun me previously, and as things sit currently, even you would be held back by the pace I could manage. I am equally sure that Daniel would drag me back here if I tried to leave."

Nicky snorted, "Make no mistake of it, he would. Nina encourages it too, she was quite concerned about you when you ran off. I am surprised that Daniel agrees with most of Nina's ideas so easily. I thought you zombies were more stubborn than that." I shrugged, "Daniel doesn't act like most sane zombies I have encountered. He seems much more humanized." Nicky took another bite of her trail bar, "I heard you injured yourself worse in that run. How bad is it?" I made a face, "With the exception of my head, every other scab opened up some. The one on my leg completely tore off." She shuddered lightly, "Remind me to not ask that question the next time I am eating." I actually chuckled before I shook my head, "I heard that they exiled those three men. Do you know if that is true?" Nicky nodded with another frown, "Over a dozen fighters actually chased them out with weapons. The people here don't take murder attempts lightly. They were also upset that those three dared to threaten you. They consider you as Nina's guest by the way. She seems to hold a lot of clout here. I tried carefully inquiring, but anytime I came anywhere close to that topic the person changed the subject with lightning speed." I frowned lightly in thought. Now that she mentioned it, I had noticed that they had been happy to see her return. I had originally put it down to her being welcomed back into a small and tight knit community, but Nicky was correct. It looked as if Nina was highly regarded. I turned my head to look at Nicky and she looked back at me in silence. Neither of us had an answer and there was nothing that we could do at the moment. 
 
 I ignored the weight of the gazes of almost fifty people as I dished up food in the mess hall. My presence was new and exciting if the hushed whispers were anything to go by. I was glad that I had come early to eat instead of waiting until later when more people would be in this room. I hadn't anticipated that so many would have already been awake this early for breakfast. I took a seat at an empty table along the far wall. I put my back against the wall so I could keep an eye on the room. Yeah, I was suspicious and didn't trust them. Now that I was facing them, most didn't stare at me either. Many glanced at me, but it wasn't the open gawking that they had been doing earlier. Breakfast was eggs, toast, some veggies, and fried chicken. I had almost finished my breakfast when Nina and Daniel arrived. Once they filled their plates they headed straight for my table. Nina sat across from me, "Good morning. I hope you slept well." I resolved to at least try to be polite while I was here, "Good morning. I did, thank you." I wondered if Nina had half expected to wake up and discover that I had attempted to leave during the night. I had juggled more scenarios around in my head last night, but if I could barely walk then I wasn't going to get far. I hesitated, unsure of how to ask my next question, "What are the plans for today? I know this place isn't a hotel where someone can stay without doing anything..." I trailed off, not wanting to admit that I was the next thing to useless with my current set of injuries. I may be a zombie, but I still had some manners. On the road I had pulled my own weight even if I simply rode in the back of a truck most of the time. I had cleared buildings, gone scavenging, and acted as a night guard. The last two days on the road had been quite different, although if anything had paid a visit at night I could have given them warning and Daniel could have used his flashlight if he had to fight. Nina took a bite of her toast and chewed thoughtfully, "Hmmm... Normally everyone works a good chunk of the day here. Your injuries rule out most of the normal chores. Something that involves sitting and not too many people around..." She trailed off as she thought.

Daniel glanced towards the kitchen, "If you don't mind washing and peeling vegetables, there is a small side room attached to the side of a kitchen. It usually takes until lunch for one person to do it. You are injured, so you don't have to do as much as the others. You can have the rest of the day off." Why did they have to keep rubbing it in that I was injured? I was well aware of my wounds, especially with the way my leg was painfully throbbing from the walk down here. I tried to keep my irritation off my expression and out of my scent. I slowly nodded my acceptance. Nina perked up, "Excellent. We can introduce you to the kitchen staff once we finish." 
 
 I sat in the far corner at a table in the kitchen while peeling carrots. Several big baskets of veggies sat to one side waiting to be peeled. The main part of the kitchen was a bustle of activity as around twenty people were working on both the lunch and supper meals. They knew I was here and they also knew what I was. I was pretty sure that everyone in this place knew that the new woman with the sunglasses was a Nightstalker. Some of them were a bit nervous, but most ignored me as they worked on their various tasks. It wasn't as if I was right in the main kitchen since this table was off to the side a bit in an alcove. My keen hearing allowed me to eavesdrop with ease, although this group must be familiar enough with Daniel to know that my hearing was better than average. I kept half an ear on the various conversations as I worked. None of them brought up any of the topics that had confused Nicky and me. There were some odd silent breaks in the conversation that entailed a glance at me and I knew that my distant presence was stopping or limiting some conversations. My Nightstalker instincts shifted in suspicion and I agreed with them. The humans thought that they were being subtle. Indeed, they were subtle enough that most humans would not have noticed, but I wasn't human. The virus that contaminated every drop of blood in my body had changed me somewhat. It had affected both my body and my mind. So, what exactly are they taking such pains to avoid talking about? I continued peeling as I contemplated various possibilities. It could be as simple as anything to do with zombies and they didn't want to offend me. That was the likeliest reason and I was the latest gossip. They weren't fearful of me, so I doubted that anyone else would try to ambush me after the last group was booted out. I watched them subtly from behind my sunglasses as I finished peeling the last of the various vegetables. I relaxed a bit as the hours went by. There was no real fear or aggression directed at me, they were just avoiding talking about something while I was present. A handful were intrigued by my presence and had even paused to talk with me a bit. I had remained polite during those brief exchanges. The most baffling part was that most of them were actually glad that I was staying here. A woman in her early twenties was rinsing the peeled vegetables right beside me. I watched her in mild curiosity before commenting, "You don't seem that bothered by my presence. Most people can't get away from me fast enough once they discover what I am." She glanced over at me with a friendly grin, "If Daniel thought that you meant anyone here any harm, he wouldn't have let you in. Having two zombies in residence gives us an edge in case other mindless zombies show up. Regular zombies are easily lured off, but Runners, Nightstalkers, and Terrors are dangerous if they attack. You two can fight them without having to worry about being infected." Blood splatter from zombies was a nightmare for a human. If it got into any scratch, the eyes, or mouth, they were practically guaranteed to be infected. The vast majority of the self-claimed zombie killers from the early days now numbered among the mindless horde. I nodded, "I never considered it from that angle before. Have any other sane zombies stopped by here?" I hadn't scented another zombie, but some might just be a regular visitor if they didn't handle crowds well. The woman shook her head, "Unfortunately not. I hear that one Nightstalker did pass by in the early days, but she couldn't handle the daylight and had some pretty bad control problems. She left a few days later and we never heard from her again. Everyone is hoping that you will stay. You would make an awesome night guard." I wasn't sure how to respond to that. I had never met a group of humans who actually wanted a zombie to hang around. "I doubt that I will stay here for more than a few weeks. Nightstalkers are loners and we don't do well with crowds." No one here would doubt that statement as it was fairly common knowledge, but it wasn't exactly the truth. Feral Nightstalkers were strict loners, but I wasn't feral. The human side of me enjoyed a bit of company. That often put my instincts and my human mind at war with one another. Truth be told, when I had been human I didn't like crowds either and preferred small groups of people that I knew well. I had avoided humans in the past because either they wanted nothing to do with me or they were trying to kill me. The last month had seriously shaken up my boring life. When did life become so complicated? The woman pursed her lips nervously as she glanced at me. She tentatively spoke, "If you don't mind me asking, I heard that you got shot while protecting Nina from some bandits. Is that true?" She looked worried, as if she halfway expected me to take offense to her question. It didn't escape my notice that most in the kitchen had paused to listen to our discussion. There was a good chance that this was one of the topics they had been avoiding. I sighed lightly while reining in my annoyance, "Yes. Nina managed to persuade me to stay here until the wounds mostly healed up." She looked as if she was thinking hard, although I couldn't imagine what she was thinking so hard about. She looked up in excitement, "If it is only the constant press of people that bothers you, we could build you a small cabin in the forest and you could come and go as you pleased." That had never occurred to me, but that thought didn't tempt me as much as the lady might think. If I was close enough to stop by daily, then I would be close enough for Daniel and Nina to swing by on a whim. That put an immediate damper on that suggestion. My little cabin up north sounded better. If I got bored or lonely, then I could travel along the coast until I crossed Travis and Kelly's trail. I had a rough idea where they were heading, so it wouldn't be too hard to locate them. It was much easier to be around them than around Daniel. I shrugged, "I am not sure. I will have to see how the next few weeks go." Several looked sad that I hadn't jumped at that idea. I decided to change the subject, "Have you heard how the others who arrived with us are doing? I noticed that the dog went with Ben when we parted ways." The lady perked back up and started giving me the rundown on the schedule that newcomers usually went through. It turned out that Chloe was accompanying those who went out foraging for wild edibles. She would look straight at any zombie, but wouldn't bark unless they got too close. This was ideal for the groups who went outside frequently. We both finished our tasks about the time the talkative lady ran out of things to say. There weren't any small tasks left, so I exited the kitchen. It was time for lunch anyways.

 

Chapter 34


 I had barely sat down for lunch with a fresh dinner roll when Nina and Daniel appeared. Either word spread in this place faster than a wildfire or someone had managed to get a phone to work. I suspected the former reason. Nina sat down with a tray of food while Daniel just had a bottle of water. Nina smiled, "I see you survived the morning. What are your plans for this afternoon?" I shrugged, "I was going to see if I could find a quiet place outdoors for a while. I thought I saw someone on the roof of the secondary building the other day. Later this afternoon I might dig up Nicky and go hunting." Nina nodded sympathetically, "Need a bit of fresh air and solitude, huh? Well, I can show you where the stairs are to get onto the roof. No one else will be up there at this time of day." I watched her eat her lunch silently. I was surprised that she had realized what I was really after so easily. I had never used the excuse of getting fresh air during our trip, so I wasn't sure how she had arrived at that correct conclusion. She was always watching and taking notes though, not to mention that she was almost always around Daniel. Nina wasted no time in cleaning her plate. We headed towards the secondary building. A dozen people were chopping wood. I picked up a faint odor and took a deep breath to verify it. I knew that scent, although I hadn't smelled it since my first days as a zombie. I spoke quietly knowing that Daniel would hear it, "Do you smell that? I think one of those men is infected." Daniel stopped dead in his tracks as he glanced at me and tested the air. He turned to face the busy group. "Now that you mention it, I can smell it too." Nina was watching Daniel with a puzzled expression, "Smell what?" She had not heard my comment. The group was slowly becoming aware of his scrutiny as they paused in their work with confused expressions. Confused or perplexed, but not scared. Daniel crossed the small distance between us and the wood splitters, "Was anyone here bitten by a zombie? I can smell that someone is infected." The people looked at one another in worry, wondering which of their friends they might be losing. Nina gasped and quickly followed Daniel as she looked between the faces in concern. No one replied to Daniel and it was apparent that none of them thought that they were the one infected. They watched as Daniel walked among them sniffing. He huffed in annoyance, "The smell is so faint that I can't detect which direction it is stronger in." He turned to face me, "Trinity, you detected it before I did. Can you track it down?" I slowly started walking towards the group and all eyes watched me silently. He may have said the smell was faint, but this close to the group it was quite noticeable. I took several deep breaths as I walked through the loose group. This entire place reeked of humans, the faint tang of zombie stood out. I stopped and looked right at one man. A shocked expression crossed his face. I went towards him and paused once I was about an arm length away. I took another deep breath for confirmation, but it really wasn't needed. He was definitely the source. He was nervous about my proximity. I exhaled gustily, "Toss your bandana to Daniel." I backed up a few steps to give the poor guy some room. The man looked confused, but did as he was told. Daniel lifted it to nose as he inhaled, his eyes flashed red for a second as his instincts surged with such a close proximity to the source of a zombie scent. Daniel looked at the man, "How did you get infected? Is there any chance that you might have passed it to someone else?" The man looked like he was having a hard time coping with Daniel's way of breaking the news to him. He shook his head as if in a daze, "I didn't go anywhere near any zombies. How could I have been infected?"

A second man inhaled sharply, "The creek!" The infected man's eyes grew wide as he realized something before putting his head in his hands, "We went swimming in the creek yesterday. We thought it was a log floating towards us, but as it passed by we realized that it was a zombie. We panicked a bit as we tried to get away. I swallowed some water as I tried to warn the others. It must have been contaminated and I was quite close to it." Nina approached him as Daniel watched both of them like a hawk. Her eyes were full of pity, "Come on, let's go to the hospital." The man started following Nina. Daniel glanced back at me and hesitated before looking at a blonde haired guy, "Ty, Can you show Trinity how to get to the top of the secondary building?" Ty nodded and Daniel quickly caught up to Nina and the infected man. The rest of us watched them until they rounded a corner and went out of sight. Ty seemed unsure of how to address me, "Uhh... It is this way." No shit Sherlock. Even I knew that the stairs to get on the roof would be in or around the building in question. We could see the building from here. I silently walked beside him, we were going faster than Nina had and my leg was telling me about it. I hid my pain lest it attract unwanted attention or questions. My silence seemed to make him uneasy, but he didn't comment. We entered the main entrance and he headed to what I had previously assumed was a linen closet. He pulled the door open and I now saw stairs, "Here you go, Miss. It leads right to the roof." "Thanks." I started going up the stairs as he went back to split wood. My room was on the second floor and I had assumed that the staircase I had previously used kept going, but apparently that was not the case. I had not expected that there would be a separate staircase connecting the main floor right to the roof top. The design made no sense to me and I wondered if the architect had been drunk while he drew out the blueprints. This building was three stories tall, but that was still a lot of stairs if you had a bullet hole in your thigh. I had to pause a few times to let the fire in my leg die down. I finally made it to the top and looked around. The roof was flat and half a dozen campfire chairs were scattered about. The air up here smelt less of humans as the faint breeze brought me scents from the forest beyond the fence. I took a seat in one as I gazed at the view below. I could see the couple of areas that Nina hadn't shown me. One was an old hotel that must have housed most of the population. The big bathhouse beside it made me glad for the shower room just down the hall from my room. I could see the rows of solar panels outside of the fence. So that is how they still have electricity... My eyes kept scanning everything below and committing the paths and buildings to memory. From my high vantage point it was clearer as to what each group of people was doing. Most were outside of the fence working in huge gardens or keeping an eye on herds of animals. I didn't see anyone outside of the fence apart from the gardeners or animals tenders, although that didn't surprise me. The pain in my leg was slowly fading. I was tired despite not doing much today, although I knew it was a side effect from how swiftly my body was healing my injuries. I closed my eyes and let myself fall into a light doze. 
 
 I gave up my attempts at a nap once I felt rested. I watched the people below, but it looked as if they had mostly finished working and were doing their own thing. Some voices floated up to me, I ignored most, but one particular discussion caught my attention. "Did you hear that Joe was infected?" "Thankfully we discovered it before he turned. Nina got him to the hospital pretty quickly, hopefully he will remain in control when he turns."

The voices faded as the people kept walking. They were hoping he would remain in control. That explained why they took him to the hospital instead of ushering him outside of the fence as fast as possible. Unfortunately, chances of him turning into a normal zombie were very high. If he had been infected by a normal zombie, it was a guarantee. For some reason, if a person was bitten by a zombie, they could turn into that rank or lower. Getting a higher rank than the zombie that infected you was unheard of. Runners, Nightstalkers, and Terrors were either originals, infected by a sneeze of an infectious person, or bitten by an equivalent or a higher ranking zombie. Even if Daniel were to bite someone, the person would almost certainly change into a regular zombie. The odds of becoming a Runner were less than 1 in a 10,000. Nightstalkers were much rarer, about 1 in a million. A person had a better chance at winning the lottery jackpot three times than becoming a Terror. I would be shocked if there were more than 50 Terrors worldwide. The fact that I had encountered two Terrors in under two weeks just went to show how bad my luck was. My gaze shifted to the side. Some people were still at the archery range and I recognized the redhead as Nicky. Really? Who gave her a ranged weapon? They were obviously not debriefed properly. Even from here I could tell that her aim was terrible. She hadn't hit the target once. I sighed and got to my feet. I had better get that bow out of her hands. Not one of her fifty arrows had even come close to that target. At this rate she stood a better chance of hitting someone behind her instead of the target in front of her. I slowly made my way to the archery area and walked up silently behind Nicky. Odd as it was, she was the only one who wouldn't freak out or get nervous regardless of what I did. Quite a few others were watching me, unsure of what I was doing when Nicky was clearly unaware of my presence. She drew her bow again. I was right behind her and gave a faint sigh, "Your posture is wrong. You will never hit the target firing like that." She jumped a bit at my voice and glanced over her shoulder, "Give me some warning next time! At this rate I am going stick some bells on you so you can't sneak up on me." It was bizarre to realize that I had actually missed her humor and complete lack of fear. I chuckled, "Bells won't help with a Nightstalker." I reached out and gently put my hands on her shoulders as I turned her a bit, "Stand sideways like this. Point your foot at your target. Angle the other one at a 90 degree angle. Yes, like that." Several were watching in shock as I actually touched Nicky's shoulders. They were even more shocked that it didn't bother Nicky in the least. It was kind of amusing really. In general it wasn't wise to get close enough to touch a zombie, so even though Daniel may call this place home, I highly doubted that anyone other than Nina would dare to so much as touch his arm or pat him on the back. I examined Nicky's posture, "That bow is a bit too long for someone as short as you or me. Draw the string so that your thumb knuckle is behind your ear lobe, it will help keep you consistent as well as help with your aim." Nicky made a face, "I am not short. Things only grow until they are perfect. Some of us clearly didn't take as long as others." I actually laughed at that. Considering that I barely stood over 5 feet tall, Nicky was one of the very few people out there who were shorter than me. I took a step away from Nicky, "Keep your bow vertical. Now take aim, you generally have to aim above and to the right of your target when firing like this. Don't forget to hold your breath when you release the string." Her bow string twanged as she released it and with a thud the arrow actually hit the target. She didn't hit the center of course, but the fact that she finally hit the shoulder target was a huge improvement. She whooped as she punched the air above her head in victory. She turned to me with a grin, "So where did you learn archery." "I can't really remember. Girl Scouts I think." She made a face, "You were a Girl Scout? I can't really see you running around selling cookies regardless of how old you were." I bared my teeth in a light grin, "I only managed a year before my parents moved to a new town. Who let you pick up a bow anyways?" Nicky chuckled as she examined the recurve bow in her hands, "I made sure that Ben and Hank weren't around to warn them when I asked if I could try it out." She raised her head to look at me, "But I am sure that you didn't come all the way over here just to save innocent bystanders from my questionable aim." I raised an eyebrow in amusement at her perceptiveness, "Do you still have the keys for that side by side?" She grinned widely, "Yep. Let me just put this bow away before Hank or Ben see it in my hands." It didn't take her long to come skipping back. I sighed as she slowed to a walk beside me, "You do remember that you promised to drive like Hank correct?" She cackled and rubbed her hand together gleefully, "Oh, but I crossed my fingers and added 'if he was completely and utterly drunk' at the end of my promise!" Someone please save me... I growled a light rebuke at Nicky, which caused two nearby people to look at us in shock. "If you don't drive like a sane person, then I will take over driving and you can sit in the passenger seat. If I can walk, I can manage the gas pedal." She sighed gustily, which was a remarkably good impression of my own irritated sighs, "All right, all right. I will drive like my driving trainer wanted me to, but I want that bag of peanuts in your backpack in exchange." I didn't even hesitate, "Deal."

 

Chapter 35

Nicky even drove in a fashion that didn't leave me wondering if I would make it back alive. She pulled up to the side of a trail and pointed, "Supposedly he put them down that side trail. He tied some orange trail ribbon above each one, although he said that you would probably have no problem locating the traps."
 I nodded and tossed the bag of peanuts to her, "I should be back shortly. I don't smell any zombies, but keep an eye open just in case." She looked at me in surprise, "You are just going to leave me here alone? What if I get kidnapped?!" I rolled my eyes, "Honest, they would bring you back." "That's exactly what Hank told me!" I shook my head in disbelief as I ducked behind some trees. It didn't take me long to find all three traps. Two had rabbits in them. I drained both of them and made sure to treat the injury on my leg while I was at it. I wanted it healed as soon as possible. The stitches that Nina put in had already dissolved. I headed back to where Nicky was waiting. I slowly took my seat as I tried to figure out what she was doing. "Why did you line up the peanuts along the top of the dashboard?" She shrugged as she scooped them back into the bag, "I wanted to see how wide it was when measured with peanuts." Sometimes you meet people who are short just a few screws, other times the whole freaking toolbox is missing. I bet that the squirrel had given her advice on how to measure things after he stole her tape measure. I refrained from commenting as she started the small vehicle and started heading back to the Stronghold. Nicky parked it in the garage with the other ATVs. Nicky looked at the clock, "We are just in time for supper. Let's go before all of the good stuff is gone!" I picked up the two rabbits, "I will drop these off and meet you there." She wasted no time running towards the mess hall. I shook my head and headed towards the butcher building. I heard some voices through an open window. "They have Joe locked in one of those old jail cells at the moment. Nothing anyone says seems to get through to him. They aren't sure how he lost control considering that he hasn't even been in contact with a human since he turned." "He did turn into a Runner and not a regular zombie, right?" "Yeah, he is definitely a Runner. He goes ballistic whenever a human approaches the cell. Hopefully he will eventually calm down enough to snap out of it." I heard a door shut as the two left whatever room they had been in. So that guy had turned. It was surprising that he had turned into a Runner considering the odds had been stacked against him. The zombie in the creek must have been a Runner after all. The smell of so many humans was probably throwing his bloodlust into overdrive and completely clouding his mind. Runners weren't exactly the brightest bricks in the wall to start with. I found it odd that he would have completely lost control since they would have known to avoid giving him raw meat or human blood. Daniel was the only one here, other than me, who could approach the Runner safely, so I doubted that I would be seeing much of Daniel for a while. That didn't hurt my feelings in the least. I left the rabbits with several people who said that they would clean them. The mess hall was pretty packed as supper was in full swing. The smell of over a hundred people in one room was an assault on my nose and the amount of noise tormented my ears. I was never coming here in the middle of the supper rush again. People gave me some space and I took care not to follow too closely to those ahead of me in the lines waiting for food lest I make them nervous. There was nothing like having a bloodthirsty zombie following you in a supper lineup to make you uneasy. Elsewhere others bumped elbows without qualms and gave little regard to personal space. 

Yeah, my Nightstalker instincts would not tolerate that. They were on the fritz as it was since it was impossible to watch everything around me. Tightly packed crowds of strangers were hell on earth for me. I did manage to spot Nicky against the far wall, she had managed to claim a small four seat table. I headed towards her after I put some fruit on my plate and I made sure to choose the least congested route. I slid into the empty seat with a sigh of relief. Nicky grinned at me, "I figured that you would want to be against a wall. I did try for a corner, but they were all taken. You look like you are on edge." I raised an eyebrow, "You have no idea how hard it is for me to be in this room at the moment. If I hadn't said that I would meet you in here, I would have turned around at the door." We ate our meal in silence. Most tables were packed with the benches holding more people than they had been intended for. No one joined us at our table, which was a relief for me. I made a mental note to grab something at lunch as well just so I could avoid this madhouse in the future. Paranoid Nightstalker instincts did not do well in a crowded mess hall. The constant noise and sheer number of people were triggering instincts that were better left buried. My mood was going downhill fast. I had made a huge effort to be polite and tolerant today, but this crowd had me at my limits. I felt like snarling simply for the need of space. By the time I finished eating I had already picked out the nearest exit. I stood up, "I need to get out of here." Nicky stood up and followed me. I noticed that she gave me more space than she usually did. I made it outside without anyone bumping into me. I could see a few people already on top of the secondary building, so that was out. Where in this oversized chicken coop could I go while avoiding people? Nicky touched my elbow, "This way." I narrowed my eyes at the contact but let her lead the way. She led me to the far side of the chicken coop that faced the fence. There were a couple of stumps leaning against the side of the chicken coop and Nicky sat down on the furthest one. She gave me a sympathetic look, "You were starting to look like you did that last night in the grocery store. I figured you needed some space and this is the best I can think of without going past the fence. I know you would be fine outside of the fence, but Daniel and Nina would have my hide." "Thanks." I sat down on another stump. The coop blocked the view of the small settlement behind us and fortune decided to grace me with a breeze right from the forest, which minimized the human smells. I wished my leg was healed so I could go for a run through the forest. I closed my eyes and took a deep breath as I tried to settle my worked up instincts. It took time, but they eventually subsided to the point where I didn't feel like growling from feeling caged up in this place. The breeze smelled more like the forest than the human Stronghold that I was in and we were far enough away from the main buildings that the only noise was from the chickens. I exhaled as I finally opened up my eyes. Nicky was fiddling with a handful of grass as she braided it, she glanced over at me, but didn't say anything. "Thanks. I am in a better mood now." She nodded, "Glad to hear it." She fell silent as she continued tormenting her handful of grass. I found it weird that Nicky was more in tune with my body language and zombie instincts than either Daniel or Nina. Sure, she occasionally pressed my buttons, but she had always somehow avoided pushing me too far. "There!" Her voice held accomplishment. I turned to look at Nicky's wide grin as she held up some sort of circle made of braided grass and daisies. I sighed, where did she come up with such ideas? She was at least 20 years old, not 8. She jumped to her feet and walked over. I stilled as I watched her, what was she up to now?

"It's a flower crown. Let me put it on you!" I restrained a growl with difficulty as her hands approached my head. The head and neck were a very touchy area for a sane zombie. Nina had simply looked at the scab on my head once I was awake and made no move to touch it. I doubted that I could have let her touch it even if Daniel had been in the room. Even Kelly and Travis wouldn't lightly attempt what Nicky was doing. Allowing anyone to put their hands near my head involved a lot of trust. I watched as both of her hands held the leafy circle closer. I tensed up as she approached, but I didn't make a sound as I felt her hands brush against my hair. She draped the weeds gently on my head. Anyone else would have gotten snarled at. The very fact that I had been able to curb my instincts enough to let her do that made me realize something astounding. Somewhere, deep down, I actually trusted Nicky on some level. It hadn't been easy, but I had done it. To the best of my knowledge, the only other people who would have been able to do that while I was awake were Kelly and Travis. We could wrestle at the drop of a hat, but they would have checked with me first before attempting to touch my head. Nicky dug around in her pockets before producing a small makeup mirror and holding it up with a cheerful smile. Please let no one else see this... A woman with a suspicious expression looked back at me. Her dark reflective sunglasses made her look distant and somewhat dangerous. The slightly lopsided grass and daisy flower chain looked completely out of place. As if I were humoring a 4 year old... I sighed heavily as I shook my head at my reflection. I reached out for the makeup mirror. Nicky reluctantly handed it over, "Just don't break it because you don't like the picture inside." I snorted as I angled it to inspect the scab on my head. I carefully moved my hair a bit as I checked it out. It was a good thing that I had my hair back in a braid, otherwise trying to tame my waist long hair would have been hell. It was healing very well. Whatever had been lacking in healing speed for my leg had obviously been redirected to this wound. I gently rubbed my fingers over it, but it was not really painful, just somewhat tender. It would not surprise me if the scab lifted in a few days. I did not realize that head wounds healed so quickly. My heart and lungs had probably healed at a similar rate in the beginning. I handed Nicky back her mirror and she stuck it back in her pocket before she sat on a closer stump. A more serious look crossed her face, "Did you hear that someone was infected and turned into a Runner?" "I heard a bit, but not much. Someone mentioned that he was having severe control problems and wasn't what I would call sane." She nodded, "They had him locked in a cell similar to that jail cell we had you in. He knew before he turned what was going to happen and how hard it was going to be at first. He was determined to remain in control, but apparently at this point he is nothing more than a feral zombie. He hasn't been in contact with any humans, so how could he be feral?" I sighed, "A Runner isn't the brightest thing around. His intelligence would have dropped during the change. The bloodlust isn't something that you can prepare yourself for if you have never experienced it. If whatever room he is in smells as strongly of humans as any building here that I have been in so far, then I can understand his reaction somewhat." Nicky lifted her head at my wording, "Somewhat?" I exhaled slowly in thought, "He should have been able to regain control even if it took a few hours. If Daniel were to snarl at him, it should have made his instincts back down enough for the human mind to take over. Especially if he is running on pure zombie instincts. It is only due to my humanity overriding my instincts that I am a constant thorn in Daniel's side." Nicky groaned and rubbed her head, "This is so confusing. I talked to Hank this morning and he has also noticed that the people here don't quite trust us yet and conversations occasionally stop when we get close. He put it down to us being new. Then again, he also blamed part of their reactions on my behavior this morning." I reluctantly inquired, "What did you do this morning?" I wasn't really sure I wanted to know, but I had a fair idea of what the answer was. She chuckled, "I may or may not have chased about 20 people around with a baseball bat before Hank and Ben managed to drag me to breakfast." No wonder people didn't quite trust her after that. They were probably convinced that she was off her rocker. I shook my head in disbelief, "Why did you do that?" She shrugged without concern, "I am not entirely sure, but there must have been a good reason even if I don't remember it." Nicky was definitely... unique.  I sighed as I turned my eyes back to the forest.

 

Chapter 36


 I tilted my head as I started picking up two sets of approaching footsteps. I pulled the silly grass crown off and dropped it on Nicky's head in a swift move. Nicky opened her mouth to protest me removing her creation and I jerked my head to the corner of the chicken coop. She immediately caught on and closed her mouth. She leaned back against the coop and put on a bored look as she gazed at the distant trees. It surprised me as to how fast she played along. She must have been the top student in drama, provided they could get her to actually stay in the role they wanted her to play and not turn into a serial killer in the middle of a romance. A minute later Daniel and Nina rounded the corner. Nina looked relieved, "Oh, here you are. I was beginning to get worried when I couldn't find you. I had to ask Daniel to track your scent. Why are you over here?" I made a face, "I made the mistake of entering the mess hall during supper." Nicky looked over and chuckled, "Don't worry, there weren't any causalities. But I don't think it is something that we should ever try again. In the future I will bring her a plate." Nina and Daniel looked surprised. Nina looked at me in curiosity and concern, "Did something go wrong in the mess hall?" I shrugged, "Nightstalkers and crowds simply do not mix. Have you ever gone into that place during the supper rush?" Daniel replied, "Yes, it is louder than is comfortable and the amount of control I need to use is quite noticeable, but I have never had any real problem unless someone bumped into me. That only happened once or twice, even then they only were growled at." Daniel was either far more accustomed to bustling humans than I ever had been or he was so far out of touch with his zombie instincts that he really wasn't bothered by that part of his instincts. It was probably a combination of the two, although I wasn't sure how solitary feral Terrors were. Nina shrugged, "It isn't a problem for us to bring you a plate if you don't want to go in there. I came looking for you because I want to check your injuries." My instincts may have settled down from supper, but I didn't want her poking my injuries at the moment. The fact that she had gone to the effort of tracking me down meant that she wasn't going to be dissuaded easily. "You checked them yesterday. I can tell that they are healing. Is this really necessary?" Nina grinned, "Yes, there is no sense trying to back out of it when we are only trying to help. Besides, I want another look at the wound on your back. I can put some more polysporin on it at the same time." It irritated me that she kept wanting to tend my wounds. Zombies didn't get infections, so my wounds would heal without someone checking on them daily. Daniel leaned against the coop while watching me. I suspected that he was her backup as well as her tracker. I knew I wasn't going to be able to back out of this. With a faint growl of irritation I stood up, "Fine..." Nicky yawned, "Well, I am going to head back to the archery lane and pick up where I left off. See you tomorrow." Nicky stretched before heading off. I walked back with Nina. I kept my pace to the slow one I had used earlier. I didn't want the people here to realize that my leg was healing faster than before. I didn't feel like explaining how blood helped wounds. I also preferred it when people underestimated me. Either way, simply walking still sent pain lancing up and down my leg. It hadn't healed that much yet. We went back to the room Nina had used yesterday. Daniel took a seat in the hallway outside. I sat on the wooden stool as Nina got me to take off my shirt. She unwrapped the numerous layers of bandages. I inspected the scabs even as Nina looked them over. The damage I had done yesterday was mostly reversed. By tomorrow morning the ones on my chest should be at the point it had been at when I first entered this place.

Nina smeared more polysporin on, "It looks like they are healing." She turned her attention to my back and sighed, "I am going to have to clean this one again." I turned my head to look at her over my shoulder. I couldn't see the wound, "Why?" "Just the way the bullet exited it left a flap of skin and it just doesn't want to stay down. The one corner keeps lifting. Sorry, but I have to trim part of this scab again otherwise it may start snagging the fabric of your shirt and pulling." I growled lightly in frustration. It had taken hours for the throbbing to disappear yesterday after she had cleaned it. Daniel was obviously eavesdropping since I heard his faint growl from the next room as a threat to behave. Nina paid no attention to my growl as she grabbed the small bag off the counter and turned her attention to my back. I felt cold metal touch my skin as some sort of tweezers started trying to raise the lifted part of the scab up so she could trim it. I gritted my teeth against the pain. I could tell she was trying to be gentle, but any wound was usually tender until it healed.  A growl rumbled through my chest and Nina apologized, "Sorry, I almost have it off. Just a bit more." The scissors snipped as she tried to cut off part of the scab. I snarled at a sudden blast of pain as I dug my nails deep into the wooden stool to keep from slashing at her. Daniel's snarl echoed through the thin walls as he attempted to use his rank to make me back down if there was any possibility of me harming Nina. Nina was immediately apologetic, "I'm sorry, I didn't realize that there was some skin in that part of the scab." I took a deep breath, but she was telling the truth. Shit that hurt. I was surprised that Daniel hadn't barged into the room when I snarled, perhaps Nina's words had kept him out. Nina spoke again, "Hang on, I got the scab off. Just let me clean it up and put some polysporin on it." My nails bit deeper into the wood as she carefully washed the wound again. Finally she reached over to grab a square stick-on bandage, "That should do it. I hope I don't have to open it up again." I exhaled heavily. That made two of us. She put the bag back on the counter and put polysporin on my other scabs before wrapping the two miles of bandages around my chest. I failed to see why she used these long wrap up ones instead of adhesive pad bandages. I put my shirt back on. I was still wearing shorts and she pushed up the edge of the one pant leg so she could unwrap the bandage. She frowned as she noticed some dried blood on the padding above the scab, "Try to take it easier. You pushed yourself enough that it bled." She didn't sound overly concerned about my leg even though it looked pretty bad. But she knew that this scab had a tendency to crack and bleed a bit as I walked. It was still fairly soft from the polysporin and my own doctoring attempts. It didn't look like it had healed any since yesterday, although I could feel the slight difference when I walked. She rubbed some more polysporin on before bandaging it back up. I wasted no time exiting the room. Daniel watched me make my escape. That idiot should have arrived earlier at the truck stop and he could have taken a couple of those bullets. Then Nina would have someone else to torment. I narrowed my eyes at him as I passed by him, "I never did hear why you were so late in showing up to the gun fight." He shrugged, "I didn't expect to take that long. I was trying to skin the bear and bring the hide back, it would have made a very warm bed spread. I started running the second I heard the first gunshot." I huffed as I shook my head, "Next time it is your turn to be the target." He raised his eyebrow, "You expect to be shot at again?"

"With my luck? It is almost a guarantee." I kept walking before Nina finished cleaning the room and came out. That lady had more curiosity than any cat and I didn't feel like answering questions today. Daniel frowned, "If anyone points a gun at you, or gives you any sort of trouble, let me know." I waved a hand in acknowledgement as I exited the door. His comment had surprised me and reminded me of the others who were hoping I would remain here. This place was bizarre... I retreated to my room as my shoulder throbbed in time with my heartbeat. 
 
 
 The next day was much the same as the last. I once more peeled vegetables. The kitchen staff were a bit more relaxed, but there were still some breaks in the conversation that my suspicious instincts locked onto with every occurrence. Someone hadn't realized that I was here and started talking about the Runner that still hadn't gained control. Another person lightly elbowed her while pointedly looking in my direction. I pretended to not notice as I kept peeling some carrots. No one was saying anything about zombies while I was present. Perhaps they were worried about offending me. After lunch I tracked down Nicky, "What are you doing this afternoon?" She shrugged, "Not much. I tried to volunteer to go on a raid, but they turned me down. Some excuse about wanting to keep our group of newcomers inside the fence so there are some familiar faces for you. I bet the guy in charge was just scared because he saw me practicing archery last night." I snorted, "Considering I haven't even seen any of the others since we got here, your archery skills are most likely the culprit." She grinned at me, "Anyways, I am at loose ends. For some reason most groups don't want me working with them. What are your plans?" "I am tired of being cooped up in here. Think they will miss us if we disappear until supper?" Nicky chuckled, "Most will probably be relieved if I don't appear. They will likely assume you are on the roof or in your room. If we grab the side by side now, the mechanics will be at lunch and won't notice." I tilted my head, "How is it that you have only been here three days and most of the people in this place hope to avoid you?" She grinned, "It is a talent. I honed it at each Stronghold I stayed at." I seriously hoped that she didn't try to hone that skill here... "Then the only person who will know that we left is the gate guard." She rubbed her hands together, "Don't worry, I'll charm the gate guard. Leave him to me." That poor guard. I shook my head silently as I followed her to the garage. She pulled the side by side up to the nearest gate. She grinned and waved wildly at the guy on duty. He turned a bit red as he started opening up the gate and waved us through without a word. "Why does he look embarrassed?" Nicky grinned at me, "He made the mistake of offering me a cup of coffee this morning. We spent an entire hour playing hide and go seek. Well, he kept trying to hide as I kept trying to catch him. His friends somehow managed to convince Hank to trick me into thinking he was in a shed and then he locked me inside." I snorted, "What happened to our bet?" She defended herself, "Hey, I was avoiding it until he put the cup of coffee in front me and told me I was cute! I couldn't resist drinking it while he flirted with me. It isn't my fault that he ran off when I tried to kiss him." I shook my head in disbelief, "So you decided to chase him for an hour?" "What else was I supposed to do?" Oh boy. How was I going to explain this? "Perhaps he didn't want to be chased?" She shook her head vigorously, "No, I overheard him and his friends saying that if he wanted to get the girl, he had to be persistent and chase me if I played hard to get. I just followed their advice, but he avoids me every chance he gets and he won't even talk to me now." Truthfully, I didn't blame the guy for avoiding her. However, I did blame him for giving her coffee and dragging me into this conversation. I shrugged as I indifferently dismissed him, "I wouldn't worry about him. He would probably just slow you down." That guy didn't have a chance of trying to contain the amount of energy this little spitfire had. My rough dismissal of him seemed to cheer Nicky up, "Yeah, I don't think he could keep up with me. His friends had to help him after all. So do you plan to flirt with anyone here?" I gave her an incredulous look. Really? Why would she ask that? That coffee had obviously messed up her mind. Nicky pressed, "Haven't you found anyone cute here yet? I know you haven't walked around much, but you have been in the mess hall a few times. Someone should have caught your eye by now." I rolled my eyes, "Open up your eyes Nicky, I am a zombie. A kiss would likely be fatal. Besides, the zombie virus destroyed any romantic tendencies. Such inclinations don't occur to me or to any zombie." She looked shocked, "Really? Boy, you really got the short end of the stick, didn't you?" I didn't respond to that comment. I had never really wanted kids, so the loss didn't overly bother me. Nicky glanced back at me, "So if boyfriends are out, what about just friendship? You can't tell me that the virus wiped that out as well." I sighed, "Friendship is possible. Not easy, but possible." She looked curious, "Is that because of how grouchy you are or the fact that you hid on a mountaintop for a decade?" I growled a faint rebuke at her, "Partly because of my short temper and partly due to how my instincts affect me. Not to mention the fact that most humans want nothing to do with zombies." She chuckled, "They have no idea what they are missing. You zombies make life so much more interesting." Considering that it came from Nicky, I doubted that it was a common sentiment.

 

Chapter 37

            I wasn't in a rush to return and Nicky was easy to distract with wild strawberries. I left Nicky pigging out on strawberries as I went to check out the rabbit traps. I left the three dead rabbits on the side by side and proceeded to raid the mostly untouched strawberry patch. Strawberries beat dry bread for supper and Nicky was thoroughly enjoying her appetizer as we picked in silence. I glanced up at the sound of footsteps, but I had already caught Daniel's scent. He slowed as he approached and walked out of the trees while simply watching us. I glanced at him, but continued picking the small sweet pieces of fruit. It took several minutes for Nicky to realize he was here. When she finally spotted him, she jumped in surprise and looked at me accusingly, "You could have told me we had company. How long has that stalker been standing there?" I shrugged, "About three minutes or so." She stuffed more berries in her mouth and grumbled around her mouthful. She turned her glare to Daniel, "Why are you out here?" He blinked slowly at her, "You disappeared for five hours. Surely you didn't think that your absence went unnoticed? I came to make sure that Trinity hadn't murdered you yet considering some of the tales I have heard recently." She frowned, "I am sure that those guys were exaggerating. I did not chase them with a tire iron." "Of course." He didn't sound at all convinced. "Those guys really need to learn the names of tools. It was actually a prybar." He growled, "You aren't supposed to be chasing them with anything that resembles a weapon." Nicky protested, "But they started it!" He glared at her, obviously losing patience, "How so?" "They gave me coffee!" He gritted his teeth with a growl as he closed his eyes, "That is not a good enough excuse for terrorizing quarter of the population." He seemed in an oddly short tempered mood compared to what I had seen in the past. He turned his reddish eyes towards me, "Just how have you not murdered her yet? I have been here less than five minutes and she is already testing my patience." I bared my teeth in a dark parody of a smile. He narrowed his eyes somewhat at the action. "She hasn't said a single thing for almost an hour, so I think you just bring out the worst in her. It makes me look normal if I hang around with her. Besides, her mere presence also keeps everyone else at a distance." He gave me a disbelieving look before shaking his head, "Supper will be ready in half an hour." He turned and abruptly left the clearing. I blinked slowly. That was rather odd. Nicky gave me a confused look, she had also noted his behavior. Perhaps he was just upset that Nicky keeps causing problems and doesn't realize she shouldn't be pulling such stunts. I wasn't about to be the one to try and explain it to her. I shrugged as I avoided the topic, "Why don't we keep picking strawberries for another ten minutes before heading back for supper?" She nodded and turned back to searching for the red fruit beneath the leaves. We headed back and parted ways. She was heading for the mess hall while I dropped off the rabbits before heading to my room. I had stuffed myself with strawberries so I wasn't hungry. I sat on my bed and gazed out the window. Most of the people were already in the mess hall although some stragglers were still making their way there. "Joe almost got through the bars and managed to grab one of the nurses. Daniel ended up killing him before he could bite her." "Yeah, I heard. That sucks. I was hoping that he was going to pull through. At least that Nightstalker is still here."

"She may be so badly injured that she is barely walking, but they are having a hell of a time trying to get her to remain here. Even being welcoming and giving her some space is barely making it tolerable for her. They keep going over all of Nina's observations trying to figure out a way to make it easier for her and convince her to stay here." "How did they get blood from her without her being aware of it anyways?" What?!  I stiffened as I listened to the three voices on the road below my window. "Apparently she has a wound on her back. It started bleeding once or twice while Nina was cleaning it and she managed to get a small vial of blood on those occasions. Nina grabbed some saliva and blood from her when she was out cold, but otherwise Daniel is getting blood and saliva samples from the feral Runners and zombies. He can't seem to catch a Nightstalker though, so this one is our only source for Nightstalker genotype blood. The fact that she is sane makes things both easier and harder." A woman huffed, "As I said before, it is like caging a falcon. I can't see it lasting long term." "Daniel says that this one isn't as aggressive as the other sane one he met. She hasn't tried to attack anyone at any rate and she has been here three days already. So that is quite promising. It has been, what? Six months since that first one stopped here? The feral Nightstalkers pick up Daniel's scent and avoid the entire area. Chances of finding another sane or feral Nightstalker are slim to none. We really can't afford to lose her, but we aren't having much luck in convincing her to stay." "It is just going to get harder as she heals. Nightstalkers are known to be solitary creatures with a short temper. I fail to see how they are going to convince her to stay here. If it weren't for Daniel dragging her back that first day, she would probably be long gone already." "That is what they are trying to figure out." "Well they better hurry up. Zombies heal fast so they only have a matter of weeks to figure it out." The group fell silent as they continued to the mess hall. My vision was red and I was shaking in rage. What the hell is going on in this place?!  Why were they taking blood from me – even more importantly, why were they doing it in secret? My suspicious instincts suddenly seemed justified and they were quite elevated at the moment with what I heard. Now I knew the subject that so many had avoided talking about. Zombies were indeed the topic they had skirted around, but I had thought it was fairly harmless gossip about the fact that I was a Nightstalker. This... This was nothing like I had assumed. The fact that everyone here knew exactly how injured I was only added fuel to the fire. They knew I was somewhat vulnerable at the moment and they were thinking of ways to keep me here. I growled lowly as I felt like I was being trapped, just like those rabbits I had killed earlier. I did not like this feeling. I was torn between pacing in my room like a caged lion or sitting silently to disguise the fact that I had started to uncover something that they obviously had not meant for me to overhear. I opted for the second option since my leg was still sore from crouching down to pick those strawberries. Heat rolled through my veins as I realized just how much the humans here had thought things out. Daniel and Nina were in the middle of whatever was going on. All of those questions and notes... A growl rumbled through my chest as I realized that they now knew far more about Nightstalkers than I was comfortable with. I had traveled with them and Nina had obviously been watching me and my behavior the entire time. This was why she had never written things down when I could see what she was writing. No wonder Daniel had relentlessly followed me to bring me back. I was the only Nightstalker he had managed to get close to in six months. I had no clue what they were doing with my blood, but roughly 200 humans felt that it was important enough that they were going out of their way to try and make a potentially dangerous zombie feel welcome here. I had never seen that many people agree on one thing before, the 36 people in my old work place couldn't even settle on five different types of pizza. I narrowed my eyes as I realized that this was partially why Daniel had always offered to kill the Runners. It wasn't because he was stronger, he had been after their blood and saliva. It also explained why I had not seen or scented any Runners in the area. I gritted my teeth. I was in a Stronghold with a conspiracy that was focused on me, and my leg had not healed enough for me to get away. What the hell have I gotten myself into this time? 
 
 I was on edge the next day. My instincts were not convinced that I was actually safe and they were altering my behavior a bit. I knew just enough to fire up my suspicious nature, but not enough to truly know what was going on. I felt like an overtightened guitar string. Those in the kitchen didn't seem to notice any difference as I peeled various vegetables. Several ladies were kind and thanked me as they had yesterday. Nicky raised her eyebrow at me as we ate lunch, somehow noting the subtle tension in my body. I had to give these people credit for their ingenuity. They had placed a four seater table in the far corner and pushed the other tables away from it a bit. It was always left open, as if it had been done just for me. I had to admit that it gave me the bit of extra space that my instincts sorely needed at the moment. I glanced across the table at Nicky. Other than Nina or Daniel, no one else had tried to sit at whatever table I was sitting at. I had plenty of invites to sit at other people's tables and join them, but I had always declined. Lunch was much quieter than supper and the place usually had less than fifty people in it as the various groups staggered their lunch breaks or simply took food with them for lunch. No one was close enough to overhear a quiet conversation. I spoke lowly, "After last night, I am in full agreement with your thoughts the first day." She yawned, but I could tell that she was focusing intently on the conversation, "That bad, huh?" I chewed a mouthful of bread before replying, "You have no idea. Can you see if you can get a map of the area and local Strongholds without anyone knowing? Hopefully before you take me out to the forest." She chuckled, "Planning on making a break for it already?" I made a bit of a face, "It sounds like we really will be breaking out." Her eyes flickered over to me in surprise. She hummed thoughtfully, "I will see if I can get that map on the quiet side. I think I saw one in a small office. I will come find you later on, it might raise suspicions if we disappear all afternoon again." I nodded, "I plan to walk the perimeter of the fence before hanging out on the roof for a while." She nodded as her eyes got distant in thought. I watched before commenting, "Oh, Nicky?" She glanced at me, "Yeah?" I smirked, "For my sanity, please avoid coffee for the foreseeable future. Coffee really scrambles your wits." She grinned at me, "Can I still chase people around in the morning occasionally?" I chuckled, "Sure." "Deal." I almost pitied those people.

 

Chapter 38

            I woke out of my light doze as I picked up faint footsteps on the stairs that led up the roof. I instantly recognized them as Daniel's. After a quick deliberation I decided to pretend to be asleep. I had been napping after all and it might mislead him in the future. Perhaps he would leave me in peace in the future if he thought I was napping most of the afternoon when I was up here on the roof. He was walking more quietly than usual, as if to avoid overly disturbing me. His normal walking footsteps were quieter than humans usually were simply due to the fact that he was a Terror. I sat still with shallow even breaths as he approached the door to the roof. It had a glass window on it, so he could see me before reaching the door. He turned the handle and I slightly jerked my head in his direction, as if I had been awoken from sleep. He blinked in slight surprise as he continued to twist the knob and open the door. He walked over to sit in a chair. My instincts cared for his presence even less now that I knew he was up to something. I scanned the tree line out of habit as Daniel simply sat down. He broke the silence to speak quietly, "How are you holding up?" I was very glad that mindreading was not a skill that Terrors possessed. If I hadn't been suspicious before, his casual and almost concerned question would have caught my attention since it came out of nowhere. We had barely tolerated each other's presence for most of our trip. This behavior was quite out of character for him. Sure, I could see Kelly or Travis showing concern like this, but the three of us had been at ease with each other's presence and I counted them as friends. Daniel and I did not have anything similar to the friendship I had with those two Nightstalkers. The only way I could describe what we had was to call it an uneasy truce. I shrugged as if disinterested, "Well enough." He sighed as he looked towards the forest as well, "It takes a bit to get used to it, but this place is one of the only places I know of that appreciates the skills that zombies have. They mentioned that they hope you stick around. If there is something that will make it easier for you, they will be happy to help." Now I knew that someone had put him up to this conversation. This was not like any of our past conversations. I was going to have to drop a false lead for my altered behavior. They were going to notice it before too long. I glanced at Daniel, "The smell of humans here is so strong that I can practically cut it into bricks and build a castle. How does it not bother you?" He looked thoughtful, "You once mentioned that you got somewhat accustomed to the smell of humans and you had only been around them a couple of weeks. I have always been around them, so I barely notice it unless my instincts get triggered or the bloodlust rears its head more strongly than usual. If you give it some time, it probably won't bother you in a month or so." He glanced at me as a thought hit him, "You aren't having any problems with control, are you?" I shook my head, "As long as I avoid the mess hall during supper, I should be good on that front unless something really riles me up." He tilted his head in curiosity, "What is most likely to rile you up?" I gave him an ironic look, "A Terror is asking a Nightstalker that question? As different as we are, our instincts have more in common than I care to admit. Although my temper seems shorter than yours from what I have seen." "You seem to be doing quite well." I snorted, "Don't count on it holding out much longer. I have been trying hard to act human, but I have never managed it for more than a few days. Ben or Marissa can testify to that from our road trip. My instincts are already starting to act up."

He furrowed his eyebrows and spoke slowly, "It isn't so much that you have to act human. They know you aren't and they don't expect you to go out of your way to act like it. You can be yourself, just don't attack or threaten them." I had never realized just how... humanized... Daniel was until just now. This guy needed to get out more and actually act like a zombie. What he really needed to do was go out and just live wild by himself for a week or two. Just thinking about how civilized he was gave me a headache. I raised an eyebrow at him, "I think quarter of the people here would fall over if they heard me growl. I shocked a few that heard me growl half-heartedly at Nicky." He shrugged, "Once they realize that you won't harm them, it won't bother them." I snorted in doubt and noticed that his jaw tensed. My ill-mannered actions and tone were triggering his instincts. As much as I wouldn't mind pissing him off, it was better if I didn't rile him up. The last thing I needed was to re-open those wounds if it came to a scuffle. The best plan was to lay low and make my escape as soon as I thought I could manage it successfully. An uncomfortable silence fell between us. His instincts hated being challenged or belittled and mine didn't like being the underdog. We were doomed to grate on each other's nerves and tempers. I heard someone running up the stairs, but waited a bit before turning my head towards the door. Daniel was watching me, as if judging just how good my hearing was. Let him think my hearing was poorer than what it was. With luck he would underestimate me later on. Nicky opened up the door and came over to me without sparing a glance at Daniel, "Come on, let's head to the forest before someone realizes that I am not weeding that garden like they told me to." "Are you trying to use me as an excuse to get out of doing work?" She was unashamed, "Yep. It is a pretty good excuse too. I would rather drive your irritable hide all over the forest than pick another freaking dandelion." I shrugged, "Fine by me. I am not going to argue about a trip to the forest." I got to my feet and slowly walked with Nicky to the door. I could feel Daniel's gaze as he watched me go. Nicky had good timing. 
 
 I finished telling Nicky everything I had overheard. Her eyes were wide, "Shit. I didn't realize that it was this bad. You realize that the longer they think we are ignorant, the better it is for us, right?" I growled in frustration, "I am well aware of that, but the situation is anything but comfortable." Nicky shook her head, "No wonder people kept asking me questions about how you were doing and if anything was bothering you. You were right, we are going to have to practically bust out of this place when we try to escape. At least they aren't trying to keep you here by force yet, that is one good point. Oh, here is that map. I read some other papers on the desk while I was there." She unfolded the map and put it against a big rock, "Wait until you see this. This is where we are currently, this is where we started, and this is the route we took. Nina and Daniel knew that these places were there because this place trades with them a fair bit. It wasn't by chance that we went down those particular roads. No wonder we never met any other people on the road, we avoided the main routes." A low snarl escaped my lips as Nicky traced her fingers over the road we had driven. Nina had guided us practically right down the middle of an invisible line that marked the halfway point between various Strongholds. We had passed six Strongholds and she had ensured that we had not gone anywhere near them. Probably because they knew I was planning to leave the instant the humans found any Stronghold. I had one other concern though. "Can you pull down the bandages and check that wound on my back for me?" Nicky nodded and I took off my shirt. She gently pulled the bandages down a bit. "It doesn't look like it has healed much at all, is that normal? I thought zombies healed fast." I looked over my shoulder, but of course couldn't see it. "Can you use your mirror so I can see it?" She quickly dug it out of her pocket and with a bit of trial and error got the angle that allowed me to see the wound. I clenched my teeth with a growl. It had barely healed with the way that Nina kept trimming the scab and cleaning the wound. Nicky glanced at me, "I take it that it isn't supposed to look this bad?" My answer was short and terse, "No." She frowned, "Is there anything we can do about it?" I narrowed my eyes in thought before putting my shirt on, "There is. Wait here, I will be back in a few minutes." I headed to the rabbits traps and swiftly returned. I held up a small jar of dark red liquid. She looked at it suspiciously, "Just what is that?" I dug a needleless syringe out of my backpack along with a pair of rubber gloves, "A mixture of rabbit blood and my saliva. If it is put onto a wound, it increases the healing rate substantially. Can you put this on my back? I can do the rest of them later." She made a face, but nodded as she put on the gloves and gingerly took the jar and syringe. "I think this is the creepiest thing I have ever done. What am I actually supposed to be doing?" I took off my shirt again as I laid down on a blanket I had spread on the grass, "Just drip that into the wound." I hated revealing this secret, but I really needed that injury to heal as soon as possible. Odd as it was, I knew that Nicky wouldn't tell anyone else. "Okay..." She carefully pulled the bandage down just enough to expose the injury. I felt the drops hit the injury. Nicky's voice was shaking, "Shit... It is literally disappearing. Is it supposed to do that?" I nodded, "Yes. That is what increases the healing." She was silent as she kept emptying the jar into the painful injury. The blood also caused the injury to heat up. It always did. The blood caused the heat in my blood to focus on that area. The spot on my back was almost painfully hot by the time Nicky sat up, "The jar is empty." She carefully put the bandage back from the way she had pulled it down. I sat up and put my shirt back on, "Thanks. If we do this every day it should completely close up within a week as long as Nina doesn't mess with it too much. Just don't mention it to anyone else." "No worries there. They would probably think I was crazy or something." I think it is a little too late for that one Nicky... She passed the small apricot sized jar back to me and I stuck it in my backpack. I had another jar in my backpack to treat my other wounds this evening. Nicky flopped on her back with a dramatic sigh, "How soon are you going to be ready for an escape attempt?" I shrugged, "Unless I heal faster than I anticipate, it will probably be around ten days before I can run without causing myself more damage." Nicky groaned, "That is going to feel like forever. Just how are we going to get out of this place? None of the vehicles ever have more than half a tank when they are parked and the gas tanks are guarded. I am not allowed to gas up the side by side, so we wouldn't get very far with it." I shook my head, "They time us when we take the side by side. I say we drain a bit of gas out of it daily and store it out here. We can sneak out right after sunset. If we find any vehicle out of gas, we can use it without raising suspicion. They wouldn't miss us until breakfast." Nicky sighed, "I guess I will see if I can purloin some tubing and a jar for the gas, but it is almost time for supper so we better get going before Daniel comes looking for us. That guy just keeps popping up like a dirty shirt."

 

Chapter 39

            Nicky was going to bring a plate to me on the roof top. I had not expected her to show up with Liz in tow. Liz ran over to give me a hug. I awkwardly returned it, I still failed to see why this child was always overjoyed to see me. Nicky chuckled as she took a seat, "She really wanted to see you again and I knew you didn't mind her hanging around." Liz looked up at me in excitement, "Nicky said that you helped her shoot her bow. Can you help me after supper?" I sighed, but gave in, "Sure." It wasn't as if I had anything else to do and people would come up here once they had finished their supper. I wondered how many people here were going to have a heart attack when they saw a child walking with me. We finished our supper before people started leaving the mess hall, so no one even saw us walk over to the archery area. There were actually bows for children here, which surprised me. Nicky grabbed a bow similar to what she had last time as she faced the target. I had Liz practicing a few lanes away, just in case Nicky's aim was worse than what I thought was possible. It was almost peacefully quiet out here. Everyone was eating, so there weren't any people wandering around and talking, no one was banging around while working or anything. Just the twang of the bows and the three of us. The feeling surprised me and I examined it carefully as I helped Liz stand properly to fire the bow. My instincts had retreated temporarily. This reminded me a tiny bit of when I had been travelling with just Marissa, Tom and the two kids. It reminded me more of my friendship with Kelly and Travis, although it was different than that as well since Kelly and Travis were Nightstalkers. None of humans I had originally rescued had been a potential threat or suspicious of me. Some general irritation was still present and always would be since I was a Nightstalker, but I knew Nicky wouldn't harm me and Liz simply wasn't capable of it even if she tried – and I doubted she ever would considering how happy she was whenever she saw me. Both accepted me for what I was and were also perfectly at ease with me. At the moment, I was about as relaxed as I could get in the presence of humans. It had been a long time since I had felt anything like companionship around humans. I didn't mind the feeling. Too bad it wouldn't last very long, I knew it would disappear the instant another human came into sight or hearing range. I went down on one knee as I helped Liz aim her bow. Her close proximity burned my throat, but Daniel had been right, I was getting acclimatized to the constant smell of humans. I barely noticed it unless I thought about it. Even the usual bloodlust was barely bothering me, but that may be due to me hunting so much more than normal. Nicky kept muttering as she shot arrow after arrow. She was at least hitting the target now. Liz was shooting at a much closer target. She wasn't bad, although she missed the target more often than not. She was only about seven years old, so it was to be expected. I remained on one knee beside her as I kept helping her nock the arrow before letting her fire it. I glanced up as I heard footsteps approaching. Marissa was approaching and it was clear from her uneasy expression that she didn't like how close I was to Liz. She had done a very good job at avoiding me once we got to the Stronghold. I slowly got to my feet as she approached, the relaxed feeling gone. Marissa called to Liz as she approached, "Liz, time for your bath." Liz pouted, "But I don't usually have a bath until later." She still obediently put her bow back in the shed and went to where Marissa was waiting. Marissa wasted no time in taking her hand and leading her away. My instincts stirred slightly and I looked around subtly while going to collect Liz's arrows.

The archery range was somewhat segregated from the other buildings, so someone would have to enter the archery field to be easily noticed. I spotted about thirty or so people lounging on a deck just past the side barriers. Judging from the disapproving expressions that they were watching Marissa with, they didn't appreciate Marissa collecting Liz. I also recognized that particular bunch as the ones who spent every evening on the archery field. They had forfeited their normal evening entertainment to give me some space while I spent time with two of my previous travel companions. Considering we had been undisturbed for almost an hour, it gave me a glimpse at how far out of their way they were willing to go to convince me to stay here. I put the arrows back in the proper holder in the shed while that creepy thought rolled through my mind. Under very different circumstances, I would have appreciated the gesture, but with this conspiracy afoot, it only served to put me on edge. I left the shed while giving myself a mental shake and trying to settle my instincts. I watched Nicky take a few shots, "Well, at least you are hitting the target every time." She glanced over with a chuckle, "Why don't you grab a bow? I am curious to see how many times you can hit the center of this obstinate target." I stuck my hands in my pockets nonchalantly, "I'll pass. I haven't fired a bow since I was twelve. I probably wouldn't even hit the target." Nicky fumbled her shot in her surprise. I watched as her arrow ended up much closer to the target in the second lane than the one she was supposed to be using. She blinked owlishly at me as she recovered, "What? But how did you know how to correct us?" I smirked at her, "I watched someone teaching a class once. What I have shown you is about all I know." "Here I thought you knew what you were doing!" I bared my teeth in a grin as I turned to leave, "Nope. I am taking my leave, don't stay out too late in case you get rained on." She sent me a thoroughly confused look, "There isn't a single cloud in the sky. How will I get rained on?" I paused before I left the field, "Honest, it will rain before the sun sets. I can smell the thunderstorm on the wind." I continued on my way. The group on the deck was glancing at the horizon, having overheard the last bit of our conversation. I headed for the secondary building. I glanced back before I went inside and noticed that the group on the deck was already on the archery field. I headed for the showers on the main floor of the secondary building, it had been far too long since I had a proper bath or shower. I hadn't done more than just sponge myself down in case I opened up the scabs. They should have healed up enough to handle it by now. It felt good to be clean. The long wraps of bandages resided in a plastic bag. They weren't needed any more. The scabs had set enough. The soap, shampoo and conditioner had burned if they touched the injury on my back. I carefully dried off and started brushing out my waist long hair. It was easy enough to hold my hair near my neck and brush it out without bothering the scab above my ear. I carefully braided it back up before leaving the shower. The moment I opened the door to the hallway I was hit with Nina's scent. The door just down the hallway was open and Nina's head popped out. I was beginning to feel like a celebrity with far too many stalkers. Nina smiled, "There you are. I see that you got cleaned up. Let's go downstairs and I will put more polysporin on the scabs." I tried to think of a way to gracefully back out of it without raising suspicion. Before I had the chance to even take a breath, the door beside Nina's room opened and Daniel leaned against the doorframe. He had the room right beside hers? I wasn't aware that his room was also on the main floor, although it didn't overly surprise me since I rarely saw them apart. I should have guessed his room was on this floor from how strong his scent was in this hallway. I made a mental note to use the shower on the second floor next time. There wasn't any way to decline Nina's request with her guard dog present. I exhaled slowly in resignation, "Sure." Nina ignored my lack of enthusiasm as she led the way. Daniel went back into his room, which surprised me. Nina once more examined and put polysporin on my scabs. Thankfully she didn't bother the one on my back. "They look like they are healing well. I will just keep checking them every few days to keep an eye on them and put on more polysporin." Check on them. Right... More like you are keeping tabs on how quickly they are healing so you know when I may make a break for it. She grabbed a handful of square adhesive bandages and put them over the scabs instead of attempting to wrap me up like a mummy. She turned to put her gloves and stuff in the garbage. I swiftly grabbed a handful of the bandages with her unaware and stuffed them in my backpack before putting on my shirt. I retreated to my room and locked the door before opening the window halfway. I sat on my bed and gazed out the window. I could see the thunderclouds building on the horizon. I smirked, I had known the storm was coming simply from the smell on the wind. I took out a jar of rabbit blood and the syringe before carefully peeling back the square bandages on my chest and leg. I put most of it on my leg, but spread the rest between the other three injuries. I didn't touch the scab on my head. It was visible and the day that particular scab sloughed off, it would catch the attention of far too many people. I watched people come and go as the evening progressed. The sky darkened both from the setting sun and from the rumbling thunderstorm. People were rapidly heading to whatever building their room was in, unwilling to be caught out in the storm. I didn't hear any interesting gossip as they headed for shelter. I massaged my leg, it was still warm from the blood. It was a bit sore, although it was no longer truly painful. That was good. That meant that it was healing rapidly. I watched the storm roll in until the lightning started. Lightning was far too bright even with my sunglasses. I closed my eyes and listened to the rumbling tumult of thunder. 
 
 ----------------------------------------------- Author's Note: Thank you for taking the time to read my story. I appreciate every single vote or comment. Such support means a lot to me.

 

Chapter 40


 I carefully shifted through the underbrush in complete silence. The deer was unaware that I was here. I was getting tired of rabbit and two of the traps hadn't caught anything today. Besides, this deer had a lot more blood than rabbits. It walked closer as it grazed and I tensed up. It glanced over its shoulder as it looked at something in the other direction. I sprang and moments later the deer was dead. I had been careful, so even though my leg hurt, the scab didn't crack open. The deer was a welcome change and once I had drank my fill, I sucked out the rest of the blood and spit it into a large canning jar. I dragged the deer carcass into a section of dense underbrush for the local predators to enjoy. I didn't want the humans to know that I was well enough to take down a deer. Even Daniel didn't understand how easy it was for me to sneak up on prey. I stashed the jar in my backpack and headed back to find Nicky. I had drained the rabbit's blood into the smaller jar earlier. Nicky was kind enough to put it on my back again. She sat beside me as she slowly applied the blood, "I can't believe how much it has closed up since yesterday." "The scab on the front of my shoulder is already loose. It will probably fall off by tomorrow. It had been minor compared to the others though. I will have to try to dodge Nina for a while." "Have you seen that lady? She has a one track mind if she gets a thought in her head." I shrugged, "We have been here for five days and I was shot four days before that. Even if she pulls the scab off that wound, it won't slow me much. The deeper parts of the injury are healing, it is mostly the part by the skin that isn't doing much. Besides, it is my leg that is holding me back. A shoulder injury won't affect my ability to run." Nicky snorted, "Last I heard you had a bullet go straight through your lung and another one grazed your heart. I would be more worried about collapsing from those injuries." I chuckled in dark humor, "The lung and heart itself are healed. It is just the collateral damage that is still healing." "I fail to see how you can possibly know that." I turned my head to watch her over my shoulder, "My appetite is dropping and I am not nearly as tired. That means that the serious damage has healed." She blinked at me, "So that is why you didn't have lunch. I had gotten used to you eating three meals a day, so it kind of stood out." I nodded. I had eaten less for breakfast than usual and I wasn't at all hungry for lunch. I had still gone to the mess hall to sit with Nicky in what was now my usual seat, but I hadn't taken any food. That meant that the worst of the damage had healed. It also meant that my healing rate was going to drop unless I applied blood to the wounds a couple of times a day. Nicky finished and put the bandage back on. I put my shirt on. I would treat my other injuries later on. I knew that Nicky wasn't exactly comfortable with watching the blood being absorbed, so I wouldn't make her unnecessarily uncomfortable. Had I been human, I probably would have had a similar reaction. I leaned against a tree, "It won't be long and we can try to escape. I can probably get out easier than you can at night. I can certainly travel easier since I can see in the dark and it will be easier to cover just my scent. It might be best if you can get transferred to a different Stronghold. I think I once heard that it isn't too hard to get transferred." Nicky chuckled, "After what I have done here so far, it is surprising that they haven't threatened to exile me yet. Getting a transfer is easy, that is how I jumped between six different Strongholds."

I nodded, "Then the only real question is if you will be fine at that location or if you are off your rocker enough that you still want me to pick you up." Nicky tilted her head in consideration, "I still want to go with you." I was stunned. I had not expected her to actually want to travel with me if she could get into a different Stronghold. "Why? I won't be joining another Stronghold, and if I have my way, I plan to avoid people altogether." She frowned as she tried to put her feelings into words, "I am not sure how to explain it. For my entire life, once people hung around me for a few days they started to avoid me or were even somewhat scared of me. Given a chance, they didn't want to be around me. I have had so many lie to me or give false excuses that I simply can't count them all." She looked at me somberly, "You have never done that. You have never lied to me. You have seen some of my absolute craziest moments and they don't faze you, even though I know I tried your patience more than any sane person would." She sighed as her shoulder slumped, "You are the closest thing I have ever had to a true friend. I honestly don't care if you are rough around the edges and growl at me. I would rather travel with you and dodge feral zombies on a daily basis than stay in a Stronghold where I know I will never entirely be welcomed." I sat silently. I simply did not have words at the moment. She had laid her heart open and I could tell from her scent that her words were a brutally honest declaration that could not have been easy for her to say. She watched me silently as she waited for my response. I finally turned my head to directly face her and spoke quietly, "Just make sure I know how to find whatever place you get transferred to and I will come for you." She nodded silently with a hopeful light in her eyes. 
 
 Nicky seemed to have taken it upon herself to bring me supper. I glanced over as Nicky came into view with a second shadow trailing her, "Hi Liz." The bubbly girl beamed at me, "Hi Trinity! I get to eat with you again!" Nicky passed me my plate as we sat down. I passed some of the food on my plate to Nicky before I started eating, there was too much for me and she was more than happy to eat it. I murmured to Nicky, "I am quite surprised that Marissa let her come again." Nicky made a face as she quietly replied, "Marissa has no idea she is with us. From what I overheard she is under the impression that she is helping out in the kitchen. Apparently some observers from the other night are hoping that you might get attached to the girl and stay just because of her. They plan to mislead Marissa as long as they can so she isn't aware of where Liz is. Oh, and I didn't tell you this either." Liz looked up, "Can we do archery again?" I knew nothing about kids. How did one entertain a seven year old? Archery was not the first thing that came to mind. "Sure." It didn't take us long to finish our meal. We walked down to the deserted archery area. Everyone was still eating or gossiping inside. I hated to break it to them, but I wasn't about to remain here just because one kid liked me. She had foster parents and two hundred other humans to care for her. The perk of spending time with her was that other people, including Nina and Daniel, would keep their distance as they hoped that we would bond. I stood behind Liz as she was attempting to nock the arrow herself tonight. Nicky was still insulting her bow as she failed to hit the center ring in the target. 

"Ugh! This bow is defective!" I glanced over to see Nicky glaring at her bow as if it were an arch enemy. I tilted my head, "I think it may be user error." She turned her glare to me and held out the bow, "Then prove it." I walked over to take the bow and snagged an arrow from her quiver. Hopefully I don't embarrass myself too badly. I was being more conscious of my surroundings and was aware that the usual archery crew once more lounged on a deck while watching us. I nocked the arrow and followed my own advice as I took aim. The first arrow barely hit the target. I grabbed another arrow. I was pleased to discover that my Nightstalker instincts helped me correct my aim on each arrow almost automatically. Thirty arrows later I was able to hit the center reliably. Once I had five arrows clustered there, I passed the bow back to a slack jawed Nicky, "You're right. It is defective. Crowbars are much better. They would have at least dented it." Nicky kept glancing between the bow in her hands and the target. She shook her head and went to collect her arrows since her quiver was empty. Liz was excited, "Can you help me hit the center?!" I knelt by Liz as I tried to help her aim properly. Part of her problem was that her arms were not strong enough to hold the bow steady as she let go of the string. With a sigh I held the bow just above the arrow and let her release the string. It helped a bit, although she still never hit the center of the target. I heard stomping footprints approaching and turned my head. Marissa was not impressed to find me so close to Liz again. Her hands were in fists and the smell of her anger rolled off her. She had been avoiding me more and more lately and was trying to keep Liz away as well, although I wasn't sure why. Behind her, the group on the deck was frowning as Marissa once more interrupted our archery session. She waited until she was close enough to speak without shouting. Her voice clearly conveyed her anger although she kept her voice quiet as she relied on intensity over volume, "Trinity. I really wish you would stop luring Liz away. Just... Just stay away from her, or... or else-" My sharp growl cut across field as I slowly turned my body to directly face in her direction in a challenge as her stance and threats hit my instincts like hairspray hitting a candle flame. Marissa froze with wide eyes, her scent turning to fear. My voice had a faint growl in it, "If you are going to try threatening me, then I advise you to come back with a weapon so I take you halfway seriously." The people on the deck looked shocked. They had obviously heard my growl and our discussion. It was another clear case of people forgetting what I truly was. Nicky was the only one unfazed by my growl. She fired another arrow at the target as she commented, "Besides, Trinity won't even enter the mess hall during supper, so I fail to see how she lured Liz away." Marissa looked stunned at Nicky's comment as she realized the truth behind them. She rapidly shook her head as if confused and held out her hand, "Liz, come on sweety, let's go." Liz looked confused as to what had just occurred, but handed me her bow and quiver before heading over to Marissa. I found it strange that Liz hadn't been bothered by my growl. Marissa wasted no time in dragging her away as fast as possible. I watched until she left the field before shaking myself like a dog with a low growl. Nicky attempted to distract me, "How about you show me how to hit the center?" I raised an eyebrow in disbelief, "You want me that close to you in my current mood?" Nicky snorted, "You have to do more than merely growl to catch my attention. Get over here and help me figure out how to turn the safety switch off." I shook my head as I came closer, "Bows don't have a safety switch." "They must have one because the center of that target is one hell of a safe place at the moment." Five minutes later Nicky finally hit the center with my assistance and cheered. I exhaled gustily, "About time. I am done. My patience is shot." "See you tomorrow!" She was more than eager to see if she could replicate the feat on her own. I headed towards my room. It was a safe enough place and smelt more like me after staying there for five days. Luck was finally with me as I didn't see or scent Nina or Daniel on my way. I opened up the jar of deer blood and grabbed another syringe. I wouldn't be able to dump it all on my wounds in one round, the heat would get too hot as it focused on that spot. I had the rest of the evening and all night to work on it though.

 

Chapter 41


 I exited the building and headed towards the mess hall for breakfast. I rounded the corner and paused as I noticed four younger men running in my direction.  They noticed me and swerved to run wider around me. One called out in a hushed voice as he ran by, "Run before she sees you!" I could only think of one reason for people to be running like that at this time of the morning. "Free hugs for everyone!!!" You have got to be kidding me... This was not how I hoped to start my day. Two more people rounded the corner in a full blown run. Nicky appeared around the corner in hot pursuit of them with a maniac grin plastered across her face. I do not recall this being part of our deal. I crossed my arms as I held my ground, my instincts refused to run from an unarmed human, even if she was in lunatic mode. Nicky ran towards me with arms outstretched, thinking I was an easy stationary target. I don't think so... I growled at her lightly as I uncrossed my arms and held out one hand to keep her from getting close. She made a few attempts, but my swifter reflexes and greater strength gave me the upper hand as I kept her at arm's length and unable to hug me. She gave up with a groan, "You are no fun." I rolled my eyes, "And that is precisely why I am not invited to any parties." She yawned and we headed for breakfast. I noticed that it was oddly quiet as we entered the mess hall. I looked around and saw that it was pretty empty, possibly because many of the early risers had heard Nicky's calls for hugs and had decided to be fashionably late today.  We didn't even have to wait in line because there was no lineup. Nicky stuffed her face once we sat down. I noticed that more people trickled in as word spread that she had calmed down. We were getting more attention than usual, which was stirring my instincts. Once we finished, Nicky went off to see what her chores were for today and I headed to the kitchen as per usual. 
 
 I sat on the roof watching the activity spread throughout the Stronghold as people worked. I had tried to rest, but even the lightest nap would not come this afternoon and I had tried for several hours already. It was a sign that my healing was rapidly diminishing. The scab on my head had fallen off last night, which might have been the reason for some of the stares I had received this morning. The two remaining scabs on my chest wouldn't be far behind and would probably fall off in a couple of days. Despite the level of damage in my leg previously, my doctoring had done wonders. It didn't even pain me now. I still kept to a slow walk to throw off the ever-watching humans, but I could run for a short distance without harming it if I needed to. It would probably be a week before that scab fell off, but I could likely make a run for it in about five days. Nicky was going to talk to someone today about getting a transfer. She would likely travel with one of the groups going to trade and there were two such trips scheduled in the next week. I planned to leave a day or two after she did. Another side effect of my slowing healing was that my energy was no longer being solely channeled into healing and I was getting restless. It had been ten days since the bullets hit me and I had done almost nothing but sit the entire time. I was seriously tired of sitting. I started pacing a bit, trying to take the edge off my building energy and impatience. I wanted to leave this place and it was like an itch I couldn't scratch. That caged feeling was coming back, it reminded me of cabin fever where you felt like you simply had to get out. It was similar to, but yet different from when Ben and Hank had kept us closed up in that grocery store for three days.

I gave up pacing and headed for the stairs. I walked along the perimeter of the fence while watching for a particular redhead. Several people seemed surprised to see me walking instead of relaxing on the rooftop. It was about my usual time to track down Nicky, so it shouldn't be unusual. I found her leaning under the hood of a truck with two men. I was amused to see that she was standing on the bumper since she was too short to see well enough from the ground. Nicky was talking a hundred miles an hour, "You can easily splice these two wires to bypass the security on the starting mechanism. But never cross this wire with this wire, and take my advice, don't let them touch the battery posts once they are crossed. You get fireworks and it would take three small miracles to ever get the vehicle running again." The men were listening intently. I leaned against the wall and simply observed them since they weren't aware of my presence. Nicky kept pointing out other wires. From her comments, I had a feeling that she had crossed almost every wire ever put into a vehicle since she knew exactly what the result would be. Nicky shifted to point to a further wire and the man beside her uneasily moved away from her although he was still listening. I kept watching their body language. They were willing to listen to her, but they really weren't comfortable around her. The avoidance was slight, but noticeable. Nicky sighed as she jumped off the bumper. She noticed me, "Hey Trinity, sorry I didn't see you there. Hope you weren't waiting too long." The two men jumped a bit as they became aware of me. I shrugged, "Not really." She dug around in her pockets before holding up a key, "Ah, got the key here. Let's go." I walked with her as we headed to the side by side. I was no longer scared for my life when Nicky got into the driver's seat. She had been driving well enough to even satisfy Hank. We drove along the familiar path in the forest as we headed towards the live traps. Nicky turned off the engine once we arrived and sighed, "My transfer got declined." I furrowed my eyebrows in confusion, "Why? I thought that transfers were almost never refused." Nicky frowned, "It doesn't make any sense. Transfers are rarely declined since no one wants an unhappy person stirring the pot. Besides, every other Stronghold I have ever been in was more than willing to drive me to another place the very next day as long as I didn't return." "Did they give a reason?" Nicky snorted, "Apparently the other Strongholds are full and can't take any more people. Which is bullshit. This place trades with eight different places on a regular basis and I have never heard of a place being so full that they would turn away another set of working hands." Bloody hell... There goes our best plan. A growl rumbled through my chest as my irritation built, "Which only means one thing..." She nodded, "They decided that I make it easier for you to stay here and they probably won't even let me try to walk to the nearest Stronghold. Although if you think about it, in the truck they always put me closest to you since you seemed to have more tolerance when it came to me." It was my turn to snort, "It had nothing to do with my level of tolerance. You simply didn't give a shit if I growled at you." She chuckled, "No, and I still don't. But we should have guessed their answer. After my little meeting I managed to overhear a few things as word spread that I attempted to transfer out. Everyone here knows that zombies don't like physical contact and the fact that you willingly came into contact with both Liz and I several times caught their attention. Apparently Nina is the only one here who dares to so much as lay a finger on Daniel and even she gives him his space." I rubbed my temple as I realized how this group would have seen our interactions. Now that I thought about it, I had only seen Nina touch Daniel twice and both times had been in the truck. Once when I had snarled at the passing Runner and she was trying to calm him. The second time had been when he had leaned over to see her notes and their arms had brushed. I had come into contact with Nicky at least half a dozen times during that same time frame. Liz had sat on my lap, but they had not seen me come into contact with any other person in our party. Nina and Daniel had been watching me far too closely to have missed those details. Nicky continued, "There is lots of whispering going on and I couldn't catch most of it without getting caught, but people noticed that the scab above your ear had fallen off and there is just light pink skin there now. They also noticed that you were pacing earlier this afternoon. They are starting to get worried and that isn't a good thing." I exhaled gustily, "I can't really help it. I feel like a lion in a cage. People here first saw me when I was seriously injured, but I am getting back on my feet. Things are going to change. You remember what I was like when we were on the road previously." Nicky chuckled, "Oh, I remember, but towards the end you were handling it better than you had before. You may not want to admit it, but you were getting used to us. You might have wanted Daniel to vanish into thin air and probably wouldn't have minded taking a chunk out of Kal, but you weren't quite so uptight around the rest of us towards the end." I huffed, "Doubtful." I got out of the side by side to go check on the traps, but my mind kept circling back to Nicky's comment. Some days that lady was just too darn observant for her own good or for my peace of mind. Especially when she was correct. There were two rabbits today. I found Nicky in a small clearing not far from the side by side and she once more helped me doctor up the wound on my back. She gently ran a gloved finger over the scab once she was done, "There is a big piece here that is starting to stick up." I groaned faintly, "I figured as much. I felt it catching on the bandage earlier when I moved. It should straighten itself out as it heals, if not, we can try cutting it once we have escaped from this place." Nicky put a bandage over it and didn't reply. I put my shirt on before following my nose. It had become our habit to go berry picking. I picked up the scent of a nearby patch of berries that we had not visited yet. I wouldn't need supper tonight after my snacking. Time passed far too quickly and I climbed onto the side by side with a reluctant growl. "I wonder what the odds are of us intercepting another Stronghold's trading group on their way back to their base and tagging along." Nicky started the ATV, "Slim to none. This place mostly sends out its own trading groups. People rarely come here to trade and I am sure that they would watch us like hawks the second that anyone else arrived." I gritted my teeth as I watched the trees go by. I went back to rolling ideas around that allowed me to escape with Nicky. Had it just been humans trying to track us, it would have been simple. The problem was that it would be Daniel on our trail the second they thought that we might have left. That changed everything.

 

Chapter 42


 Nicky once more brought me a plate, which was more for appearance's sake than anything else. I nibbled on an apple slice, but Nicky ate everything else. Liz didn't accompany Nicky this time. Nicky stacked the two dirty plates, "So what is our plan for the evening? By the time I finished last night my aim was good enough that Ben was scared, although it might have just been the fact that I had a bow in my hands. He didn't know I had been practicing." "I never really had been into archery. I thought I heard someone talking about a place we could practice throwing knives?" Nicky nodded and pointed with her thumb over her shoulder, "Yeah, it is in the back of the second garage. Two lanes. I doubt anyone goes there after supper since there are targets out behind the hotel that they prefer to use in good weather." I glanced at the garage she was pointing towards, "Trying my hand at knife throwing sounds much more appealing to me." She chuckled, "Well, if you are throwing knives, then I am keeping out of your way. I will go torment that bow again. One of these days it is going to throw in the towel and quit fighting me." I shook my head as I got to my feet. I felt the one edge of the scab over my heart pull and come loose. It wasn't going to stay on for more than a day or two if the edges were starting to let go. I headed down the stairs and went in the direction of the garage. Nicky had been correct, no one was here. Half a dozen windows let in plenty of light even for humans to see in this place. I eyed up the ten knives of various sizes that were carefully arranged on a tray. I picked up the smallest one and tested its balance before throwing it. I frowned as the hilt hit the target. I had tried throwing knives in the past and I had sucked at it. Looks like the trend was going to continue to hold true. I picked up the next knife and tried again. My Nightstalker instincts were apparently of no use when I was throwing a knife. I had thrown each of those ten knives dozens of times and the blades had only stuck in the target six times. The knives hit the center of the target without fail, but I just couldn't seem to get the tip of the blade to hit at the precise angle that was required for the knife to sink into the target. I growled lightly in frustration as I went to collect them again. I heard familiar footsteps, but didn't bother turning around as I collected the various knives from the floor. Only one was actually in the target. I rolled my shoulders slightly as Daniel's scent reached me. I picked up the last knife as I turned around to walk back to the throwing line. Daniel leaned against the wall by the doorway and watched me silently. I turned my attention back to the target and threw another knife. He watched without a word as eight of the knives bounced off the target one after another. I snorted, "And this is why I prefer a crowbar. Considering I haven't killed anyone yet, when can I have my sickle back?" He shrugged, "You really don't need weapons in here. I would rather wait until your injuries have healed up." I growled faintly in annoyance, "If anything did happen, then a weapon gives me the advantage I need until these blasted injuries heal." My pitiful attempts at knife throwing were not helping my temper. Daniel was watching me fairly closely as I whipped another knife at the target. This one at least stuck in the target, even if it was on the far side of the center ring and barely hanging on. I wondered what thoughts were rolling through his mind. "I saw you pacing on the roof earlier. You seem a bit more restless than usual." I should have known that people would have noticed. I huffed, "That is because I am getting more restless."

He tilted his head in intent curiosity, "And why would that be? I don't think I have seen you like this since we arrived." I snorted as I sent him a look of disbelief, "When we first arrived I was so seriously injured that I was sleeping three quarters of the day. I even managed to sleep in the back of moving truck with all of you in it. It certainly wasn't by choice, it is just what the body does when it is trying to patch up what would otherwise be fatal wounds." Daniel blinked in surprise at that tidbit of information. I hadn't actually slept that much, but he had no way of knowing that. With luck it would mislead him a bit. I threw the last knife and growled when it bounced off the target. I went to collect them once again before returning to the throwing line. Daniel looked deep in thought. I threw three knives before I spoke again, "My lung and heart must have mostly healed up since I am no longer sleeping the entire afternoon. I haven't felt any blood in my lung for the last couple of days at any rate. Before I got injured, I quite often went off by myself while we were on the road, not to mention that I often went hunting at night. I have barely moved for an entire week and I have never been around this many people since I turned. So I can't see why you are surprised that I am restless." I balanced a knife in my hand to get the weight of it. It was a nice blade, but if it disappeared people would certainly notice. I hadn't had any luck in snagging one from the kitchen either. I threw the knife only for it to hit sideways. Daniel was silent as I threw the last of the knives. I collected them before placing them on the tray. I glanced at him, but he seemed lost in thought although he was still watching me. I put the tray back to where it had originally been sitting. I tilted my head, "Where do you usually hunt? I haven't crossed your trail on the way to where those traps are." "I usually go east or south, although I do circle the Stronghold to check for any trouble." In other words, he was circling the area further out to see if I had wandered out of that section of the forest. I exhaled gustily as I stretched out my throwing arm and rotated it a bit. It was the same one that the bullet had hit. I could feel the nearly healed wound twinge at bit, but it wasn't anything that would slow me. It didn't escape my attention that Daniel's eyes focused on the part of my shirt that hid the old injury. The motion would likely make him think that it was sore. I shook myself lightly, "Well, I am heading for a shower." He nodded, but remained where he was as I exited out the other door. I headed to the secondary building and went up to the third floor to use their showers. Hopefully it would help me avoid Nina. I took care not to touch the scabs in case they fell off. An injury always looked worse if there was a big scab on it. Miracle of miracles, I actually managed to get to my room without Nina appearing. That was two days that she had not seen my injuries. I watched as the sun approached the horizon while debating on different ways to confuse the scent trail that Nicky and I would leave until we found a vehicle. We had several old water bottles filled with gas that we had siphoned from the side by side. They were hidden in the forest. I was glad that I hadn't tried to scout out a road to find something that just needed gas to run. Daniel's nose may not be as sharp as mine, but if he crossed near my trail he would certainly know it. The longer he thought I was incapable of traveling long distances, the better it would be for me. Nicky was having no luck tagging along with a group outside of the fence for any type of work to see if she could spot such a vehicle. There hadn't been any such vehicle along the road we came in on, which left only two other main roads. Our best plan at the moment was to aim for a nearby small town shown on the map and hope to find something out of gas.

I sighed heavily as I tried to relax and sleep a bit. 
 
 The staff in the kitchen had grown accustomed to my presence in the far corner. The odd breaks in conversation had almost entirely disappeared as they got better at avoiding anything leading to the subject of zombies. I joined Nicky at the corner table for lunch. I didn't bother grabbing a plate since I wasn't hungry. The sight of Nina and Daniel entering the room had me restraining a growl. I should have known that avoiding them in this small place would be next to impossible. Nina grabbed a plate while Daniel skipped this meal and simply walked beside her. The crowd gave him about as much room as they gave me. The general unwritten rule for the humans here seemed to be to allow at least an arm's length of room between themselves and zombies. I still couldn't figure out why he followed her like a close friend or a bodyguard. Nicky had no luck in discovering anything about what these two did or even where they were during the day. The secrecy did not alleviate my suspicious nature any. Predictably, Nina and Daniel sat at our table. I tried to shove my instincts lower to appear normal. Nina glanced at the empty table in front of me, "Not hungry?" I shrugged, "I had a large breakfast and I tend to snack on berries when Nicky takes me out in the afternoon." Her eyes moved to my head, "I see the scab on your head fell off." I exhaled slowly, "My hairbrush caught it the other morning. Thankfully it didn't bleed." She nodded, "That is good. I think I should check the others after lunch." I wasn't sure whether to compare Nina to a mother hen or a nurse at this point in time. I shook my head, "No need. They are healing normally. Nothing looks out of place and this isn't the first time I have been shot." Like any experienced nurse, she wanted to see the injury with her own eyes. Nina's voice was still kind, "There is no harm in me checking. Particularly that one on your back since you can't see it." I was already known to be a stubborn patient, so they wouldn't think anything of my aversion of having people examine my wounds. My irritation was becoming more noticeable. "Thanks, but I will pass." Daniel focused his eyes on me as they took on a redder hue. His warning growl rumbled loudly enough that I saw Nicky glance at him. My muscles tensed automatically as I focused on the Terror. This was reminding me of our trip in the truck far too much for my liking. Only this time my escape wasn't as simple as jumping out of the back of a moving truck. His voice had a growl in the undertone, "She is only trying to help. She pulled the bullets out in the first place. The only other doctor in this place is a man, and I know you wouldn't even consider letting him check your injuries." I growled faintly in frustration, but looked away as I conceded defeat. I was no match for a Terror even before I had been injured. Once more, I didn't have a choice. I could either give in gracefully or be forced into it. If I resisted too much, they would get suspicious. I had always tried to get out of letting anyone near my injuries in the past, so right now they were just blaming my reactions on my usual stubborn Nightstalker nature. I reluctantly followed Nina to the small room. Daniel remained in the waiting room once more, possibly in case I gave Nina more difficulty. Nina raised her eyebrow and with a huff of irritation I slowly removed my shirt. There were no bandages on my chest, just the square ones on my leg and back.

Her eyes widened the second she got a look at my chest. The small injury by my collar bone was a pink scar and the skin around my other two scabs wasn't even red. She had obviously not expected this rate of healing. Truth be told, I hadn't healed this fast last time either. Nina spoke in a soft shocked tone, "I can't believe how much these have closed up..." She came forward and gently touched the scar on my shoulder. She moved her hand to the apricot sized scar over my heart. The corner on that one was slightly lifted. She carefully tried to push the raised edge down. With a barely audible crackling noise the scab came completely free and lay in her gloved hand. She inhaled in surprise. The skin beneath was bright red and irritated, but it had completely closed over. She put the scab on the counter with slightly shaking hands. She turned to the remaining scab from the bullet that hit my lung. It wasn't as large as the one that had pierced my heart. Nina gently pushed on the scab and I growled lightly at her, "That one is still sore. It won't come loose for at least four or five days yet." She nodded and left it alone. She moved to my leg and lifted up the leg on my shorts. Nina blinked as she noticed that this one still had an adhesive bandage over it. She carefully peeled it back. The wound on my leg may have healed a lot, but it still had quite a ways to go. The skin around the scab was irritated and red from how the scab pulled as I walked despite the fact that there was polysporin on it to keep it soft. In truth, it looked worse than it actually was. Nina looked oddly reassured at the sight of the painful wound. She is probably relieved that my mobility is still hampered... I had done a lot of damage to it when I had run from this place on that first day. If it hadn't been for that incident, it would probably be at the same point as the other injuries. I gritted my teeth as she poked at it a bit before I moved my leg away from her. She glanced at me, but took the hint. The scab was quite clearly a long ways away from falling off. She put more polysporin on it and put a new bandage on it. I stilled as she moved behind my back. My instincts were screaming at me and the hair on the back of my neck rose as my fighting reactions were being triggered. Nina peeled the bandage off and paused for a moment. It had probably surprised her. I knew that that wound had healed by leaps and bounds with Nicky's help. It was even in better shape than my leg was. "That flap of skin is lifting once more. I am afraid that I need to remove this scab again so it remains in contact with the rest of your skin." That was not what I wanted to hear, even though it was probably the best course of action. I growled my distaste of that idea, "That hurt like hell last time. I don't care if it scars, just leave it. No one is going to see it." Daniel growled from the other room, I was guessing that he didn't like how much I had been growling in here. Nina sighed, "Sorry, but it really has to be done. I didn't mean to hurt you last time. I think I see a bit of dirt or something as well, so I need to make sure that there isn't any more in the wound." I shook my head fiercely, "My body will push any dirt or even bullets out as it heals. If you see it, it is because my body is rejecting it. It will continue to push it out." My argument didn't deter her focus. "I know it won't get infected, but a clean wound still heals faster. The flap needs to be put back down. You know it needs to be done." My muscles tensed as she started pulling up bits of the soft scab and trimming it. Nina sighed, "This piece of the scab is anchored right to the skin. It is going to hurt regardless of what I do. Do you want me to keep trying to slowly cut it free, or just yank it off? There is only a pea sized section that I can't easily get free." I did not want to sit here for another five minutes while she slowly tried to work it free. Each of those little tugs were slowly making the wound painful. I just wanted it over and done with. I growled faintly, "Just yank it off." I didn't have to wait more than a few seconds for the hot fire of pain. I clenched my jaws with a deep growl that echoed throughout the room. It took all of my control not to turn and strike the one causing the pain. I seriously debated about not allowing her to clean the wound again, but that would likely destroy any possibility of an escape. It was better if they thought I was still naïve. I could handle having a bit of the scab pulled off if it meant that my chances of successfully escaping were better. It wasn't as if this would be the first time she had collected my blood without me knowing. Besides, she had given me the option and the first one wouldn't have let any blood flow. The immediate pain dulled to a throbbing as I took several deep breaths. I felt Nina moving something slightly cold against my back and I guessed that it was a vial to collect blood that flowed out from where that part of the scab had been. Nina apologized, "Sorry, that was the worst of it. Just hang on a bit more so I can clean it and get the bleeding stopped." I gritted my teeth as I suppressed a low growl as she once more gently washed the wound. The injury was once more sore and my instincts were raging behind my control as they were fully aware that she had once more collected my blood. My control was strained and my temper was unpredictable due to my enraged instincts. My anger built and my temper kindled as I waited for her to finish. A long minute later she had finished whatever she was doing and put a new bandage on. I swiftly put my shirt on and stormed to the door, throwing it open hard enough for it to bang against the wall. Just because I let her do it, didn't mean that it hadn't rubbed me completely the wrong way. I didn't look back although I could smell Nina's sudden surprise and worry. I went the other way down the hallway to exit out the back door just to avoid passing by Daniel. I wouldn't be able to tolerate him in my current foul mood. I headed straight for the gate, not willing to spend the time to track down Nicky. I doubted that I could bear her presence at the moment. My instincts were up and my walk was closer to a stalk.  My posture clearly proclaimed me as a Nightstalker.

 

Chapter 43


 The person guarding the gate looked surprised to see me going out on foot, but after one glance at my expression, he opened up the gate even before I got there. I held myself to a fast walk as my temper bubbled like a hot pot on a stove. Something was going to die today. I headed in the familiar direction of the rabbit traps. I knew that the guard would run to find Daniel if I went in a different direction. I had kept my pace to a walk to also prevent any observers from racing off to locate Daniel. As it was, he would probably come track me down before too long. It was a bit of a walk, but I got there within fifteen minutes. I occasionally struck out at random trees in my rage, leaving deep claw marks in the bark. I sniffed the air and growled faintly before leaving the path to stalk through the trees. I stalked in closer to the source of the smell. The rabbit had likely died of a heart attack, but the small black bear was still trying to break into the live trap. It was oblivious to my presence as I crept closer. I bared my teeth in a silent snarl before launching myself onto its back. It tried to run from the sudden attack, but I had a good grip on its fur. I grabbed its neck and gave a hard twist. The snap was loud as the bear collapsed into the leaf litter. I still didn't have any weapons and had to rely on my nails to shave some of the fur away. The hot blood was welcome. It had been a long time since I had hunted a bear and it was a welcome change. I made sure to doctor my leg wound as well. If Nina was going to insist on checking my remaining injuries every three days, then I wanted to be gone before the next time rolled around. I left the bear where it was. I wasn't going to try hauling that around, especially considering how much my shoulder hurt. The wind shifted and I could faintly pick up Daniel's scent. He was likely running a much wider perimeter to double check that I was still inside this piece of forest. I had zero desire to have to deal with the Terror. My instincts tried to prod me to go in a certain direction and I followed them, partly out of curiosity. Sometimes my instincts picked up more than I did consciously. I had just hunted, it was daytime, and I was in pain so my instincts wanted to go to ground and hole up. Once more the perceptiveness of my instincts surprised me. As I got closer, I could smell the damp air that could only be a cave. A small tickle of water exited the cave that was barely visible in the side of a rocky hillside. It was large enough for me to walk right into. I didn't realize that this was here. Why didn't I stumble across it earlier considering how close it was to the rabbit traps? I cautiously entered the cave and followed it. It was a single curving tunnel that went back to a slightly larger room. A creek as wide as my hand escaped from a crack in the wall before it flowed towards the entrance. Most of the tunnel was pitch black and the room at the end was so dark that only a Nightstalker could truly appreciate it. I looked around, it was perfect for a Nightstalker without any eye protection. It was actually dim with my welding glasses on. A feral would have readily moved in if it had come across it. I took a deep breath, but I didn't pick up any hint of zombie other than my own scent. Daniel's scent was quite sharp due to him being a Terror and he ran such a large perimeter that any Nightstalker wouldn't get close enough to scent the humans. They would avoid the area due to the resident Terror, never realizing the potential food source hidden deep within his 'territory'. Had they realized it, Daniel's scent would not have stopped them from coming. "Trinity? Are you in there?" Speak of the devil and he shall appear... I narrowed my eyes in displeasure. It was a pity that there was no second exit out of this place. I crossed my arms and leaned against the cave wall to wait. The cool wall actually felt good on my shoulder. I didn't bother answering him. Perhaps he would leave.

A deep sigh and approaching footsteps told me that my wish had not been granted. A sudden brightness around the corner proved that Daniel packed that flashlight everywhere. I regretted picking it up for him. The light got brighter before rounding the corner. I growled lowly as the light hit my already narrowed eyes. Daniel pointed the light towards the floor now that he had found me. His voice was confused, "Why didn't you answer me?" Now that the light wasn't pointed at me, I could see that he actually had to duck a bit due to the height of the cave roof. I didn't even come up to his collarbone so the roof had been plenty high enough for me. I remained silent, wishing he would just leave me in peace. He furrowed his eyebrows in confusion at my silence. I saw his nostrils flare slightly as he tested the air. My own scent was sharp from my pain and was also tainted with the slowly drying blood under the bandage. I knew he would have no problem detecting it. He tried again, "Are you okay?" I snorted, "I just had someone rip off a scab on a large healing wound. I doubted that you would have fared any better if a stranger came up behind you and ripped some of your skin off with a pair of pliers." It was a huge exaggeration and we both knew it, but I was in a bad mood. His eyes flashed red at my tone and I bared my teeth at him silently. I was in no mood for his crap, although I knew that I wouldn't win if it came to a fight. He seemed to realize it as he clenched his teeth in an effort to rein in his own temper. Although if he did attack me, it would give me a very good reason to leave if I claimed that it was proof that we simply couldn't get along long term. It took him some time before he spoke again, "Just why are you in a cave?" I sighed heavily in irritation, "You wouldn't understand." He glanced around the room before leaning on the wall across from me, "Try me." I huffed in disbelief, "Turn off the flashlight." His muscles tensed as he growled faintly at the very thought of it. His eyes were now a dull red as either he no longer bothered to camouflage them or he was too worked up to control his eye color. He narrowed his eyes as he watched me closely. To my great surprise, he turned the flashlight off. From his stance, he obviously expected me to try to attack him. The fact that I was still unarmed was probably the only reason he even considered the idea. I reached up to remove my sunglasses. His eyes focused on my red ones. My eyes were glowing more strongly than his were, partly from the pain and partly from how worked up I was. At the very least, I could make him uncomfortable and give him something else to think about. I was quite certain that Nina would be asking for a word by word breakdown of our conversation after the way I had left the examination room. I tilted my head as I lowered my voice to something more suited for a late night creepy campfire story, "Do you feel that prickle along your skin and in your veins while you are in this cave? Even though the sun shines above the ground, this darkness reminds you of the night time. You feel like this because it isn't your element. Could you imagine feeling this all day? I am perfectly aware of exactly when the sun is above the horizon. Sometimes I simply want nothing to do with the daylight." It was a bit of a stretch, but true enough. My humanity allowed me to enjoy the day if my irritation and instincts didn't get in the way. I doubted that he was aware of that though, since he completely detested the dark as it went against both his human and Terror preferences. Daniel was watching me as he likely committed my long speech to memory. I could tell that the darkness was grating on him.

He glanced around before refocusing on my glowing eyes, "How did you find this cave anyways? I have traveled through this forest for months and never knew it was here." He must have followed my scent here. "I only found it today. When my instincts are high enough, they are very good at finding shelter from the sun." He sighed heavily, "Why don't we head back? Nicky was worried when you took off like that." It seemed to be a constant tactic of his to bring up acquaintances in a conversation when he was trying to calm me down or trying to convince me to come back. I narrowed my eyes, "I doubt she is overly worried. She is quite easily distracted. Besides, my leg will heal enough for travel in a couple more weeks and I will head back home." That comment jolted him out of whatever he had been planning on saying next. His body tensed up slightly, "Why? Everyone I have spoken to wants you to stay." If he took my comment seriously, they would shift their plans with a new deadline occurring in roughly two weeks. I planned to be gone within the next five days. They had already been quite worried that I would disappear, hopefully this would keep them from jumping the gun on any plans. I gazed up at the ceiling, "It just isn't working well for me. The people are definitely much nicer than anyone I have ever met, even before I turned, but the constant presence of so many people is driving me crazy. Nightstalker instincts and crowds simply do not mix." He shook his head, "The entire place wants you to stay. No other place is going to accept a zombie. Honest, I have been to quite a few in the past, so I speak from experience. You surpassed everyone's expectations so far. If the sunlight and crowds bother you, you could always act as a night guard. That position would suit you perfectly and few people are up at night." I blinked slowly, it was odd knowing that I could see him perfectly although he could only see my eyes because they were glowing. "I miss the cool crisp mountain air from back home. It was always so peaceful and quiet. I set my own schedule and did what I wanted whenever I felt like it." I growled faintly as my irritation built, "It is difficult to constantly watch my actions so I don't scare someone too badly. The stares I get now are bad enough and I haven't even snarled directly at anyone yet. I can only imagine what they would think if I feinted a slash at someone who pushed me too far. They would probably kick me out, so I will just save them the trouble of doing so." Daniel watched me intently as he sensed pent up emotions underneath, "They won't kick you out for that. What has you so worked up? Why is it so bad to stay here? Just stay longer, give it three or four months and see how it goes. You will get accustomed to things before you know it. Besides, it will be hard to find food once the stores are picked clean." His constant arguments aggravated me, although that wasn't hard to accomplish in my current mindframe. This entire situation ticked me off and I was tired of being pushed around against my will. It also fired up my rather short temper. My growl deepened with my worsening mood, "I had never planned on even stepping foot inside this place, let alone staying. Why do you want me here so badly? Having me around must rub your instincts the wrong way. I can feel it too, you know." My temper had flared and I was starting a good rant, "My instincts are suspicious and people don't stare at you the same way they stare at me. It is almost as if they are hiding something and I don't like it." I gritted my teeth, I hadn't meant to have such an outburst. It was the penalty of being a Nightstalker. If something was bothering or irritating me, I tended to wear my emotions for all to see. Nightstalkers, and presumably all zombies, were not good at bottling things up. If we tried, things tended to explode like an over-pressurized steam cooker He bared his teeth and growled lowly at my display of temper. His eyes brightened as his own instincts were rising, "They are curious, everyone heard rumors about how temperamental Nightstalkers are and you have turned every rumor on its head. They are familiar with me and know what to expect. Everyone wants you here because they know that I am not that dependable once it gets dark outside. As you mentioned, you are perfectly adapted for the night." I felt somewhat cornered in this room with him by the only exit and it riled my temper up something fierce. Daniel was getting similarly worked up by the small dark space that he couldn't even stand straight up in. He was obviously determined to overturn any argument I could come up with. Both of our tempers were rapidly worsening. I couldn't really afford a fight since it would re-open my injuries and delay my escape even more. I knew I wouldn't win either. I tried to control my own raging temper before I did something that I would regret later. Either way, we both really had to calm down. I shrugged petulantly, although he wouldn't see the motion. My voice was peeved, "I am still stuck here for at least two weeks to allow my leg to heal enough for such a long journey. The humans have plenty of time to get tired of my presence or decide that I am too dangerous to have around." I growled in frustration and shook my head in annoyance as I put my sunglasses back on, "Let's get out of here before this place lets my instincts have a freer run with my temper." Daniel wasted no time in turning on the flashlight while keeping it aimed at the floor. He was beside the exit and I waited for him to move. I didn't want to pass by him with this much tension in the air. He motioned me to exit first. I narrowed my eyes, but went first. My muscles were tense as I passed by him, but he didn't do anything. The hair on the back of my neck was raised. I really didn't like having him following me even if he gave me a lot of room. He likely didn't want me behind him in a dark place either. Some of the tension left Daniel once he was outside. The sunlight put a damper on my instincts, although I was still in a foul mood. I watched him warily as he focused on me. He must have decided that I was a bit too unpredictable to return to the Stronghold at the moment, "I assume you plan on staying out here for a bit before returning?" I nodded, "It is probably better for everyone if I stay out here until supper." He didn't seem happy, but accept it, "Fine, do you want me to send Nicky out here to keep you company?" I snorted and shook my head, "Unless you are actually trying to get her killed, I advise against it." He narrowed his eyes, but nodded. He slowly and reluctantly left the clearing as he headed back to the Stronghold. I suspected that he wanted me to return with him. It did surprise me that he was willing to leave me out here to have some space. Although he might have just wanted to avoid a potential casualty back in the Stronghold. If I didn't show up by supper I knew that he would be showing up again just to ensure that I didn't decide to take off. I went further into the trees and decided to explore this section of forest. It took a couple of hours, but I knew the rough layout of it now. It was a fairly large section of untouched forest surrounded by fields, no wonder Daniel could check the 'perimeter' so easily. This also left my scent all over. It may pose problems for him when he tried to track me in the future. No road was within sight of this forest, so I was still no closer to finding a potential getaway vehicle. I planned to return before supper just to keep them from getting suspicious. Being alone at long last in the forest was slowly cooling my temper.

 

Chapter 44


 I was still somewhat irritated when I returned to the Stronghold. Nicky was lounging on a bench near the gate. She came over as the guard let me in. "There you are. I was beginning to wonder if I had to grab my trusty bow and start practicing blindfolded in hopes that you would come rescue any poor bystanders. What were you doing out there? Watching where the birds were shitting?" I rolled my eyes and idly swung my hand at her with nails poised for a slash. She ducked my blow, as I expected her to, before she straightened up and sent a mock punch at my shoulder. I let her hit my shoulder, although I barely felt her teasing blow. She drawled in a sarcastic tone, "Yeah, yeah, I missed you too." I snorted and shook my head, "Right." Bizarrely enough, Nicky's sarcastic comments and utter lack of fear somehow defused my temper to something closer to normal. My instincts also saw her as harmless at this point, so her actions didn't really trigger my temper. Nicky somehow also managed to avoid triggering my instincts in the first place. The amount of tolerance I had for this crazy yet loyal woman was bizarre and I had a hard time wrapping my head around it. Anyone else would have been in big trouble if they tried what she did. The guard and a few bystanders were watching the exchange with wide shocked eyes. Nicky grinned at me, "Come on, I'll grab us some food. Want anything in particular? Want to eat on the roof? I can meet you up there." I shrugged, "I wouldn't mind some fruit if there is any. The roof works for me." Nicky grinned, "I can manage that. I'll meet you on the roof." I nodded and headed towards the secondary building as Nicky went to brave the supper rush. My sharp ears picked up hushed and astonished muttering from people who had been watching from a window higher up. "Shit. Did you see that?" "That redhead didn't even look worried. I would have had a heart attack if a zombie tried to slash me." "Yeah, me too. I have no plans to annoy her like that crazy lady does though." "I am amazed that she is still alive. I know that Daniel wouldn't tolerate that sort of thing." Looks like I had astonished them again. Then again, the building friendship between Nicky and me simply went against common sense and logic. Sticking one grouchy Nightstalker with one crazy human bent on annoying the hell out of everyone around her should have been a surefire recipe for disaster. Yet Nicky still lived. Somehow. Nicky brought a small bowl with some various types of sliced fruit in it. I munched on the handful of fruit slowly while watching Nicky slowly mangle a slab of cooked meat. "Why are you using a butter knife?" Nicky made a face, "I tried to take a steak knife, but Ben told me that I wasn't allowed such a dangerous weapon." Considering she was still packing a dagger and that crazy pirate sword, I failed to see his logic. She looked up at me, "Feel like archery afterwards? I have improved." "Sure." It wasn't like I had anything else to do. 
 
 I decided to try the various bows out. Each one fired a bit differently and I took the time to get used to each type. I had no desire to own or carry a bow, so it was strictly for practice or an emergency use. If nothing else, it is making Nicky extremely jealous. My attempts with various bows were also getting some interest from the usual group lounging on the deck. Three people entered the field with a bouncing Liz in tow. I turned to examine the approaching group. All three seemed quite proud that they had managed to steal Liz away from Marissa. 

I tilted my head and sighed faintly, but my voice held slight amusement, "And just what is my excuse supposed to be when Marissa comes looking for her?" The one guy with brown hair grinned triumphantly before looking down at Liz. Liz smiled back up at him and spoke as if she was reciting something, "I am supposed to tell Marissa that some guy with brown hair asked if I wanted to do archery and I said yes." I chuckled. I was definitely in a much better mood now than when I had left earlier, even if my shoulder still throbbed, "Plotting to corrupt the youth?" The man grinned, "I consider it a lesson in accepting others regardless of their differences, so I can't really call it corruption." Nicky came over with a grin, "Well, I call it a great way to get under Marissa's skin. Elevating her blood pressure keeps her cheeks nice and rosy red without the need for makeup." The man shrugged as if the thought didn't bother him in the least before all three of them turned to go. The three had barely taken five steps before I spoke, "Would you three mind doing me a favor?" The three turned with surprised expressions. That was clearly the last thing they had ever expected to hear from me. The woman collected her wits first, "What do you need?" I glanced towards the deck of relaxing archers, "Could you please deliver a message for me? If that group promises to quit staring at me so much, they can come on the field. There is no way for three of us to use fifteen archery lanes regardless of how bad our aim is." Nicky snorted, "Speak for yourself, I make no such promises." The woman nodded as a bit of excitement entered her expression, "Sure, we will pass it on." "Thanks."  I turned back to see Liz already coming out of the shed with her little bow and matching arrow. Nicky raised her eyebrows as she returned to her firing spot, "What was that all about? Since when do you want more humans around?" I smirked at her, "I don't, but there are two very good reasons. One, the entire population will think that I am relaxing and hopefully won't be watching me so closely. Two, if that group is doing archery, then they will be focusing mostly on that and not on staring at us." She shrugged, "That sounds too much like thinking. I hope it works though." I murmured, "So do I." The archery group was thrilled that I had invited them to join us on the field. They were already halfway here. I turned to string Liz's bow while they started stringing their own bows. We were on the furthest side of the archery field so they simply took up the lanes closest to the buildings. They left the lane between them and us open as if ensuring that they didn't crowd us. They sent us some glances, but were putting effort into not actually watching us. Roughly thirty people were sharing twelve archery lanes and taking turns shooting. Some were doing impromptu competitions while others hung back and gossiped while waiting their turn. I kept an eye on Liz as she kept trying out her bow. I wasn't able to relax as I had before with this many humans so close, but she didn't seem to notice. I always made her wait until Nicky went to collect her arrows before letting her go fetch her own. Nicky was definitely improving, but some things were never meant to be tested in real life. A stir in the group beside us caught my attention. There were subtle but urgent whispers as people started moving, it had me watching them from the corner of my eye. I couldn't tell what was going on or hear what they were whispering and it was firing up my suspicious instincts again since they were obviously doing something.

I heard Marissa's voice, "Have any of you seen Liz?" Someone from the archery group replied, "Not lately, have you tried the kitchens or the room where the men play darts?" I inhaled in surprise. They had moved themselves to form a human wall while they had been shuffling around. Marissa was unable to see us on the other side of the carefully arranged group. I had not expected this. My instincts relaxed again as I realized that there was nothing more sinister afoot. Marissa sounded worried, "I checked all of those places. She is usually over here when I can't find her." "The guards wouldn't have let her outside of the fence, so she has to be in here somewhere." "I know, but it is worrying me," Marissa took a deep breath before shouting, "Liz! Where are you?!" Liz was the typical obedient child that most parents would have been proud of. She jumped in surprise and peered in Marissa's direction before calling, "Over here Marissa!" The archers weren't impressed as Marissa went around them at a jog. With the looks they were giving her, I wouldn't have wanted to try pushing my way through that crowd if I had been in her shoes either. Marissa slowed noticeably the second she spotted me standing between Nicky and Liz. Her expression soured, unhappy to find me in the vicinity of her charge once more. "Liz, what are you doing over here?" Liz tilted her head and dutifully replied, "A brown haired man asked me if I wanted to go do archery and I said yes. He brought me over here." A few archers smirked, obviously aware of the cover story as well as the identity of the culprit. Marissa sighed heavily, "You had me so worried when I couldn't find you. You really have to tell me when you are going somewhere." "He said I could go anywhere in the fence if I was polite and listened to the adults." I had a feeling that most of those adults would readily steer her in my direction given half a chance. Marissa shook her head, "You still need to tell me instead of just taking off." I could almost imagine Daniel or Nina telling me those exact same words if they thought I would listen. Marissa took Liz's hand and started leading her away, giving me a dirty look as she passed me. I pulled my lips back from my teeth at her expression. It wiped the look off of her face immediately as she rapidly picked up her pace. I had no clue how she kept forgetting I was a zombie when that was the entire reason she was keeping Liz away from me. It was like she had selective memory. I also wasn't sure why she was getting more and more unfriendly towards me. I hadn't actually done anything to her after all. The archery group gave up their adopted formation as Marissa and Liz left the field. Nicky scowled at the annoying woman before shaking her head, "Well, they tried." I was surprised that Nicky had noticed their actions. It was just more proof that she sometimes saw far more than she ever let on, at least when she wasn't grumpy or going off the deep end. Although she hadn't shown any signs of the really grumpy side of her since she gave up coffee. I shrugged, "Apparently that brown haired guy hasn't corrupted the youth as much as he thought." Nicky chuckled, "We will just have to explain the game to Liz next time." I rolled my eyes, "This is beginning to sound like a weird game of keep away, with a child being the object." Nicky shook her head, "Nah, it is just a test to see who is more stubborn, the locals or Marissa." If I looked at it from that angle, I knew exactly who was going to win in the end. I went to put Liz's bow away. Nicky was still using her last five arrows and I had zero intention on approaching Liz's target while Nicky was firing at the target ten feet away. I was starting to trust her, but not that much. I hung around practicing for another half an hour before I got bored and tired of the small crowd. I put my bow away and wandered back to Nicky, "I am done for the night." Nicky nodded as she loosed her arrow. Over half of her arrows were actually on the target now, instead of barely hitting the board that was holding the target up. "See you tomorrow." I walked wide around the group of archers with a polite nod as quite a few glanced at me as I passed. They nodded back. Most seemed quite happy or proud of themselves. I retreated to my room since I did not feel like having any more company this evening. I sat on my bed and put my back against the wall. My shoulder still ached, firing a bow likely hadn't help it any. Today had been a long day and I hoped that I wouldn't have one like it again. I pulled the jar of red liquid out of my backpack and started doctoring my leg again. I had a feeling I was going to need every edge I could get in the next few days.

 

Chapter 45

            "What?" Surely I had not heard correctly or had misunderstood. Nicky shrugged, but she was even more upset and frustrated than I was at the moment, "They took my key for the side by side. It has been parked beside the guardpost by the north gate and one of the guards will take you if you don't want to walk. Or so I was informed this morning." My vision took on a redder haze as my anger was kindled. I saw no reason for this recent change and I did not appreciate it. The side by side had been tight enough considering how small Nicky was, anyone larger would be bumping elbows with me the entire trip. I might be able to tolerate that from Nicky or Liz, but no one else would be safe from my temper at that proximity. A growl rumbled through my chest, "And just why did they decide this?" She shrugged, "They didn't give me a clear answer." Her expression said that she knew more, but didn't dare repeat them considering there was a group of people washing clothing not far away. Some were talking among themselves, but others had their heads tilted as they subtly eavesdropped on us. I shook myself briskly while clamping down on my temper, "I'll be walking then. Sticking a stranger right beside me in that close of a space is a good way to get someone injured." "You might be concerned about that, but this means that I don't get to take a big chunk of the afternoon off. I actually have to work! To make it worse, they won't let me do most of the chores I want to do. I can't help with the horses, they refuse to let me play with wiring on the solar panels or vehicles, and they won't even let me go hunting despite how much better my aim has gotten!" Once more Nicky's crazy perception of the world caused a tiny thread of amusement to appear amidst the rolling anger. It didn't do much, but the fact that it was there at all was surprising. I snorted, "Nicky, if you are hunting rabbits, you at least have to hit the rabbit. Not the tree behind it." She huffed indignantly, "I am getting better! I am going to find somewhere where my skills are more appreciated." She turned and stomped off. I started walking towards the gate knowing that she wasn't actually upset with me. I hid a smirk as Nicky headed straight for our eavesdroppers to grace them with her presence. Those who had been listening held pained expressions as they saw her heading straight for their group. It looks like Nicky also has a very subtle and strange idea of revenge, but it is one that I can appreciate. The guards didn't comment as they let me walk out. They didn't even offer to drive me, which didn't surprise me. I somehow doubted that any of them wanted to get that close to me. Wanting me to stay in the Stronghold and sitting right beside me when I was clearly annoyed were two very different things. Once I was out of sight in the forest I started jogging. My mind had been replaying this newest aggravation the entire walk and my mood had worsened as I traveled. I didn't damage any more trees, but the local wildlife had better not cross my path until I got to those rabbit traps. Had Nicky been here, I knew that I wouldn't be able to predict what would fly out of her mouth. I finally realized that this was how Nicky had been managing to somewhat ease my temper. Her unpredictable comments completely derailed my line of thought even though she kept to the same subject and never attempted to placate me in an obvious way. Nicky's absence also meant that she couldn't help me doctor my shoulder, not to mention that our discussion of various escape plans were on hold. I would have to get her alone later on and find out what she had overheard. Two of the traps held rabbits and once I had drained them I hung them on a tree to pick up later. I explored the forest again, taking care to not go past the edge in case it made Daniel suspicious. Other than his trail from yesterday, he didn't seem to enter this small forest. His faint scent from further out showed that he did patrol further out in the fields several times a day.

It would not take him long to notice if I left this forest to explore further. I was suddenly glad that I had always mostly hung around in one area with Nicky. When Daniel had come looking for me yesterday, he would have noticed that I had not strayed far from the area with the live traps. He might think that my leg was bothering me more than I was letting on, which would be a typical thing for any predator. I wandered into the cave again, but left it within minutes. It didn't hold my interest, as much as my instincts liked the darkness, even they wanted to be further away from the resident Terror. All of this wandering around in this forest would also spread my scent and make it harder to trace. It was sure to surprise Daniel whenever he realized it. Instead of venting my temper on hapless logs and rocks, I put my energy into preparing our future escape. I took the time to prepare a few components that would help me to break my scent trail before hiding them near the water bottles that contained our pilfered gasoline. Nicky and I would have to grab them and run when we made our escape. With luck, I could cover our trail until we hit that abandoned town and Daniel would thoroughly search this forest for us before ranging further afield. The more he was delayed, the better. 
 
 I returned at my usual time right before supper. Nicky brought me a plate with some fruit, steamed veggies, and fried chicken, but her companions put a damper on my mood. Nina and Daniel had their own plates as they were seated on the lawn chairs on the roof. I tried to hide my unease and suspicion as I tried to act normal. It wasn't easy, but it was necessary. There hadn't been much tension between Daniel and me towards the end of our road trip. The tension had somewhat reappeared and was more noticeable now, although it was due to me, and not Daniel this time. I hoped that he wasn't in touch enough with his instincts to realize the difference. Nina nibbled on a bun, "How is your shoulder?" I glanced in her direction, "Sore." Daniel narrowed his eyes at my short tone, but didn't comment. Nina looked sad, "I'm sorry, I didn't realize that it would have hurt you that much. Your other injuries were more healed." Instead of responding, I chewed on a bit of fried chicken, giving Nina the proverbial cold shoulder with my lack of a response. If she hadn't gotten the hint that I didn't appreciate her constant doctoring of my injuries, then she was likely more than aware of it now. Nightstalkers did not make good patients. Especially if the nurse in question kept bothering them. Nina's saving grace was how well she had Daniel wrapped around her little fingers. I wondered how much it would piss Daniel off if I sent a parcel to him at Christmas that contained a guard dog collar with his name on it. I might have to do that, but I would have to be a long ways away when it arrives. Nicky broke the growing silence, "Feel like archery again after supper?" I shrugged, "Sure. I am not getting anywhere learning to throw knives." Daniel glanced at me, "You were hitting the center of the target each time." I raised an eyebrow, "The point of knife throwing is to actually get the knife to stick into the target. Otherwise it is simply an easy way to pass a weapon to an opponent." His eyes flickered a bit redder before he shrugged without replying. He didn't even carry a belt knife, so he certainly had no room to talk. The rest of the meal was eaten in a somewhat uncomfortable silence. Nina offered to take our plates back for us and I politely thanked her as I passed her mine. I suspected that it was her way of trying to apologize, although it wasn't doing much with the undercover plot afoot.

Nicky and I headed towards the archery area. Two of the archers were already there practicing. We took the two furthest lanes. The archery group seemed to think that if they were invited once that it meant that they were always welcome. The entire group shared the other lanes. Liz didn't make an appearance, although this didn't surprise me with the effort that Marissa was probably putting in to keep Liz away from me. The company meant that I was still unable to speak with Nicky alone without the chance of others overhearing. It was frustrating that it was so hard to manage a private conversation. I picked out the largest compound bow in the shed. It was some sort of heavy draw custom-made thing and I had no clue where they had found it. I tormented it for a bit before my shoulder started twinging. I bid Nicky a good evening before I went to walk the inside perimeter of the fence twice. It may have looked like a casual evening stroll, but it was actually a careful evaluation of the security. I could see two potential ways to get out without being caught. With my assessment complete, I headed back to my room. I had also located Nicky's window. Once it was dark out I would sneak out and go over there. The brick façade wouldn't be an easy climb, but my hard fingernails made it possible. She was on the second story in the hotel. I knew she had a room to herself, so I didn't have to worry about a roommate. My window was open halfway, but I didn't overhear anything besides trivial gossip that didn't interest me. I watched the archery group from my window as the evening wore on. The group took turns shooting, but they never asked Nicky to share her lane. They did occasionally go over and talk to her, so it wasn't that they were actively trying to avoid her. I suspected that it had something to do with the fact that I did spend so much time with Nicky. They were trying to ensure that she felt welcome in this place since she had tried to transfer using the excuse that she liked to travel. She had been to so many Strongholds in the past that it could very well be the truth. She had never stayed in one Stronghold for more than two months. Every time I turned around there seemed to be more layers to their plans. This conspiracy thing was going to drive me nuts. 
 
 I climbed up the rough bricks until I got to Nicky's window. Daniel had been right, once it got dark out almost no one stirred from their rooms. I finally made it to her window sill and reached over to gently tap at the glass. I lowered my glasses a bit so my red glowing eyes could be seen above the edge of the frame. Nicky groggily looked over and jumped a bit before getting out of bed. She staggered over to the window and opened it up so I could climb inside. She yawned, "And for what do I owe the privilege of this visit?" I leaned against the wall by the window as she went to flop on her bed. She didn't seem inclined to turn on any lights so I took my sunglasses off so she could at least tell where I was. "I figure the events of today would count as sufficient." She yawned again, "I did try to come up to your room earlier this evening, but apparently only the residents of the secondary building are allowed inside of that place once the sun starts to set. I was turned back." I growled lowly, "I was not aware of that. I climbed out of my window, so I had no idea that there was even someone watching the entrance. Any idea what prompted them to take away your keys? You didn't go and burn donuts in the garden did you?" "Shit, I should have thought of that. It would have made weeding so much easier." She started muttering about dandelions and stinkweed. I sighed, "Back on track Nicky. I know it is late, but please try to concentrate." She shook her head as she tried to wake up, "The idiots seem to think that you actually enjoy having me piss you off. They are now quite convinced that you would return if I was still here. They are nervous that we would just decide to keep driving on the side by side, so they decided to ensure that I am always inside the fence when you go outside of it." I snarled as my eyes glowed more brightly at the force of my emotions. They had purposefully tried to separate me from the one person here that I trusted. It was very hard to gain my trust and loyalty, but Nicky had managed it. I had always been loyal as a human and being turned into a zombie didn't seem to have affected that trait. People were trying to mess with my friend and that was a huge blunder on their part. I was also the wrong person to piss off. My chest rattled with my growl as I tried to keep quiet to avoid waking the neighbors, "This changes our plans. We can't wait here any longer. My leg has healed up enough that it won't open up and Nina is likely going to try and corner me again the day after tomorrow." Nicky sat up straighter, "There isn't enough time to get far tonight. Are you sure your leg is going to hold up? I know it still gives you trouble." My eyes focused on her, "I'll manage. We will leave tomorrow night as soon as it is dark out. Do you think you can make it to the chicken coop undetected?" She nodded sleepily, "I can manage that, but how are we going to get out of this place and dodge that red eyed bloodhound?" "The side gate is unguarded and there is one other spot where no one will notice us if we don't use flashlights. I will also leave my backpack in my room as a decoy, hopefully they will think I am in the Stronghold somewhere. That should delay pursuit for a while. My scent is pretty much entrenched in the area with the rabbit traps so we can head there first. Once we cloak our scents we can run to that town. Daniel will have to search that entire bloody forest to ensure we aren't in there somewhere and it should give us some time." Nicky rubbed her eyes, "Sounds like you thought this through. Is it really possible to hide our scent from Daniel?" I nodded, "It is difficult, but it can be done for a short time." She yawned, "That is good, but if we are planning on running tomorrow night, then I really need my beauty sleep. You can explain the fine details while we run tomorrow." She promptly laid down in her bed and pulled her covers over herself. I exhaled gustily in irritation at her dismissal, but put my sunglasses on and went out of the window. The only lights were the ones on each of the guard posts. The ground I crossed was completely unlit and no one would notice me. The night air and moon called to me, but I climbed back up to my window and went inside. I started doctoring my leg again. If we were running tomorrow, I needed any bit of extra healing I could coax out of it by then.

 

Chapter 46


 The next day went pretty much the same as the day before. I joined Nicky at the archery range after supper, none of the other archers had arrived yet. Nicky took aim at her target, "Marissa is being quite stubborn and she hasn't let Liz out of her sight the last two days. I overheard someone complaining that no one can manage to get Liz away from Marissa and they were really trying today." I loosed my own arrow, it hit dead center and sunk deep into the target despite shooting the most distant target. "In that case Marissa will be much happier tomorrow." "Are you going to miss Liz? I know you were showing some teeth towards Marissa the last two times." I snorted in amusement, "The teeth were more for her attitude than anything else. I don't know Liz well enough to miss her. She is a cute kid, but I have never really done anything with kids." Nicky nodded as she went to collect her arrows. She had no fear about collecting her arrows while I shot at my target. Then again, my aim had never been as bad as hers had originally been. The first trickle of the archery group started arriving and we fell silent. I tested the air and grinned internally in triumph. Perfect. A storm was on the wind and would arrive tonight. A good rainfall would wipe out a muddled or faint scent trail. Rain would also destroy footprints and other traces that one might leave behind. The thunderclouds built on the horizon as we wasted time on the archery range. The storm might even arrive before we left. I eventually put my bow away, "Big storm coming, don't stay out too late." She nodded as she glanced at the distant clouds. I headed off to my room to wait impatiently. My backpack got one more check before I left it at the side of my bed. It was going to remain behind as a decoy. My hairbrush and toothbrush were sitting on the tiny dresser as well to make it look like I was still planning on being here tonight. I didn't truly need anything in my backpack. I could live without a hairbrush for a few days and I had already brushed and braided my hair in preparation. Various objects that I would rather they didn't find were in a junk bin behind the garage. Things like the glass jars and syringes. I left a bar of soap in my backpack just to entertain Daniel. It was getting dark outside although it was more due to the storm than the setting sun. A rumble of thunder announced that it would arrive soon. My eyes watched the dark clouds that were heavy with rain, this was almost perfect. A storm this big would last almost half the night and we wouldn't even have to worry about using half of the tricks to destroy a scent trail when this storm was going to do it for us. 
 
 I stood under the overhang of the chicken coop in my rain jacket and waited. Where was Nicky? There was only one chicken coop, so she couldn't have gotten lost. I glanced at my pocket watch, but I was only going to give her another ten minutes to show up before I went looking for her. She better not have fallen asleep while waiting... I remained still as I watched the Stronghold. A crack of lightning lit up the place much too brightly before a deafening roll of thunder shook the window panes behind me. I glanced at my pocket watch again, her time was up. I growled in frustration as I headed back towards the buildings. Her room was dark and the window was halfway open. I had no idea if she was inside or not. I gritted my teeth as I began to climb the damp bricks. Thankfully the wind was blowing the rain mostly in the other direction so not much rain hit the wall or me as I climbed up. I glanced inside of her room before growling at the sight of Nicky sleeping on her bed in her rain jacket. I pushed the window open wide enough for me to slip inside and went over to shake her shoulders. I wrinkled my nose at whatever cheap air freshener the cleaning staff used. The cleaning staff wouldn't enter my room without my permission and I never would ask them since I didn't want strange humans in my room. It was bad enough when Nicky barged in occasionally.

I shook Nicky's shoulder harder.  "Ungghhhh...." I growled, "Nicky wake up." "Lemme sleepppp...." My instincts rolled and I tensed up at the force of them. Nicky had never slurred her words before, even when she had been woken up during the night. I took another breath as I tested the air for any trace of sickness, but picked up nothing. Except for a different faint scent on her breath. Something isn't right. A rumbling snarl built up in my throat. The door handle started to turn and I darted to the far corner where the deepest shadows were. There wasn't enough time for me to climb out the window. The door opened and Daniel walked in before switching on the light. He barely spared a glance at the sleeping redhead as he focused on me. From his expression, he had known I was coming and had been waiting in the hallway. That was why I hadn't heard his footsteps. My words were warped by the intense growl in my voice, "What did you do to her? Why were you waiting outside her door?" I had not expected him to show up and it had me severely off balance. He was watching me with the intensity of a hawk, "We don't want either of you two to leave. We were quite certain that you wouldn't leave without her so I simply waited for you to show up." I dropped into a deeper crouch as I snarled at him. His eyes flickered red, but oddly enough, he didn't growl or snarl. I was reminded of the time I had egged him on in the tree, the harder I pushed him, the more control he seemed to have. That was not how zombie instincts were supposed to work. I growled, "Let us go. How did you know what we were planning anyways?" He ignored the first demand, "We bugged Nicky's room and happened to overhear your conversation last night." That meant that they had likely bugged my room too. My privacy was something that I held almost sacred and they had violated it. My pissed off snarl was drowned out by another peal of thunder. The flash of lightning was bright, but my vision was extremely red in my rage. "How dare you invade our privacy?!" He shrugged, "It was needed. We had to know when you planned to leave. We only bugged Nicky's room since you would pick up the scent if someone entered your room." Nicky groaned and I glanced at her as she pulled the pillow over her head. The sound of footsteps had my head whipping back towards Daniel who had come several steps towards me. My body vibrated with my warning snarl, he bared his teeth and growled deeply back as my disrespectful snarl affected his instincts. My body tensed up like an overstrung spring, my instincts were insanely high as the heat rolled through my veins along with the adrenaline. My instincts wanted to back down from the higher ranking Terror, but my human mind was pissed at whatever the hell was occurring in this place. Part of my mind was worried about Nicky though, something wasn't right. "What did you do to Nicky?" He glanced at the redhead, "We drugged her with sleeping aids so she couldn't run." They had drugged her?! My vision was all red at this point and I was beyond pissed with this newest betrayal. I launched myself at him with an enraged shriek. He barely dodged my attack. He managed to grab my wrist and I turned as I slammed my body into his with all of my enraged strength. I got a painful growl out of him from the blow as we tumbled to the floor. He managed to block several of my blows before he got a good hold on me. I snarled and thrashed, likely leaving bruises on both of us. A growl rumbled in his chest as he struggled to fully pin me. I felt my nails rip his shirt a few times, although I didn't feel them connect with his skin.

I struggled and snarled at him as he finally managed to wrap his arms around me and successfully pin me. His one hand managed to contain both of my wrists while he knelt and used his own weight on top of the back of my legs to pin them. My back was against his chest so I couldn't bite him. His voice was strained from the effort he was using to contain me, but surprisingly calm, "Relax. We never meant you any harm. We will explain everything." I was far too furious at the moment to be bothered with listening. I snarled viciously at the man behind me as I tried to fight back. I contorted my body and managed to free my one leg before kicking his shin since that was the only thing my foot could reach. It took him a few seconds to immobilize me again. He was breathing heavily as I snarled breathlessly in his grip. He kept me pinned as I wore myself out against his greater strength. A Nightstalker could never match a Terror's strength. Once my struggles grew weaker he spoke again, "Once you calm down I will let you go. Then we will explain everything." The worst edge on my anger had worn out with the fight. I was tiring and I knew it. My body hadn't fully healed either, so I wasn't at the top of my game. I also knew that I had no chance of winning this fight, especially when I was already pinned. I stilled although my muscles vibrated in my lingering anger. Daniel waited a few seconds to ensure that I wasn't about to start struggling again. He carefully released me while standing up and taking a cautious step back. I was on my feet and whirled to face him as swiftly as I could move, unable to allow him to be behind my unprotected back. I was in a slight crouch, but held my ground. Daniel was watching me, halfway expecting me to come after him again. I wasn't that foolish. I was no longer blinded by rage either. Anger still made my muscles tremble as my eyes never left Daniel. I was outclassed and outmatched - and I knew it. My eyes narrowed in faint triumph as I noticed that Daniel had not escaped from that clash unscathed. He had a small set of scratches on his arm where my nails had barely grazed him. His shirt had several slices through it from my nails and I had a feeling that I had managed to leave another set of minor scratches on his ribs. He was going to have several bruises on his arms from where he had blocked the worst of my blows. I didn't move from my crouch, but my body was doing its own system check. The wounds on my shoulder and leg were throbbing. From the wet feeling around them, I knew that both were bleeding. I could feel spots that were going to bruise. My knees were a bit scraped up from hitting the floor. Other than my current wounds re-opening, Daniel had a bit more actual damage than I did. I exhaled gustily in annoyance as I realized that he hadn't tried to inflict any damage. He had only blocked me before proceeding to pin me. He had held back to avoid harming me. This discovery did not help my already smarting pride. Daniel seemed surprised that I didn't initiate another attack. He slowly stood up out of his crouch, "As I said, we will explain everything. I am not sure what you may have thought, but we have no plans to harm you. Once you calm down, I will guide you to Nina and she can also show you what it is we are doing here." There was no trace of a lie in his scent. My anger was still simmering, but it wasn't at a level where I was in danger of harming someone unintentionally. My muscles no longer vibrated in anger. We had been here ten days and they were finally offering an explanation? A bit late in my opinion. My mind was working rapidly though. The number of options in my current situation were rather limited. I couldn't outrun Daniel and I sure couldn't overpower him. That left him as having the final say if he decided to back up his decision with his muscles. The fact that he was still trying to just convince me with words was the only reason I was even listening to him or thinking about this. I knew in theory that if he wanted to force me to stay here that he could have easily injured me so badly that I couldn't leave. He had killed several zombies on the drive here. If I went along with his suggestion, I would learn more. I would likely have another chance to run later, as long as they didn't cripple me or imprison me. There really wasn't a choice. I could stand here until he tired of waiting. Or I could try to make a break for it and undoubtedly get caught before I even made it to the window. Or I could go with him and learn what secret this place had so carefully guarded, the very thing that had 200 people trying to convince a Nightstalker to stay with them. If I knew exactly what I was dealing with, it might be easier to run later on. I was still angry, but I knew which option I was picking. I slowly stood up out of my crouch. Nicky had somehow slept through the chaos. Daniel relaxed as he saw that I wasn't about to try anything stupid. I glanced at the snoring redhead, "What about Nicky?" "She is fine. She will sleep until around dawn. There is a guard by the door downstairs in case she does manage to wake up." He gestured towards the door, "If you are calm enough, we can go and let her sleep without disruptions." I reined in my temper some more and nodded stiffly. I was still upset and not entirely happy with my decision, but I was going along with it. Daniel turned his back on me as he led the way, which surprised me. I had no idea how he was turning his back on me so soon after our rather unfair wrestling match. He left the room and turned off the light. I followed him out into the hallway and closed the door behind me. There was some light in the hallway and it must have been enough for Daniel to see. My sunglasses had somehow stayed on my face during our scuffle. I ensured that my footsteps were loud enough for him to hear me. Daniel pulled out his flashlight and pointed it towards his feet as he went down the dark stairs. A guard sitting by the door pretended to not see us as we walked outside. Daniel grabbed a raincoat from a hook and turned on his flashlight before he passed through the door. This storm was a good one. Rain fell down in buckets and thunder rocked the air continuously.

 

Chapter 47

Daniel headed back to the secondary building and went to a door on the main level. I had thought it was a bedroom door, but it actually opened up to reveal a staircase going down. As if this building didn't have enough staircases already... The architect was definitely smoking something to put three sets of stairs in one fairly small three story building.
 I followed Daniel cautiously in case I was walking into a trap, but I didn't think that there was one. He had already pinned me once and would have acted then if he had planned on doing anything. The stairs only went down one level to a door that opened to reveal a long hallway. The smell of bleach and other sterilizers was strong. I could see that doors lined both sides. This basement was as big as the other floors, but these shiny metal doors did not lead to bedrooms. They were clearly meant to be easy to clean, although I was a bit relieved to see that they were not the solid kind that were meant to stand up to an attack. Daniel headed to an open doorway and went inside. I cautiously approached it and looked in before entering. It was a lab of some sort, and judging from how strong Nina's scent was, she spent a lot of time down here. Despite the late hour, that very lady was sitting on a computer chair waiting for us. She smiled apologetically, "Trinity, I do apologize for not asking permission to take your blood. Please let me explain our reasons and I will answer any questions you may have." I stopped just inside the door as I silently watched the lady in suspicion. They had better have one hell of a good reason for taking my blood without my permission. Daniel sat down in a chair not far from her. There were several other chairs scattered around, but I was too on edge to sit. Nina took my silence as the cue to begin, "It may be easier to start at the beginning. Before the first zombie appeared, I had been working in one of the biggest medical research facilities in the country. I was one of the many people who were directed to start researching the zombie virus to see if we could come up with a cure, or at the very least, create a vaccine. "The fact that we are here shows that no one had any success in that area. Mere weeks later about half of us were sent out to small towns where no zombies had appeared, to see if something there was preventing the spread of the virus. We had no idea it was in the flu vaccine at that point, even though we knew the about sneezing symptom and helped spread word about that. "While I was in that small town I met Daniel. He had just started sneezing so we put him into isolation. There had been rumors and other reports of the different types of zombies and the potential for them to remain sane. Someone on a different research team happened to turn into a Nightstalker early in the first wave and managed to remain in control. Anyone who was sneezing was given that same warning that you heard on the radio. "We helped Daniel in the early days, but the town ended up getting overrun. Daniel was quite instrumental in getting the fifty-some remaining survivors to a nearby Stronghold. That place was terrified of him though, and asked him to keep going. I decided to tag along with him and see if I could continue my work. We eventually found a place that was more than eager to help and that is how we ended up here. "As for what we are doing, it is mostly blood tests as we try to understand exactly how the virus works as well as come up with a vaccine or a cure for it. The problem is that the virus has different triggers and that is what decides what type of zombie a person turns into. Different types of zombies are, for all intents and purposes, carrying a similar, but different type of virus. "In all honesty, all I have done with your blood is examine the triggers and differences. You have no idea how valuable your blood has been so far. Within days we managed to pin down the regular zombie trigger and create a medication that inactivates it. So if a person hasn't turned yet, we can at least stop them from becoming a regular mindless zombie."

My eyes widened, so that was how that infected person had turned into a Runner. Nina continued, "Regular zombies are common and Runners aren't too hard to find. Daniel lets me collect blood from him, but until we met you, we were missing one of the four key puzzle pieces. Our knowledge is jumping by leaps and bounds. Without it, there is no chance of us finding a cure." She paused and looked at me, "Trinity, this is why we are asking you to stay. Without your help and your blood, this project is going to stall out. Will you please remain and help us find a cure or a vaccine?" One immediate thought popped up in my mind, "I am no guinea pig." There was no way in hell I was going to test any of these concoctions she came up with. I didn't really care that she was examining my blood under a microscope, it was the fact that she took it without me knowing. Nina shook her head, "No, and we are not asking that of you. All we are asking for, is for you to let us take blood samples a couple times a week. If you do decide that you want to leave, then we ask that you remain at least three days to truly think about it and you are free to go. But please, give us a second chance to atone for our actions." I was silent as I thought, my anger had mostly abated at this point. My original reason for leaving had been in case my life had hung in the balance in whatever plot had been afoot. Now I saw that it had only been to collect my blood. That thought still rankled, but I could understand their actions even if I still held a grudge against their previous actions. Should I stay or should I go? It was a huge question. Life in the mountains beckoned, but it had its own downfalls. One of which being the relative lack of food other than animals and plants like clover in that rugged part of the wilderness. I had relied on food from the untouched stores, but that wouldn't last more than a year or so. I would never admit it aloud, but it was fairly lonely and few sane zombies passed through. Staying here was no piece of cake either. My Nightstalker instincts really did have serious issues with huge groups of people. It wasn't often that most of them were gathered in one place, so I could probably avoid that problem without too much difficulty. I knew that those here would be more than willing to help me spot and avoid those situations. They had proven numerous times that they were willing to make accommodations for me wherever they were needed. So, if I were to look ten years into the future, what are the differences of each choice? In the mountains, it would be more survival than enjoyment. I would have likely headed for the coast to find Kelly and Travis. We would be doing a lot more menial chores like growing our food, making bread and such from sun up to sun down. Those tasks were easy in the old world with its electricity, running water, and other conveniences. Things not that easy in this world with just a handful of people. If I took Nicky and vanished into the wilderness, life would be even harder for her. Surviving off the land was not easy. Any time I left to hunt, or even just go for a walk, a zombie could show up and possibly attack her. Feral Nightstalkers were out there and even though they may not care too much about me, they would fight to get at Nicky. Being sane and able to wield weapons gave me an edge, but a larger or stronger Nightstalker could possibly beat me or barge right past me. The research here was the biggest consideration though. If I were to leave, it would likely stop until Daniel tracked down another Nightstalker – which was unlikely since it took him six months to stumble across me and that had been completely by accident. If I stayed, progress may be made. They may find a cure. At the very least they had already discovered a way for people to have a shot at remaining in control by eliminating the regular zombie option. A cure or vaccine would save thousands of lives even if one was discovered this late. I had lost friends as well my only family member. Their loss still weighed heavily on my heart. If a cure or vaccine had been present, they may very well be alive today.

Another thought entered my mind. If, somehow, a cure was made to allow regular zombies to become human or gain control, this would be the likeliest place for it to happen. I didn't see any chance of it happening since the human mind was long gone with normal zombies, but if it did, I would be heading north with a handful of those vials... Admittedly, I wouldn't consider taking the cure myself even if she found one. I had grown used to my extra strength and speed, even if I had to rely on blood to keep my mind my own. Humans would probably clamor for a vaccine in case they got infected though. I could always change my mind and leave later if it didn't work out. If I left and decided to come back, they would very likely welcome me once more. It wasn't as if either of these choices were set in stone once they were made. Now that I knew what secret they had been protecting, my suspicious instincts had subsided. I could also see why they had kept it a secret. They had hoped to unlock all of the secrets in my blood before I healed, and I wouldn't have been any wiser when I decided to leave. I had just healed much faster than they had expected. I didn't like it, but I understood it. They had tried to use stealth in case I had refused to let them take blood. Daniel could have easily pinned me, but something told me that neither Nina nor Daniel would stoop so low. I hadn't scented any lies when Daniel said they meant me no harm. As odd as it seemed, Nina's concern over my injuries had also been genuine. They could have forced me to stay here by force or by injuring me further, but they had not and were still just trying to convince me with words. They had also still left me the option to leave, with a 3 day wait as the only condition. I still didn't scent any deception or lies. I had been silent and motionless for quite some time as I pondered all of this. Nina and Daniel were waiting patiently, unwilling to rush me when the longer I took to decide put the odds more in their favor. I turned my head towards Nina, "Is collecting this blood going to require tormenting my shoulder each time?" She shook her head, "No, I will use a regular collection needle like the hospitals did. I didn't mean to cause you pain and I truly was only trying to tidy up the wound. I only collected blood three times and I never intentionally caused the bleeding to collect the blood. We were hoping to map out the Nightstalker genome before you left without you being aware of it." Such pain would have been an instant decline. I could handle a regular collection needle though. I exhaled slowly and reluctantly, "Having me here isn't going to be easy for anyone, including myself. The last few days people got a clearer glimpse of what my behavior is closer to. Nightstalkers really do not do well with large groups." I glanced towards Daniel, "Or with zombies of a similar or higher rank, as I am sure that you noticed. I will be a constant thorn in your side." Daniel actually looked amused, "Tonight should have shown you that although I may pin you, I won't harm you. I am willing to put up with more such wrestling matches if needed, so if you feel the need to vent and strike out at me, feel free to do so." That was a bizarre offer and I wasn't overly sure what to think of it, other than the fact that he didn't seem at all concerned that he might lose. He may have meant it as a reassurance, but it was also a blow to my pride that both of us knew I would end up in the dirt each time I tried. Nina interrupted my thoughts, "If you need anything or if we can do something to make things easier for you, just let us know. We know it is going to be hard for you and we are willing to help." My immediate thought went to the fence and the guards monitoring my coming and going. Even though I was in a lit up basement room, I could still feel the night calling to me – and it had been far too long since I ran through the night without worry.

I tilted my head, "Would there be any difficulty in me going outside the fence at night? I am tired of being cooped up in my room like a bat in the belfry when the night calls to me." Nina hesitated slightly, but shook her head, "No, you are free to come and go as you please." I relaxed a bit and nodded. Nina was obviously worried about me pulling a disappearing act after coming clean, but was trusting me to return. I turned my head towards Daniel, "Are you bothered if I start traveling elsewhere other than that small forest?" He shook his head, "Feel free to explore. I will have them return the keys for the side by side to Nicky tomorrow." I didn't think he would care if I wandered around, but if he had objections, then that would have been a red flag of another possible secret. Nina eyes went to my leg where blood had seeped to the top of the bandage, "I hope you didn't injure yourself too badly." I shrugged, "I don't think so." Nina turned to regard Daniel, "She isn't the only one who is bleeding." Daniel glanced at his forearm where the very shallow scratches were already drying into scabs. He gave me a rueful look, "She was quicker than I expected and almost caught me off guard when I turned to look at Nicky. I am glad that she was unarmed, otherwise I have a feeling that she could have inflicted more damage." "That reminds me, when do I get my weapons back?" Daniel made a face and pointed across the room, "Under that cloth. Make sure that you do not use them when you come after me or I will take them away permanently." I looked over to see a white cloth covering something on one counter. I walked over with one eye on the two. The cloth had two familiar outlines underneath and I lifted the cloth to reveal my belt knife as well as my sickle in its sheath. I was relieved to see them once more. I would really miss that sickle if I ever lost it. I grabbed both and put my belt knife on, but the sickle remained in my hand since the sheath was designed to go under my shirt. It felt so much better to finally have my weapons back. I doubted that Daniel and others would share the same sentiment. Nina was digging around in a drawer behind her as I went back to where I had been standing previously. She looked up, "I will clean up both of your injuries." I stiffened at her words. Nina noticed and gave me a reassuring smile, "Honest, it is just a cleaning and some polysporin. Nothing more. I promise that I will always ask permission from now on." She turned her attention to Daniel, who made a face, but let her use a damp cloth to clean up his arm and get rid of any dried blood on his skin. She put a thin smear of polysporin on the scratches, "There, is there anything else?" With a heavy sigh he pulled off his shirt, revealing two minor sets of scratches along his ribs. Nina wiped them clean, added more polysporin and put an adhesive bandage over it so his shirt didn't wipe off the gel that she was so fond of. She turned to me and I watched her warily as she slowly approached. She made sure her hands were clearly visible as she only held a damp cloth, a tube of polysporin, and adhesive bandages. Daniel was watching me closely, ready to intervene if needed. I wasn't sure why, but I let her approach. It wasn't due to trust, because I didn't trust her – she had destroyed any trust that she may have built on our long road trip here. It would be a very long time before there was any chance of me starting to trust her, if I ever could with my suspicious instincts. Perhaps it was to give her a chance to prove that she wasn't actually a threat. Whatever the reason was, I stood still. I remained standing as she knelt down by my leg and lifted the leg of my shorts to reveal the blood soaked bandage. She carefully peeled it off. The scab had halfway torn off. The bleeding had been mostly from the new skin that was trying to grow, not from deeper within the wound. Nina blinked as she noted how much it had healed since she had last seen it roughly 36 hours ago. My intense doctoring had made a considerable difference. She gently cleaned the skin around the wound, "I can't believe the rate of healing. It looked much worse the last time. Thankfully, it doesn't look as if it got too much worse." I watched her silently, unwilling to part with the secret. Let them assume that it was natural for a serious wound to heal that quickly. They had seen my heart recover from a bullet within two days, so it shouldn't be too much of a stretch. Before long she had it cleaned and bandaged up. She glanced over her shoulder at Daniel, "Can you go outside while I clean her shoulder?" Daniel sent me a warning look as he reluctantly exited the door and closed it behind him. His footsteps did not continue, so I knew he was right outside the door. Nina waited while watching me. I examined her for several seconds before removing my shirt. She moved slowly as she went behind me, being careful to not make any sudden moves. It didn't take her long to clean and bandage my shoulder wound up. I wasted no time putting my shirt back on. Nina moved to put the dirty stuff away, "We are done Daniel." He re-entered the room and went back to his seat. Nina put her gloves in the garbage and washed her hands for good measure. "Other than those who arrived with us, everyone else knows in general what is going on. So feel free to talk about it. We will be telling Nicky, Ben and the others what goes on here as well. Myself and Louise do the actual lab work here, although a handful of others help out a bit with the small and easy stuff." My curiosity was piqued despite myself, "What kind of progress have you made?" Nina waved at the rows of microscopes, lab equipment, and computers, "We could fill an entire library with the various things we have learned. The triggers within the zombie virus are one of our biggest discoveries. The fact that we can inactivate one of them is a milestone. We have discovered so many cures and vaccines that don't work that the number has six digits." She shrugged, "We have a couple dozen things waiting for testing at any given time. We test first in various samples of blood. Whenever Daniel comes across a feral Runner, we trap it and we get to try one of the promising ones on it. The biggest problem is that almost no medication or chemical will do anything to a zombie. You are immune to almost everything, so simply finding things that are capable of even the tiniest effect is our largest task. We have had the most luck targeting the virus itself instead of trying to target the body, which is not how traditional medicine was usually developed." Nina covered her mouth as she yawned, "Any other questions?" I thought for a moment and shook my head, "At the moment, not really. I may think of more later." Nina shrugged as she stood up and stretched, "Well, I will be happy to answer them at breakfast then." I followed them back up to the main floor. They headed off to their rooms and I climbed the stairs to return to my room. I needed some time to think and wrap my head around this unexpected and abrupt change of plans.


 

Chapter 48

            Nicky yawned as she sat down with her breakfast plate. I was in my usual spot while Nina and Daniel were already seated with their own breakfast. Nicky shook her head as she tried to wake up, "I can't believe how hard I slept last night." I tilted my head slightly as I examined her, "Do you remember anything from last night?" She blinked slowly as her eyes flickered briefly to our two companions, "Uh... No... My head hit that pillow and I was out like a light. Did I miss a party or something?" I raised my eyebrows, "So you don't remember Daniel and me having an argument in your room in the middle of the night?" Nicky's jaw dropped as she gaped at me, "What?! How could I have missed something like that?" She turned to glare at Daniel, "I don't recall inviting you into my room. Haven't you ever heard of knocking?" He looked faintly amused, "I did knock the first time. You didn't answer." Nicky glared at him, "The first time? Why the hell were you in my room to start with?" He took a bite of toast, unconcerned, "The first time was to ensure that you were still in your room.  The second time was to stop Trinity from kidnapping you." Nicky narrowed her eyes, "Unless I was screaming bloody murder, then you don't have to consider it kidnapping if she is dragging me around. She had plenty of opportunities in the past when we were in the forest. Besides, I did holler and shout that one morning on the trip here when she threw me over her shoulders like a sack of potatoes and not one person so much as lifted a finger to help me!" Daniel snorted, "You were clearly out of your mind at that point in time and we heard you loud and clear. That time we chose not to intervene. This time was different since that hot chocolate had been drugged so you would sleep." He had the oddest ways of admitting what he had done. Nicky inhaled in shocked as she glanced at my unimpressed expression. She turned back towards Daniel as her anger was starting to show more clearly, "Why the hell was it drugged?!" Quite a few at nearby tables had been listening with wide eyes to the conversation. I guessed that only a couple of people been aware of how close we had been to leaving. None were aware of that little fiasco last night. The loud thunder had possibly covered up the sounds that Daniel and I had made in our spat. Daniel raised his eyebrow, "Your room was bugged with a small microphone and a certain conversation the other night prompted such a precaution." Nicky stood up suddenly as her face contorted in anger, "You bugged my room? Where is that mic? I want to try out my yodeling skills. If they wanted me to audition, all they had to do was say so!" Heads started turning as Nicky stood up and her chair legs squealed a bit. I growled lightly, "Sit back down wildcat. I am right beside you, so lower your voice. Daniel used up my daily allotment of patience last night. If you are going to attempt yodeling, wait until I am out of earshot." Nicky dropped back into her chair with a grumble as she glared at Daniel. She glanced at me, "So what exactly happened last night? I must admit that I was quite confused by the red marks on my floor this morning." The blood must have been from when I skinned my knees on the rough carpet. It would have dried within minutes so it wouldn't have been contagious. I sighed, "Long story short, I lost a fight with Daniel before he took me to Nina so they could tell me exactly what was going on in this place." Nicky's jaw dropped, "Shit! There was a bottle of liquid soap in my backpack, you should have grabbed it. If I had been awake I had four cans of tomato juice in there as well." Daniel narrowed his eyes even as Nina's eyes lit up in curiosity.

I shrugged, "I didn't have enough time to get to it, although it wouldn't have delayed Daniel for very long if he was willing to run at night. Considering he had that flashlight, he probably would have followed." Nicky sighed, "There is always next time I guess. I call the cans though. And what exactly is going on in this place?" I raised an eyebrow at Nina, "I will let you repeat that information." She nodded before bringing Nicky up to speed. Nicky's expression got more incredulous as Nina went on. Once she finished explaining Nina tilted her head, "So do either of you two have any questions?" Nicky rubbed her forehead, "It is far too early to be dumping surprises on us like this. You are a scientist?" Nina nodded, "Technically I was a medical researcher, but the title scientist works considering that what I do has spread out over a wider area." Nicky shook her head, "I met a scientist once. I hope you are smarter than he was. He once told me that the world is made up of Protons, Neutrons, and Electrons. The idiot completely forgot to mention Morons and I have seen an awful lot of those." Nina looked absolutely dumbfounded and I heard a couple of faint chuckles from eavesdroppers that were quickly being suppressed. Daniel smirked, "Nina is quite smart, even if you don't understand half of what she says once she starts talking in technical terms." Nina glanced between Nicky and I in faint confusion, "I am kind of surprised that neither of you asked why we didn't tell you earlier." Nicky snorted, "Why ask a question that I know the answer to? Sometimes Trinity's mind works like mine. If you had mentioned the words scientist, lab, or tests while we were on the road, Trinity would have pulled a vanishing act that no magician could ever hope to replicate." I growled grumpily, "My mind works like yours? I highly doubt that." I could never pull off some of the stunts that she had done. Nicky grinned at me, "How else could I get along with you so well?" I nibbled on an apple slice and pointedly ignored her. Nina was a bit surprised at Nicky's deduction, "That was precisely why we didn't mention it earlier. We had hoped to finish everything before Trinity recovered and left. Needless to say, we greatly appreciate her giving us a chance." Nicky raised her eyebrow at me, "So we aren't running for the hills?" Several people within hearing range tensed up at that question. Nina and Daniel were watching me closely. I turned my head towards Nina, "You don't have to hold your breath in suspense. I told you that I would give it a second chance." It was an extraordinarily shaky second chance, but I had my reasons to give it a cautious attempt. Nina sighed in relief, but grinned as she was caught with her unconscious action. I turned back to Nicky, "I said I would give it a shot. Hopefully they can come up with a vaccine. If you still plan on following your dream of visiting every Stronghold in the country within ten years, I am sure they will approve your transfer." Nicky gave me a disbelieving look, "As if I would leave while you are here. It is far more entertaining to hang around you." Oh, lucky me... Just what I needed, someone who magically turns into a maniac with a sip of coffee... Nicky just grinned at my disbelieving expression, "Who else is capable of putting up with me or dragging me back to the realm of reason if I go on an insanity blitz?" Nicky turned to Nina with bright eyes, "Since Daniel claims you are so smart, how is it possible that the two of us manage to balance each other out when both of us are considered unstable and unpredictable?" Nicky gestured between herself and me, "Just look at us. Trinity is a Nightstalker with temper problems, although you may not have noticed since she is more wary around Daniel, but Ben had a few close calls. I have a personality disorder that uncannily specializes in pissing people off in a fashion that shouldn't even be possible. Putting the two of us in the same area should be like putting a lit match in a box of dynamite, yet the two of us actually get along in a way that we don't even manage with normal people." Nina blinked slowly, "You aren't the first person to ask that question. It has confused many. I haven't studied your interactions enough to give an educated hypothesis. We had noticed that you seem to take the edge off of Trinity's temper if she gets worked up. You are saying that she alters your temperament as well?" Nicky shrugged, "It was Trinity who noticed that a big breakfast and no coffee makes a huge difference. It actually does more than the doctor's pills ever did and they sure never thought of that. In the past, nothing helped with the outbursts once they started though. You saw what I was like that morning when Daniel tied me up. I often become unmanageable. Ben and Hank can testify to it as well." Daniel made a face as if he knew exactly what she was talking about. I was curious, "Was she really that bad?" He gritted his teeth at the memory, "You didn't see her. I ended up tying her to a chair three times. I have never seen a human who was unafraid if I truly snarled at them." I shrugged, "That could have been amusing to watch. Too bad you didn't videotape it. I just distract her, so it isn't as if I actually do anything. Just pretend she is a four year old with a short attention span." Daniel shook his head, "You get to deal with her next time." Nicky yawned, "Good. I'd rather deal with Trinity than you. She at least makes sense and I know where I stand with her. You are more unpredictable than she is." Nina gave her a disbelieving look, "I fail to see that. Daniel is very predictable." Nicky looked at her as if she was crazy, "On the surface or when he is calm maybe, but not when he gets stressed or angry. He tends to snap and act unpredictably. Regardless of how angry Trinity gets, I at least know how bad of a reaction she is going to have or if she is truly too dangerous to approach." I guess Nicky noticed that Daniel didn't act like a sane zombie should. I wonder how she picked that up. Nina and Nicky were frowning at each other in obvious disagreement. I was in agreement with Nicky, of course. I had previously noted that Daniel didn't understand zombie rules and it affected his behavior when his instincts rose. I decided to interrupt this debate before it got too out of hand, "So is there anything else I should expect now that the cat is out of the bag? Technically I am capable of doing more than just peeling vegetables." Nina perked up, "Is there anything in particular that you want to do?" I had thought about this last night, "It won't be long before my injuries heal enough that I will get too restless just sitting all day. I do want to try being a night guard, although I am not sure exactly what they do. I don't know what else I could do during the day, most animals won't tolerate me and I know nothing about vehicles." Nina tilted her head as she thought, "The choice is really up to you since feral zombies don't pose a risk to you like they do to humans. You could sit in a guard post or you could patrol inside or outside of the fence, whatever you prefer. If you help guard from sunset to sunrise, then you have worked more hours than anyone else here does and you don't need to work during the day unless you get bored or want to." Daniel added his own thoughts, "People here often just need a hand from someone stronger than them for a few seconds. The hunters would welcome you. The quads lure off the regular zombies every few hours, but even knowing that you are around will help the guards relax since they know that you will help if a Runner shows up and starts scaling the fence. Nina is right though, if you guard all night, then there is no need to work during the day. Most here don't work more than 9 or 10 hours a day." I shrugged, "I will still help peel stuff today and I will start patrolling outside the fence tonight. Just let the guards know to not shoot at the zombie wearing sunglasses when it approaches the gate." Nina nodded, "Certainly. Don't strain yourself though, it will be some time before your leg heals." I nodded as I munched on my toast. I was looking forward to roaming the forest tonight.

 

Chapter 49


 I kept my ears open while peeling veggies and it was no surprise that word was spreading like wildfire about me knowing what was going on. None of the staff approached me about it, but I heard faint whispers from them and from those just outside the open kitchen door. Nina once more joined Nicky and me at lunch. I glanced around, "What did you do to Daniel? I don't think I have ever seen you two apart." Nina grinned at me, "He is off with a group of people to cage some feral Runners and take them to a holding barn to the south. He will help me get some blood from them. The more samples we have, the better it is for us. Most of our testing is done in blood samples. Using feral Runners also gives us a chance to try out any promising cures on an actual zombie without putting a sane zombie at risk of unforeseen side effects. Forewarned, he will be a bit grouchy when he gets back. Dealing with ferals always puts him in a bad mood." I blinked slowly, "Are there a lot of those unforeseen side effects?" Nina sighed, "Yeah. The virus is tenacious. Kind of like trying to treat a really nasty wide spread cancer, but worse. No cancer ever had the power to regenerate entire limbs and keep a body from failing even if its host bled out." Nicky shuddered, "Ughh! I am trying to eat here! Obviously scientists and zombies have one thing in common, not much grosses you out when you are eating. But please let the rest of us eat in peace without nausea." Nina looked amused, but changed the topic, "Trinity, you mentioned earlier that the night called to you, can you elaborate on that?" She dug into a side satchel to pull out a small notepad and pen. The interrogator was back. Fantastic, just what I wanted... Perhaps we should give Nicky some coffee just to make this day even better. I knew that Nina had never managed to talk to the first Nightstalker that passed through and it looked as if she was trying to make up for lost time. I sighed, "A Nightstalker's instincts strengthen once the sun has set. There is a strong desire to go outside at night. As a human, I loved big thunderstorms and enjoyed sitting on our porch to watch one while feeling the cool breeze. It always seemed to make me feel alive and invigorated. It is somewhat similar to that, but different." Nina's hands flew as she took notes. She glanced at me, "I had a look at your sunglasses while you were unconscious. How did you customize them? Daniel said that the soft stuff around the edges smelt like silicone when he scratched a bit off." I made a mental note to check my other two pairs to ensure that he hadn't damaged their fit. "No pair of welding glasses that look like sunglasses has a perfect seal, other than some rather ugly goggles, so I do have to make some modifications. I took black silicone and put a line of it around the frame before putting a strip of plasticwrap over it. Then I put them on and the silicone molded to my face perfectly. The saranwrap kept the silicone from sticking to me and once the silicone had cured, I just trimmed the plastic off." "Can you see with them on at night? How well can you see?" I resignedly regarded the overenthusiastic lady who had completely forgotten about her half eaten plate of food, "You have to eat at least three bites between each question." I took a slow bite of an apple slice to emphasize my point. Nina screwed up her face, but reluctantly traded her pen for her fork. She took exactly three hurried bites and grabbed her pen while still chewing her last mouthful. I rolled my eyes, but held up my end of the deal, "I can see with them on even during the new moon, although it is quite dim. With your curiosity, I am sure that you tried them on. How much could you see?"

"Inside I could see absolutely nothing. I could have been in a pitch black room for all I knew. If I was outside at midday, I could see vague silhouettes, but nothing more. Although I kind of expected that since they are welding glasses. How often do you take your glasses off?" I raised an eyebrow and inclined my head towards her plate. Nina huffed in annoyance before grabbing her fork and pointedly scooping a mouthful of potatoes into her mouth while staring at me. I snorted and shook my head at her childish reaction. 
 
 Nina's questions nibbled at my composure and waning patience like a swarm of mice with a loaf of bread. About the time she finally managed to clear her plate I was more than ready to escape. I stood up in relief. Nina looked at me in confusion, "Where are you going?" I shook my head, "I am not entirely sure, but I am sure that I can find something to do." Nina frowned, "You didn't tell me I had a question limit. I barely finished eating." I ignored her as I turned to Nicky, "What do you usually do in the afternoon?" Nicky grinned, "I make sure to take turns gracing people with my presence. I was planning on helping wash blankets today, so they can definitely use your muscles." Nina perked up, "They usually wash that stuff outside in the sun. I can sit nearby and talk while you work." This lady just didn't take a hint... I regarded Nina, "Feel free to suntan, but keep the questions to a minimum. They won't thank me for helping if my fingernails rip the blankets in my irritation." Nina looked amused, "It is hard to contain my enthusiasm once I get going, but I can attempt it." She sounded like she wasn't going to be trying too hard. I also doubted that she overly cared. I was correct. I was up to my elbows in warm soapy water as I scrubbed and wrung out the heaviest of blankets. As if that wasn't bad enough, Nina was perched on a lawn chair behind me with a pen and notepad. Admittedly, she was spacing out her questions and taking time to think between them. Her questions were somewhat easier to bear if I was working out my frustrations by scrubbing the heavy bedding instead of just sitting and fidgeting. Somewhat being the key word. Nicky ignored my sliding mood, but the other dozen people helping with this task were obviously affected by my body language since it told of my slowly growing annoyance. This was the last heavy blanket, the rest were lighter things that probably would not survive the treatment I had given the others. The ones I had done were certainly clean at any rate. I started wringing it out before pulling it through the mechanism to help squeeze out the remaining water. Another woman came to take the damp and pummeled blanket from me before going to hang it up to dry. I looked around, Nicky still had most of her pile left and she would be a while yet. Nina had left for a few minutes and was now walking back over with a woman I didn't recognize. I guessed that the blonde haired woman was in her late teens or very early twenties. I smelt her long before I turned around, her scent was strong with odd chemical smells. She was appraising me with a curious look as she followed Nina. Nina introduced us, "Trinity, this is my assistant Louise. Louise, this is Trinity. Louise had just graduated from university as a researcher that specialized in viruses. She helps me with some of the stuff in the lab." I nodded. None of them were surprised when I didn't offer to shake hands. Zombies weren't much for contact and I doubted that anyone expected such actions from zombies here. Louise's voice was higher pitched than I expected, "Glad to hear you decided to stick around. We have some really good leads on potential cures now. I suspect that we will see a bit more of each other in the future."

I shrugged, "I suppose we will see." I lifted my head to take a deeper breath of air while trying to ignore Miss Stinky in front of me, "I am picking up Daniel's scent, so it won't be long before he arrives." Both ladies perked up. Nina turned and headed towards the south gate, "In that case, I will go and meet him so he doesn't have to search the compound for me." Louise followed Nina. I glanced back at Nicky, "How about I help you finish up that pile real quick and we make ourselves scarce? If Nina is correct and Daniel is grouchy, then I am the last person he should be around." A different lady interrupted, "Don't worry about finishing, you did the heaviest stuff so we are well ahead of schedule. Just leave it for us." I blinked slowly at the lady. They either wanted to get rid of Nicky or they were trying to prevent a possible clash between Daniel and me. Possibly both. I nodded, "Thank you." I glanced at Nicky, "He is coming up from the south, so let's head north to the forest for a few hours." Nicky nodded and quickly dried her hands. We had only been helping wash for a little over an hour, but it had felt like forever with Nina asking questions. We made it out of the north gate before Daniel arrived at the south gate, so it worked out well. We headed back to where the rabbit traps were. We could bring the cages back with us since I was more than capable of hunting for myself at this point. I left Nicky in the clearing once more and went to check the traps. I had managed to reclaim my glass jars and syringes with no one the wiser and wasted no time in bleeding the rabbits out. I went back to Nicky, "Feel like trying to doctor up my shoulder one more time?" Nicky grinned, "Well, you did get me out of doing work, so I can do that if we can find another blackberry patch afterwards." I raised an eyebrow as I dug a small blanket out of my backpack, "That is two favors from me to get you to do one favor? That doesn't seem exactly fair." Nicky chuckled, "Yeah, but I know you will agree. You almost always go looking for some sort of berry or fruit afterwards anyways." She had a point. I shook my head as I spread the blanket out and lay down on it. Nicky came over to sit beside me as she doctored my wound with the jar I gave her. The other jar would be for my leg later on. Hopefully this would be the last time I would have to ask Nicky to do this for me. 
 After three hours of hiding in the forest and nibbling on fresh fruit, we headed back. Nicky was heading to the mess hall to grab herself some supper. I headed towards the secondary building to wait for her. One man from the archery group was lounging on a bench, probably waiting for some of his friends. I decided to test out the effectiveness of the gossip vine, "Any rumor on what kind of mood Daniel is in?" The man looked at me, slightly surprised that I was talking to him, "He came back right as you left. Nina and Louise met him at the gate and headed to the barn once they grabbed their supplies. None of them have come back yet and when they do, they will likely head straight to the lab. It is usually best to stay out of their way when they return." I nodded, "Thank you." I resumed my walk. Stay out of their way? I could do that, as long as they didn't try to find me. It didn't take Nicky long to join me on the rooftop. I gazed towards the south, but the barn must be past the bend in the road and the trees blocked my view. No one appeared on the road by the time Nicky finished her supper. We headed for the archery lane, figuring that counted as a safe place. Some of the archery group were already present, but the last two lanes had been left open for us as per usual. I kept an eye on the group, but they seemed more relaxed around me. Most people today had been more at ease. There was no secret they had to guard and the difference was noticeable. They were also no longer triggering my suspicious instincts, which was a welcome relief. Nicky looked up, "Hey Ben! Glad to see you still live." Ben shook his head as he approached, "I still can't believe they let you fire a bow." Nicky drew herself up as far as her short frame could manage, "I will have you know that my aim has improved drastically since you last saw me. I dare you to put an apple on your head and stand in front of the target." Ben shook his head rapidly, "Not a chance. I don't care who is shooting, I am not doing it." I wouldn't have taken Nicky's dare either. She may be hitting the target itself consistently now, but that target was half my size. Ben looked at me, "I hear you are going to do some nighttime patrols tonight?" I nodded, "That was my general plan." Ben sighed in relief, "Good. I have been on night shift the last four days and it isn't exactly fun since we can't see much unless it comes right up to the fence. The guards at the north gate have a walkie talkie that you can pick up when you leave. They aren't too concerned about regular zombies, but let them know if you see or scent any other type of zombie. They will probably want to round it up and put it in the barn." "Is there anything in particular that they are expecting me to do?" Ben shook his head, "No, just patrol and radio stuff in. Overall, simply having you out there gives us a bit of extra warning if something nasty is coming our way. Most overrun Strongholds fell at night because a zombie got over the fence in the dark. They may call you if something shows up that they want help fighting." That sounded easy enough. I nodded and took another shot at my target. I had practiced with every type of bow in the shed and always got close to the center of the target at this point, if I didn't get the bullseye. Ben watched me fire a few arrows, "Your aim is pretty good. I am surprised that you don't carry a bow." I shrugged, "Bows don't really interest me. I find throwing a crowbar to be more effective." "Point taken." His eyes had a distant look as he was probably recalling a few times he had seen me use the crowbar. He glanced back at the shed, "I think I will shoot for a bit before I have to report at the guard post." I remained at the archery lane until the sun got closer to the horizon. Ben stretched, "Well, I have to get going. They have me on the north gate tonight. I can grab that walkie talkie for you, if you want." I nodded, "Sure." I walked with Ben as we headed towards the gate.

 

Chapter 50

            This task suited me well. I silently jogged through the shadows as I continued to circle the Stronghold. The half moon above gave plenty of light as I explored a bit and learned the lay of the land. I pushed each circle slightly further out so I saw new terrain each time. I committed everything to memory in case I needed it one day. I found the barn, but circled very widely around it. They probably had twenty live Runners in there from the smell of things. The barn was dark and no humans were in there at the moment, but I still was not going near that building. I had missed travelling through the night like this. My sunglasses could finally come off. I sniffed the air, examining the complex layers of scents. My mind automatically identified several dozen types of plants, various animals, and so much more. There was a small creek a bit further out. I could also pick out the faint damp scent of another cave. I decided to go investigate the cave. There was no way to tell from the scent if it was big enough for me to fit into or not. I had to go and inspect the cave to learn details like that. I crouched down to inspect the cave. It wasn't something I was going to enter on a mild whim, but I could climb into it if I tried. The opening was small, but the long tunnel went back until it turned around a corner. I noted its location in case I ever needed a spot where Daniel couldn't get at me. His wide shoulders wouldn't fit into that narrow opening. Terrors also didn't seem to like really tiny spaces or caves, so I doubted that he would crawl in there on his belly even if he did manage to get his shoulders past the opening. I kept going. The night was quiet and I started circling back towards the Stronghold once I started getting too far out. I had gone further than the path that Daniel must run several times a day. No wonder no Nightstalker crossed over it, even I didn't want to cross over it. His scent was ingrained into that path so well that it was practically like the Great Wall of China as far as my nose and instincts were concerned. It took me all night, but by the time the sky started to lighten, I had pretty much covered every section of the land around the Stronghold. I hadn't seen a single zombie other than the regular zombies, although that didn't really surprise me. I wondered what Daniel would think when he realized that my scent was all over the place. I returned to the road heading to the north gate. My leg was sore, but the scab hadn't pulled open. My steps were reluctant as I walked towards the gate that I could just see in the distance. The amount of people in that small place was something that I wasn't sure I could ever get used to. I put my sunglasses back on, each gate had a big light post above it so the guards could see better at night. The sunglasses would also be the clue that any guard could easily recognize. No feral zombie would tolerate glasses on their face. It was proof that I was sane. There was only one sane zombie who didn't need a flashlight in this place, so my identity was rather obvious even for those who may have not seen me previously. I watched the two guards who sat in chairs in the tower and scanned the ground below. They had half a dozen regular zombies on the other side of the fence that were watching them. I kept walking slowly towards them. I wonder who will spot me first, the zombies or the guards? My clothes were fairly dark and my smooth walk kept me from sticking out too obviously in the nearly black light of the early hour. One of the guards spotted me and did a double take as he noticed the lack of glowing red eyes that the zombies below sported. He relaxed as he realized who I was. The two guards watched me approach. They glanced between me and the zombies in front of the gate. The gate couldn't be safely opened with the zombies. I didn't feel like trying to climb over it again either.

I stooped down to grab a rock before throwing it at an oblivious zombie. I wasn't sure why I had wondered if the zombies would see me first, they were focused on the humans that they could clearly see and smell. They were not bright enough to turn around and check if something might have appeared behind them. The zombie turned around and finally spotted me. It headed towards me with a growl, which caused the other zombies to take notice. Seconds later I turned and slowly jogged off with the zombies in tow. Where should I lead them? I don't want them near here. I thought a bit about it as I headed up the road. The humans used this road enough that their scent was fairly strong along it. A normal zombie rarely doubled back once it found a trail. I picked up my speed until I was out of sight, then I left the road to run back through the forest. They should follow the road until they tired and found somewhere to sleep. I returned to the gate once more and a guard climbed down to let me in. "Thanks for luring them off. Anything interesting out there?" I handed him the walkie talkie, "Just regular zombies. There wasn't even much in the way of larger predators." He nodded and climbed up the ladder again. I headed towards my room. It would still be a few hours before breakfast was ready and I could grab a bit of sleep. I entered the door and headed for the stairs.  The scents along the main hallway told me that both Daniel and Nina were in their rooms. They had returned at some point in the later part of the evening when I had been on the archery field. I entered my room and locked the door behind me. I would have to search the garages later on for a more reliable lock since the door still only had the twist lock. Twist locks were far too easy to open and they were certainly not Nicky proof. We don't actually need zombies. All we need is Nicky on a coffee high to send this place into a semi-panic. I drew the blinds closed and sat on my bed as I dozed off. I hadn't slept for over 20 hours and sleep came to me easier than I had anticipated. My body still must be after more sleep than was normal. 
 
 I didn't see Nina or Daniel at breakfast, although it didn't take long for me to overhear gossip. They had returned to the barn to continue whatever they were doing.  The people themselves didn't know all of the details, but they did know that they were working mostly with blood samples. They would only test out a very promising potential cure on one Runner after all of the blood tests were done. I had a feeling that I wouldn't be seeing much of those two for several days. That was just fine with me. Nicky yawned as she sat down, "The man in charge of the night shifts told me to tell you thank you. He is also asking if you can do a patrol loop or two between 10am and noon. You are welcome to use the quads if you want. Oh, I was also told that they really don't expect you to do anything this morning since you were up all day yesterday and all night." I made a face, "They just expect me to sit and do nothing?" I had grabbed just over two hours of rest before breakfast and I felt quite rested. The prospect of sitting in a chair in utter boredom wasn't that appealing. Nicky chuckled, "Yep. If you patrol the entire time the sun is below the horizon, you have the daytime off. Let me ask you this though. If anyone else had the injuries that you currently sport, would they be doing anything?" I mocked glared at her, "And just when did you gain so much insight and become so wise?" Nicky grinned at me, "I think part of it is the lack of coffee. The voices in my head get much louder if I have coffee. Not sure how long they are going to remain in coffee deprived silence though."

"Then give me warning before you drink coffee so I can hide." Nicky simply grinned as she ate her breakfast. I sampled some odd scrambled egg concoction. My appetite had dropped to close to normal, so I decided to pick breakfast as my main meal. It gave me an excuse to avoid the chaos at supper. Nicky had been right. No one really wanted me to work. After having the fifth person decline my help and suggest that I should relax, I gave up and headed for the secondary building rooftop. There was no chance of me sleeping after my pre-breakfast nap, so I pulled a book out of my backpack and read a bit instead. I was quite bored by the time 10 o'clock rolled around. I headed to the north gate. One of the guards saw me coming. He was waiting by the gate with the walkie talkie, "Are you sure you don't want a quad?" I nodded, "Unless they need me to make several laps within an hour, then I will go on foot." The man shook his head, "No, they just want to know if a Runner is in the vicinity and only you or Daniel can pick up their scent. They will probably ask if you will check the perimeter tomorrow as well since Daniel is helping our two scientists." It was odd how easily they accepted our sense of smell. Even walking a patrol sounded much more fun than dying of boredom on a rooftop. "Sounds good to me." I headed out of the gate. It was different doing the patrol during the day. Various groups of people were out and about. Unless I was travelling through the forest, I was easy to spot. I kept my smooth flowing pace close to a slow jog when I was in the open. The groups waved as they spotted me, I waved back and kept going. Most groups were helping with animals, gardening, or collecting wild foods like fruit or nuts. I even spotted the group that had adopted Chloe as they picked mushrooms. She stood by them as a sentry on the lookout for zombies, although I doubted that she saw me since I was quite some distance away. Quads occasionally drove down the roads as they slowly lured mindless zombies away from the Stronghold. I knew that one or two heavily armed groups were further afield in vehicles as they raided empty towns. I avoided the entire area that the barn was in. If a zombie showed up there, Daniel was more than capable of dealing with it. I kept circling further out until I hit Daniel's perimeter. From the scent, he had done a couple of loops early this morning and hadn't been back since. He must normally run numerous laps several times a day since his scent wall was starting to fade slightly. I headed back when it was close to lunch time, having managed two complete loops. The guard took the walkie talkie back for charging and I went to find Nicky. She happened to round a corner and spotted me. She jogged over, "Did you know they have an evil turkey here? That monster chased me around the pen several times!" I sighed as I rethought my original plan to come back for lunch. Although I was positive that someone would come looking for me if I tried to patrol until supper. "What did you do to annoy the turkey?" "Nothing! It gobbled at me and I tried to return the greeting, but I must have mispronounced something because it took my words as an insult. It chased other people around as well, so it wasn't just me. Honest, that thing would chase you too." I snorted, "No it wouldn't. One growl from me and it would be trying to get as far away as possible." Nicky blinked at my response, "If you ever decide to go after it, I call the drumstick. Just make sure you target the right turkey, this one stands as high as your waist and is missing some tail feathers." "I am not killing a turkey just because it chased you. If they are keeping it, they probably have a good reason. If it is that mean, then it will appear in the soup pot sooner or later."

Nicky sighed theatrically, "I hope that it is sooner rather than later. Let's go grab some lunch, I'm starving." I put a handful of fruit slices on a napkin and sat across from Nicky as she attempted to down a huge bowl of soup. "What are you doing this afternoon? Why is it you end up doing different things each day?" Nicky shrugged, "Apparently no one wants me in their group permanently, so I get to spread my joy around." She took a bite of bread and chewed it thoughtfully. I found it somewhat sad that she accepted that fact so easily. She had been right, she really wasn't accepted anywhere, yet she didn't seem to overly resent that detail. Nicky swallowed, "I am helping with sheep this afternoon, so that is definitely out for you. Your choices are pretty limited. I am fine dealing with new people every day, but that just doesn't work for you. You really need a task that you do on your own or with only a handful of the same people every time." I raised an eyebrow, "That pretty much eliminates most tasks in this place." "Yeah. Now I know why the career counselor hated having to try and place anti-social people with a touchy temper." I growled at her, "Thanks..." She shrugged, "It is the truth. Anything to do with animals is out unless you are hunting them. Crowded situations are a no-no. That more or less leaves patrolling, gardening, hunting, or chopping wood when no one else is there." She had rattled that list off far too easily, "There is no way that you came up with that conclusion on your own." She grinned at me, "Nope. Others heard you were bored and were tossing ideas around. Since I knew you better than they did, I got to participate in that long discussion. Good thing too, I had to veto several of their absurd ideas." "And what was the final consensus?" "To try to get you to patrol all night and two or three times during the day. If you got bored, you could chop wood or help the hunting groups track animals. I know your opinion of weeding is even lower than mine is, but it is an option. Otherwise we could try to find a small group, but they tend to work in fairly crowded areas." Nicky continued, "But if you do patrol all night, you have put in your hours of work. Relax like a normal person would. It isn't as if you are trying to prove that you can work for your keep. They wouldn't care if you sat and did nothing all day long if you were willing to let Nina take blood samples. They have been trying to find a Nightstalker for months." I rolled my eyes, "I get so bored just sitting and doing nothing. It is also odd to do nothing when everyone else is working hard. I am sure that I would wear out my welcome before very long if I did nothing all day, every day." Nicky snorted, "I highly doubt that. They will kick me out long before they will wish that you would move on. I can understand the boredom part, it is why I don't complain about having to work, although I will cheerily complain about work that I don't like doing." Nicky finished her meal and we parted ways. I decided to chop some wood since no one else was there. 
 A couple of hours later I looked up at the sound of familiar footsteps. Nina and Daniel were heading towards me. I swung my axe and planted it into the chopping block, it was a safer place than letting it sit on the ground. Daniel didn't seem to be in that good of a mood and my instincts shifted as he approached. I really didn't want to be near him while he was like this. Nina looked tired, but excited, "Good afternoon Trinity, do you mind if I get a blood sample? I would also love a fresh saliva sample." My stubborn nature didn't really want to, but I had agreed to try. "What do you need me to do?" "Just sit on one of these stumps while I dig out the blood vials." I took a seat on one of the larger chopping blocks. Daniel stood nearby like a silent bodyguard, his presence made me uneasy when he was in this mood. It reminded me of the first few days when there had been a lot of tension between us. He was watching me like I was a potential enemy and that put me on edge. Nina wrapped a plastic band around my arm as she got a needle ready. I watched her as she tapped the vein before inserting the needle. I stifled a faint growl at the prick of pain and watched the blood filling up the vial. Nina swapped out the vials until she had four of them. She passed me an empty vial, "If you could just spit some saliva into that, it would be a great help." I had to admit that this was the first time someone wanted me to spit into a vial. I filled the vial up about halfway before handing it back. I wasn't sure what she would find in it, although I might hear about it later. Nina carefully put them into a special holder, "Thank you very much. I probably won't see you at supper, so have a good evening." "Don't overwork yourself." She just waved with a chuckle as she left. I was very glad that Daniel followed her. I decided to go patrol for a while to try to get rid of my uneasiness. Whatever Daniel was doing was altering his mood and body language, and it just creeped me out. His current state was quite unstable and unpredictable. No wonder everyone else stayed out of their way. 

 

Chapter 51


 The next several days saw a pattern develop. I patrolled all night, relaxed in my room or on the roof until about 10am, and patrolled until lunch. I usually chopped wood until midafternoon before patrolling until supper. Nicky tagged along on a quad during the last patrol. I had only seen glimpses of Nina or Daniel the last week, other than two times where she had come for more blood. I was beginning to wonder if she was actually a vampire in disguise, although I made no such comment with her sullen guard at hand. The bonus part was that Nina hadn't cornered me for another interrogation session. I left my room and paused in the hallway as I waited for two people to move the dresser into the room next door. More people carried boxes or items behind them. There was a pretty good crowd of people in this hallway carrying stuff, which was odd since this hallway only had ten rooms and two of them were empty. My nostrils flared as I picked one particular scent apart from the twenty other humans present in the hallway. No... Please tell me that I am mistaken... Nicky bounced around the corner and immediately spied me. "Trinity! You'll never guess what happened!" The overenthusiastic lady somehow managed to squeeze between all of the people moving boxes and furniture with a speed that left me wondering if she had gotten infected. I wasn't sure how she managed to get through that traffic jam either, it shouldn't have been possible. I used my hands to grab her shoulders to prevent her from hugging me. She groaned as she gave up, "You're no fun..." Others were watching her with disbelief, unable to figure out how she was still alive after that attempt. I let go of her shoulders, and as I halfway expected, she tried to hug me again. I faintly growled, but let her since this was a toned down hug compared to her last attempt. I rolled my shoulders as my growl deepened, "All right, let go." She stepped back with a grin, "Guess what!" "The sun is shining and for some reason you are up here instead of in the mess hall." She chuckled, "That too, but I get the room next to yours! They are moving my stuff in already! Isn't that great?!" I was afraid of that. I sighed, "And to what do I owe this honor?" Nicky was hyper and could barely stand still in her excitement, "This morning my neighbor asked me if I would like having a room closer to yours, and of course I said yes. Less than ten minutes later she arrived with people offering to carry everything for me!" By this time, the group of people carrying the original occupants stuff away were gone and all of Nicky's stuff was in the room. It had taken these determined people a whole 5 minutes to empty a room and fill it with another person's stuff. They had been in such a rush that both moving groups had crossed paths. I started walking down the now mostly empty hallway, "I am surprised that they moved you after all of this time. We have been here almost three weeks already." Nicky grinned at me, "They said that if zombies broke in, that I would be safer in a room close to yours." With two resident zombies and numerous guards on duty, that particular scenario was not on the top of our worry list. "I patrol all night, and during the day you aren't in your room. If zombies did get in, your best bet is to get onto a roof, particularly on this building if you make sure the stairwell door is closed." Nicky walked beside me, "I will keep that in mind. I also get to use the showers here, the downside is that there are no people to hear me serenading them first thing in the morning as I wash my hair."

This sounded a little closer to the real reason. Nicky's singing voice was something best left unheard. It sounded like something you might get if you crossed a toad with a cockatiel. The other likely reason was that Nicky had gone off the deep end two mornings ago. I had ended up tracking her down and dragging her away from where Ben had locked himself into the janitor's closet. Her current neighbors must be tired of her. If they thought I was going to babysit her, they were sadly mistaken. I only intervened when it was completely necessary – particularly if Ben instigated it. At that point, I tended to sit back and watch the show at his expense. Nicky sat down beside me at the table with a heaping plate of food, "I bet you didn't know that they leave this table open even at supper just in case you decide to join us." I snorted, "I am not trying that again, although I was not aware that they left it open." It didn't surprise me though. This table was still in the corner and set apart a bit from the others. I always sat in the corner seat so my back was protected by the two joining walls. It made this room more tolerable for my Nightstalker instincts. I glanced up as Nina and Daniel entered the room. I hadn't seen them here for breakfast for a week now. Daniel was a bit more relaxed today, but there was still an edge to his posture. I wasn't sure why dealing with feral Runners always set him on edge. Then again, he was probably pinning them to let Nina get blood samples. Nina sat down with a plate across from me, "Good morning. Sorry I haven't been around much." I shrugged, "No worries." Nicky snickered, knowing that I had no problem with Nina's absence. Daniel eyed up the redhead across the table from him with a faint growl. I barely heard it, so I doubted the two women did. That was a bit uncalled for. I growled just as faintly in return. He looked slightly surprised as his eyes flickered to me. Daniel narrowed his eyes as they shifted to a red color. If he thought that a mere warning by making his eyes go redder was going to make me roll over in submission, then he was obviously too used to dealing with feral Runners. This guy really needs to get the stick out of his ass. I tilted my head slightly in insolence, still not looking directly at him, but not looking away in defeat either. I hated to break it to him, but if anyone here had a license to be a jerk, then a Nightstalker above ground during the day was entitled to it. My actions had him gritting his teeth as his muscles tensed up a bit at my disrespect to his Terror rank. I had known the effect it would have when I did it. After an entire week I was tired of his behavior, even if I had only seen him a few times. I now had to deal with Nicky as a new neighbor, I did not also need to deal with a prissy Terror who had a superiority complex. I was going to ignore the fact that I often went out of my way to antagonize him. Nina was unaware of the byplay as she spoke again, "How are your injuries? I haven't had a chance to check them for a while." I shrugged, "They are healing just fine." In truth, both injuries were fading scars. The scabs had fallen off a day or so ago. Nina grinned, "I take that as a hint that you don't want me to put more polysporin on and bandage them up?" My tone was dry, "You would be correct." Nina was amused and probably suspected that they were mostly healed by now, if not fully healed. Daniel growled at my tone, he was definitely in a touchier mood than normal. Nina turned her head to regard the Terror beside her and attempted to calm him down as she spoke softly, "Relax, she isn't threatening me. I am pretty sure that she would know if the injuries weren't healing properly."

Nina was watching Daniel while she was talking and missed seeing me raise my lip to flash one of my canines in response to Daniel's growl. My immature behavior did not help with his temper, I could smell his anger and irritation clearly. I could also smell someone else approaching. I wrinkled my nose, "Why does that woman always smell like she fell into a vat of chemicals?" Nina glanced over her shoulder to see Louise approaching, "Possibly because she doesn't always use gloves like I do when handling chemicals. It is possible that even the fumes are sticking to her skin. I will mention safety to her again later on." To my displeasure, Louise grabbed a chair and put it at the end of our table. She looked slightly uncomfortable sitting between Daniel and Nicky. She glanced over at me before looking at Nina, "Did you tell them about the breakthrough?" Nina brightened up, "No, I hadn't yet." Nina looked over at Nicky and me, "We have a potential cure now. We ended up testing it on four different Runners and over twenty regular zombies. Within six hours the zombie virus is gone, but the human body is left unconscious, possibly because the zombie had not been sane and the human mind within had been wiped out." Louise sipped her tea, "It is the best lead we have so far. If it was given to a human that was recently bitten, it could prevent them from turning into a zombie altogether. It worked in every blood sample we tried at any rate." I was surprised that they had discovered a cure so soon. Well, at least sticking around saw some results... Louise looked over at me, "We will do more testing on feral zombies, but the best test would be if we could find a sane zombie to volunteer once we are sure it is reliable." I bared my teeth at her, "Don't even look at me. I am not a guinea pig." Nina shook her head at Louise, "It would be better if we could find a sane Runner who would be willing to try it. We need to do a lot more testing first though. Trinity, I don't suppose you would know where a sane Runner might be located?" I shook my head, "No, it has been at least three months since I have last seen a sane Runner." Nina sighed, "Too bad. A Runner would have been more likely to try it since their mind is slowed down by the virus. We also normally test on Runners, so that would have also made them the perfect group to work with. We will keep working on the cure, chances are we will find a sane Runner one day or someone will eventually get infected." At least Nina didn't seem to think that I should volunteer. Had she pressed the matter, Nicky and I would be a long ways away come next sunrise. We still had that gas hidden away in the forest as a backup plan just in case our attempt to try staying here took a sour turn. Nicky nibbled on a boiled egg, "So what is happening with those unconscious ex-zombies?" Nina shrugged, "At the moment they are in cells since we are hoping that the human within didn't completely vanish. Their bodies are responsive, but the mind is comatose. Their bodies are slowly breaking down like a normal comatose human would without any life support – which we don't have." Louise expanded, "We may end up re-introducing the zombie virus if they don't recover. That will at least tell us if the cure can also work as a vaccine as well. If it doesn't work as a vaccine, then we can work on the zombie virus triggers during the infection stage and fine-tune that research. We didn't quite have it perfected when that last guy turned, which is why he didn't remain sane. We have since located the one trigger that we previously missed and it works properly in the blood samples. We just have to test it in one of the ex-zombies." I could see the logic in re-introducing the virus, but there was something creepy about the way Louise didn't seem bothered about the fact that she planned on continuously re-infecting and curing that person over and over. I truly hoped that if the person was still somewhere in the body, that they were completely unaware. I doubted they were in there though, that was the whole reason I resisted my bloodlust so hard around humans. Once the human mind was truly gone, it never came back. Her comment also explained why that guy hadn't remained sane. Their research hadn't been tested on a live subject when we had stumbled across the infected woodchopper. That was one more reason to never volunteer for any of their drugs. There were too many unforeseen side effects. I was glad when the meal was over and everyone went their separate ways. My instincts wanted to snarl at Louise. She had dropped a hint or two that I should volunteer for their newest lead once they did more testing. I ignored her, I was not going to even contemplate it. I let Nina take blood samples, but that was it. I had no real desire to be human again as long as I could remain in control. My control around humans was easier now than it had been before. The bloodlust was still present and I still desired to taste their blood, but it was easier to overrule now. I was strong and faster than humans were and I preferred it that way. Part of it was my Nightstalker instincts. As a Nightstalker, I was near the top of the food chain and I was proud of it. I had my own version of a superiority complex, but it wasn't quite as bad as Daniel's was. His attitude annoyed the hell out of me and I was sure that I was not a piece of cake to be around either. Nightstalkers and Terrors really shouldn't mix, especially if one wasn't in the best mood. It looked as if the virus itself had realized this long ago and purposely tried to separate us using sunlight. It wasn't possible for either of us to control the sun. Perhaps it was a good thing that we rarely crossed paths lately.

 

Chapter 52


 I sighed as I reclined in the lawn chair. Nicky snorted, "I don't know why you are sighing. All you did was run around outside the fence. I was the one who was stooped over all afternoon picking rocks. You have sure been spending a lot of time outside of the fence lately. You aren't planning on running without me are you?" Running was getting a bit more tempting, but running away went against my instincts as it was tantamount to giving in. Besides, they had made one breakthrough already... I exhaled gustily as I recalled the main source of my irritation, "I am spending more time out there because Louise is scared of being outside the fence without guards." Nicky gave me an incredulous look, "Is she still trying to get you to try that new cure? I thought Nina and Daniel told her to leave you alone." I frowned, "They did, but she keeps coming when they are elsewhere. She is getting seriously annoying and I am tired of it." It had been three days since Nina had told us about the cure and Louise had been a royal pain in my ass ever since. I had growled at her several times, but she just didn't take the hint. Nina had caught her annoying me once and told Louise to leave me alone. Daniel had backed Nina as he bared his teeth at the young woman. They had worked hard to convince me to stay, having a lab assistant annoying me wasn't something that they were going to tolerate. Daniel had relaxed a bit the last few days, but dealing with ferals day in and day out was putting him in a perpetual slightly irritable mood. I stayed clear of that barn. Once the ex-zombies had been close to having their bodies shut down, they had re-infected them. Their triggers still needed some work, but they could reliably turn someone into a Runner. Not one of the zombies regained control or were sane. Each and every one remained completely feral. They refused to try the trigger for a Terror outside of small blood samples. The potential consequences of a feral Terror getting loose were not to be contemplated. They were cautious when trying the Nightstalker trigger. The one attempt they made in turning a Runner into a Nightstalker had failed though. "Speak of the devil and he shall appear..." Nicky's voice snapped me out of my thoughts. I followed her gaze as a low growl built in my throat at the sight of the annoying woman in question. Louise had her plate as she was heading towards our building. She was likely planning to eat supper with us. Nina and Daniel had also been joining us for supper the last few days, although they had not arrived yet. My anger built simply knowing that Louise was on her way. I had taken a dislike to her. Louise appeared on the roof far too quickly for my tastes. I disliked how she smelled and detested how she kept hinting that I should help out in their research more. If I never saw her again, that would be fine by me. She sat down in a chair and put her plate on her knees as she started to eat. She wasted no time in bringing up the undesirable subject, "It turns out that the cure removes the zombie virus, but it does not act as a vaccine. We have run numerous tests and it works perfectly with the ferals and in the blood samples from the humans." I growled lowly in warning as I knew what she was trying to hint at, "I am not volunteering. I am here as a blood donor and that is it. I quite enjoy being a Nightstalker and I have no desire to go back to being human with the illnesses and slow healing injuries." I was getting quite upset at Louise. Her mere presence irritated me, so it wasn't that big of a step for my mood worsen. Nicky glanced at me in concern, she could see I was getting worked up. Louise shrugged, "We have the triggers worked out, so you could always turn back into a Nightstalker." I bared my teeth as my chest vibrated with the force of my growl, "No. I will not be a test subject. If you want to see the results so badly, then turn yourself into a Nightstalker and see if you can reverse it." My vision was going redder as my temper reared its head.

Louise frowned at me, "I know that being a Nightstalker makes you obstinate, but there is no reason to be quite so damn stubborn." Her callous reply snapped my temper. I rose to my feet in a fighting crouch as my ripping snarl echoed around me. A second snarl echoed mine and I glanced to the side, but Daniel was focused on Louise. His snarl had been meant for her. His bright red eyes showed that he was not happy. Nina was standing beside him as they had just come up on the roof. She looked livid. Nina walked forward with her focus on Louise, "And just what is the meaning of this?! I told you to leave Trinity alone, and you take that as leave to harass her?" Her tone could cut glass, I had never seen her so mad before. Louise hunched her shoulders as she realized just how badly she had messed up, but didn't respond. Her guilty silence did nothing to appease Nina's temper. Nina pointed towards the door she had just passed through, "Go. I do not want to see you near Trinity unless she approaches you." Louise hesitated, but as both Daniel and myself growled at her, she picked up her plate and scurried off. Nina watched her leave with narrowed eyes until she was out of sight. She turned back to me with a regretful expression, but realized at a glance that I was in no mood for a conversation. The person responsible for my rage was gone, but my anger didn't dissipate so quickly. Nina had spent enough time with Daniel to know this. I was still in a fighting crouch as the heat flowed through my veins from my temper. My instincts and anger were too strong to relax my stance. My vision was still a very deep red color. Nina sat down in a chair with her plate of food. Daniel watched me closely, but also took a seat as he moved slowly to avoid triggering an attack. I fought with my temper, although it was easier said than done. My anger slowly simmered down and I came out of my fighting crouch. I was still too agitated to sit though. Nicky sighed as I slowly straightened up. She had been waiting for me to relax a bit before talking, "If you hadn't snarled at her, I was about to let loose and go crazy on her. And honest, if I purposefully decide to lose my cool, I go completely bat shit crazy. She would have looked like a squirrel that stuck its tongue into an electrical socket by the time I got done with her." Her words were not helping any. I raised an eyebrow at Nicky, still quite upset and irritated, "If you are trying to derail my line of thought, then you need to do better than that." Such comments were her usual tactic to help distract me from my anger, but I hadn't been this mad in a long time. She sat up straighter with a look of hyper excitement, "What about if I paint myself blue and swing from the tree branches like a monkey while singing Who Let The Dogs Out?!" I stared at her in complete disbelief. Apparently she had considered my comment as a challenge. I also knew that she was quite serious about doing it if she thought it was needed. I wasn't sure how to erase that disturbing image from my mind. Nicky continued to stare at me with all of the excitement of a four year old after drinking a stolen expresso. I had no clue how to respond to such a comment. Judging from Nina and Daniel's expressions, neither did they. My anger had abated somewhat with the distraction. I exhaled gustily as I sank down into my chair, "Whatever are we going to do with you?" Nicky burst out laughing, "Keep me around obviously! What kind of question is that?" I almost hated to admit that her tactic had worked. Most of my anger had disappeared as I tried to work out how to respond to her and my vision was back to normal. I was still upset, but no longer furious. I turned my head to look at a dumbfounded Nina who was looking between Nicky and me. 

I raised my eyebrow at Nina, "Promise me that you will hide all cans of blue paint where she can't find them." Nicky sat up in alarm, "Hey! That is no fair! You can't ruin my fun like that!" Daniel shook his head, "Your idea of fun is often a challenge to our sanity." Nicky raised her chin in defiance, "Before you criticize someone, you should walk a mile in their shoes. That way if your criticism insults them, you are a mile away from them and you have their shoes. Speaking of shoes, I still have a standing grudge against your left shoe. Lend it to me for half an hour, I saw a package of markers somewhere." Daniel wasn't buying it as he shook his head, "Not a chance. Even my shoe deserves to have its dignity left intact." Nicky shoved a mouthful of potatoes in her mouth and grumbled incoherently. Nina was eating salad with a thoughtful expression as her eyes kept shifting between Nicky and me. I raised an eyebrow at her in a silent question. Nina blinked slowly, "I had heard some people say that Nicky was able to somehow calm you down, but I hadn't seen it myself. I am still trying to determine exactly what I saw. You were furious and in under two minutes Nicky has you sitting down." Nicky snorted, "For someone who prides herself on being observant, you really miss a lot don't you?" Daniel growled faintly, but Nina gently waved him off as she regarded Nicky in curiosity, "What do you mean?" Nicky rolled her eyes in exasperation, "Open your eyes Miss Scientist. The tactics I use to help Trinity calm down are the same ones that she uses to help me recover from an insanity blitz. Distraction. Admittedly, her approach is more tolerance with a good dose of distraction while she fends me off, but that is beside the point." Nina blinked, "That is a rather interesting comparison..." Nicky gestured towards Daniel, "I can't calm Trinity down the way you calm down Daniel. You helped him with control when he first turned and somewhere deep down he is convinced that his control is dependent on you. That is why he is so protective of you and listens to you so readily, he equivalates you to his control." I blinked in surprise at her. That actually made a lot of sense and explained his diligent guard dog act. Some days Nicky's perceptiveness scared me... Nina and Daniel looked startled. They had obviously never thought of it that way. Nicky shrugged, "Basic psychology 101. You may be a scientist, but I know psychology and I have met hundreds of counselors and psychiatrists over the years. My name has appeared in over 50 research papers." She tilted her head, "Or were they restraining orders? I can never keep those two straight." I shook my head as Nina and Daniel exchanged a look. I bet that it was the same counselors and psychiatrists who requested those very restraining orders in an attempt to protect themselves. As if a mere piece of paper was going to stop Nicky... I wasn't hungry, but Nicky handed me a couple of apple slices from her plate. I slowly nibbled on the crisp fruit as the humans worked their way through their plates of food. Nina ate in a polite and dainty fashion while Nicky more or less shoveled her food into her mouth. Nicky ate a surprising amount of food every day and somehow never gained a pound. Nicky sighed as she chased the last bit of gravy around her plate with a piece of bread, "That tasted great. Good thing archery doesn't require much moving." She stood up with a groan as she stretched, "Come on Trinity, let's get down there before someone tries to take my favorite bow." I rolled my eyes as I stood up, "There are 15 identical bows in that shed and there is no way to tell them apart." Nicky headed for the door, "Excuses, excuses. Stop procrastinating, an hour or two of archery won't kill you unless you get too close to my target."

I shook my head as I followed her down the stairs. She clattered ahead of me excitedly. The door clicked closed and I heard Daniel's faint voice through the door, "As annoying as Nicky is, she is worth her weight in gold when it comes to calming Trinity down." Nina replied, "Indeed. She did have some very interesting observations, but I doubt that anyone else could replicate the effect Nicky has on Trinity. I have never seen distraction used in such a manner before." Their voices were too faint for me to hear them. It looked like my previous attempts to keep Daniel from knowing exactly how good my hearing was had worked. They had been talking to each other quietly and had not known I could hear them.  I kind of wished that I could head to my room and open up my window to try and overhear what else they were talking about. There was no distracting Nicky when she was on a mission though, and if they didn't see me with her as we walked to the archery area, it would attract their attention. A few people were already on the archery field when we got there. I hadn't even fired thirty arrows before several people led Liz into the field. I was surprised to see her, it wasn't often that she left Marissa's sight despite numerous attempts by quite a few people. Liz grinned widely when she saw me before running over. Her tiny frame hit my legs so hard that she almost rebounded. "I missed you!" She was clearly delighted to see me. I could see others on the field smiling at the child's enthusiasm. Everyone here knew that I had agreed to stay, but they still went out of their way to make things easier or make staying more tempting. I patted the child on the back, "It is good to see you too. What have you been up to?" Liz stepped back so she could see my face easier, "I have been helping Marissa and going to school. Can we do archery?" I nodded towards the shed, "Your bow is along the back wall." With a squeal of excitement and a sneeze, she jogged towards the shed to get her bow. She must be catching that sneezing cold that had been going around. I glanced over at Nicky, "I wonder how long it will be before Marissa realized she is missing." Nicky smirked, "Ah, but there is a difference between realizing she is missing and dodging people who are trying to delay her." I raised my eyebrow in askance. Nicky chuckled, "We are missing the prankish twin. The only time he is absent from the archery field in the evening is when he is causing mischief." I looked around as I realized that Nicky was correct. The twin's brother was close enough to overhear Nicky's comment and chuckled as he watched his friend shoot. I guess we will see how talented this twin is. The twin must have either been quite talented or he had a lot of help since it took over two hours before Marissa made her predictable appearance on the field. She came in from the other side of the field, close to us, so the archery group didn't have a chance to close ranks on her again. She was tightlipped, but didn't say anything as she held out her hand to Liz. Liz passed me the bow and arrows before walking across the substantial distance to Marissa. Marissa promptly turned around and walked back the way she had come. I snorted quietly once she was gone, "I am quite surprised that she hasn't transferred to another Stronghold just to get away from me." Nicky glanced over, "Actually she did try." That startled me, "She is still here, did they decline her too?" That would explain a lot about her behavior actually... Nicky shook her head, "Marissa, Tom and Josh were cleared to leave, but they wouldn't let Liz go. So Marissa decided to remain behind. Tom and Josh already left. Marissa tried to sneak Liz out twice so far, but got caught." I shook my head in disbelief at this news, "No wonder she doesn't like me. She never had any problem with me on the road, so I couldn't figure out why she was suddenly passive aggressive." Nicky snickered, "Oh, that isn't the real reason, but I do know why she is acting like that." I tilted my head, "And why has she taken a sudden dislike towards me?" "She is scared. I don't think she really believed you were a zombie until you attacked those bandits, but that is when she started avoiding you, although you were technically dead, so you won't remember that part. She tried to get us to leave you behind at the truck stop claiming that you were an out of control monster, but shut up once Daniel snarled at her. The fact that they won't let Liz leave is just slowly twisting her panties into a pretty knot." I shook my head, "If I hadn't attacked them, someone would have died." "Well, technically you did die, but I know what you mean." I rolled my eyes as I took aim at the target again. I wanted to ask about what exactly did occur while I was out of it, but there were far too many ears nearby for my comfort. The unknown bothered me. I would have to ask her later.

 

Chapter 53

            I sat down and watched as Nicky balanced a plate on her knees as she started eating. Daniel and Nina hadn't arrived yet. Louise must have taken Nina's threat seriously this time. She hadn't come back and it had been four days already. It almost felt like peace. Well, semi-peace since Nina and Daniel were turning up more often. I leaned back in my chair, "Hey Nicky?" She glanced up, "Yeah?" "At that truck stop, what exactly happened after I blacked out? I remember up until the point where I got shot in the head." Nicky chewed thoughtfully, "I still can't believe that fight. I didn't know you could move that fast. That one guy had better aim than the others and got you in the head. You kind of just collapsed mid-run. That bastard drew a sword, but Daniel charged in from a window and killed him before he had taken more than a few steps. Daniel killed the last two that were trying to get more weapons." She paused to sip her water, "He untied us and Hank and Ben went to grab that part we needed from the truck. Turns out that there was a jerrycan of gas in that building. Those two drove back to fix our truck and return. By the time they returned, Daniel and Nina had you laid on a tarp so you were easier to move. "We traveled to a nearby town with a police station and jail. They weren't sure how long you would remain unconscious and we had all heard rumors about head injuries in sane zombies. Nina spent almost two hours trying to dig those bullets out of you. You woke up the second day, which was a surprise since Nina and Daniel were expecting you to be out for at least four days. You know the rest." I nodded, "Thanks." I had wondered how they had moved me. A tarp made sense since they could just grab the edges and it would have kept the blood contamination risk to a minimum. I glanced down to see Daniel and Nina approaching the building with their plates. Several minutes later they came on top of the roof to join us. We talked a bit about things happening in the Stronghold, which wasn't much. Nina's research had slowed down. They had re-infected the ex-zombies since the bodies had been dying and were trying some other possible cures. Most cures either didn't do anything or they killed the zombie once the cure took effect and they were human. There were only a handful of living zombies in the barn at this point. My patrols had been quiet. I hadn't crossed a single Runner or higher ranked zombie. Daniel had started running the outer boundary more frequently so his scent wall was back, although it wasn't as strong as the first time I had run along it. Nicky had been helping out with various groups, although the kitchen no longer wanted her in any capacity that involved a knife. Nicky eventually stretched, "So, shall we go see if we can pin the tail on the donkey?" I nodded and went with Nicky to the archery field, leaving Nina and Daniel to relax on the rooftop. Nicky had not been kidding. Someone had painted a big grey ugly donkey and people would attach a grey ribbon as a 'tail' to their arrow. The ribbon altered the arrow's flight enormously, which made it a challenge. The wind was blowing in light unpredictable puffs today, which was going to make it really interesting, even for the best shooters. I was looking forward to it, normal shooting was fairly boring since I hit the center constantly. This was the first group sport that I had enjoyed since becoming a zombie. Everyone in the archery group who wanted to play split into two teams. We took turns with each person only firing one arrow, the group with the most hits won the round. The unpredictable and prankish wind was grabbing the arm-long ribbon and making the arrow hit some odd places.

Nicky teased one of the guys, "It is called pin the tail on the donkey for a reason. You are supposed to aim for its rear end. Last time I checked, a donkey's ears were on its head." The guy handed her the bow, "Let's see your shot." "Oh shit. Well, here goes nothing." I chuckled as Nicky's arrow hit the donkey's hoof. Most people started laughing or snickering. This game wasn't as competitive or serious as some they played. When the wind was like this, we were just here to have fun. Truth be told, I was enjoying myself, as much as I ever could with a group of humans. Nicky had once commented aloud that I preferred more space than Daniel did and the group had been more than willing to re-adjust their arm's length rule to three times that amount. It did make things easier. Of course, Nicky didn't bother to take her own advice and invaded my personal space without a care. I watched as the wind caused someone's arrow to completely miss the target. One man sneezed just as he fired and the arrow went way above the target. The next person managed to at least get the arrow in the proper area. Another person sneezed three times before she could even attempt to fire. Her friend passed her a kleenex after her shot. I tested the air, but she just had a cold that was going around and not the sneezing stage of the zombie virus. The wind died down and the next person got the arrow in the proper area. "Oh look, Mark found Liz." I looked over to see the mischievous twin walking with Liz as she carried a big plastic bowl. The wind shifted and I could smell freshly baked cookies. Liz approached the group with a smile, "I baked chocolate chip cookies! Everyone can have one!" Liz was thrilled to share her bounty and everyone was quick to grab the rare treat. Nicky waited with me to avoid the press of people. Liz kept walking as people took their cookie and parted to let her through. The jar only had a handful of cookies by the time she passed through the archery group. She came towards us and dug in her shirt pocket, "I made Trinity a special cookie." She unwrapped a napkin to reveal a cookie that was a bit larger than the rest, "Look! I made a T on it in chocolate chips!" I accepted the cookie from Liz, and was surprised to find that I was touched that she had put my initial on it. "Thank you." Liz beamed at me as she dug into the jar and took a cookie for herself. I bit into the cookie. It was soft and sugary. It was just a bit undercooked, but I had never minded raw cookie dough so it didn't bother me. The cinnamon shaker and allspice had definitely gotten away on whoever was measuring. The spices were quite strong, but went fairly well with the chocolate. There was lots of chocolate. It had been a very long time since I had eaten chocolate so I quite enjoyed the treat. Liz offered me another one, but I declined since I was pretty full. Our interrupted game started up again. Liz got excited, "Can I play?" "I am not sure that your bow can shoot that far." She looked up at me with big eyes, "Can I try?" I sighed, "Sure." I knew her bow wouldn't fire that far if we attached a ribbon to it. Hopefully she would be happy with a plain arrow. She came back with her bow and the next person up gestured for her to take the next shot. She took aim with a plain arrow and managed to hit the donkey's leg. It was a crazy luck shot, especially at that range with a child's bow. She cheered before moving back to let the next person go. My arrow landed just above the donkey's back, which was better than anyone else so far. Liz looked at the arrows, "How come they have ribbon on their arrows?"

Nicky replied, "It is like pin the tail on the donkey, but with arrows. The ribbon makes it much harder though." Liz looked at Nicky, "Can I try with a ribbon on my turn?" Nicky gave in easily and tied a ribbon to her arrow. Liz waited patiently for her turn, giggling at some of the really bad shots that the wind grabbed. Her turn came and she took careful aim and fired. Her shoulders drooped down as the ribbon's drag caused the arrow to fall in the dust before even reaching the target. The person behind her clearly felt bad for her, "Why don't you try again? It is your first time with a ribbon." Liz nodded and tried again. And again. And again. She was almost in tears since she couldn't get her arrows to the target. I sighed as I came forward, the others parted to give me my space. Liz looked up at me with a devastated expression. I went down to one knee beside her, "Here. Stand here." I positioned her so her back was against my chest as I held up my larger bow. "Put one hand on the bow, I will hold it, but you have to aim it." I drew the string, putting my hand beside her head so it would be easier for her to aim. Others were watching in curiosity or surprise that I allowed her so close. "Put your hand on mine, not on the string, otherwise it will hurt you when I release it." She leaned her head against my hand to get a better aim as she adjusted my aim. "Let me know when." She nodded and adjusted my aim a bit more. Liz leaned against my chest to ensure she was out of the way of the bowstring, "Okay, now." I ensured that there was no chance of the string touching the child in my arms and released the string. The string twanged as the ribbon made a whistling sound with the speed of its passage. It hit the hindquarters of the donkey. Liz and the others cheered. "What is the meaning of this?!" I narrowed my eyes as I glanced over my shoulder with a very low growl. Marissa really had the worst timing possible. She was staring at Liz and me in disbelief before turning an accusing eye on the group around me who had started shifting into a defensive formation around me. Marissa shook her head, "I don't know why Liz likes you, but stop encouraging her. She is too young to get mixed up in all of this. It wasn't too bad when you kept your distance, but this... this... You are going too far." One of the men crossed his arms and regarded Marissa in disapproval, "You are free to leave this place any time." Marissa rounded on him, "I am, but you are holding Liz hostage here just to placate that beast! Liz was put into my care four years ago. Mine! Not yours!" I snarled lowly as my vision took on a redder hue at her insult. I slowly stood up and turned so I could watch the angry woman easier. She shifted her angry gaze to me, "That is exactly what I am concerned about! You are clearly dangerous. No zombie should be allowed near a child. Why do you hold her here?" I bared my teeth as my own anger built and my instincts started to rise. My voice had deepened, "Most of my growls are a warning and come to me as naturally as your scowl graces your face. And precisely what have I done to either of you two? Show me the injuries that I have inflicted. Besides, I am not holding her hostage." Marissa narrowed her eyes as she shook in fury. She was past thinking, she was just mad at this point, "I am leaving tomorrow with Liz and if anyone stops us then I will let it be known that you kidnap children and send them to play with zombies. Liz, come here. Get away from her." Liz looked close to tears since everyone was angry and she didn't understand why. She listened and went to Marissa, who scooped her up and carried her off in her arms. Liz looked back over Marissa's shoulder sadly before they left the field and were out of sight. The archery group was around me. The emotions were so strong that they were clearly reflected in their scents. Anger, rage, sadness, defiance, a need to defend, and more. One man slowly walked towards me and came closer than any of the others had in days. I turned my head towards him as an acknowledgement of his presence. The man sighed, "We have been preventing Liz from leaving. It is your call though, should we let them go?" Anger still clouded my mind, but I knew the answer for this question. I nodded, "Let them go. She will simply cause problems otherwise." He nodded with a sad expression, "Alright. I will let the guards know. Hopefully Liz will return on her own one day." He turned and left the field. After the confrontation with Marissa, no one had any heart left for the game. We all put our bows away and scattered in various directions. Nicky was heading for another shower and I decided to start my patrol early. My anger hadn't completely faded and I was certain that a few less trees were going to be standing by dawn. The guard tossed me the walkie talkie without coming down from his post. I let myself out and headed towards the forest. I planned to pass the border that Daniel ran before providing my rage an outlet. The downside was that the long trip gave my temper plenty of time to percolate like a cloud of propane just waiting for a match. Once I was out of sight, I picked up my pace to a run as I unsuccessfully tried to leave unflattering and vexing thoughts behind. I never once harmed them. I never wanted to be Liz's guardian, the child only came by in the evening, if she even came by at all. My instincts didn't care that I wouldn't see Liz again. Even my human heart hadn't been that close to her to be overly affected, but my human mind recognized the insults. My instincts didn't do well with insults and that fired it up. A human had shouted and insulted me, so my instincts wanted to show her where her place on the totem pole really was. My heart and mind were human though, so I was able to resist that impulse. She called me a beast... I snarled at the memory of that insult, as if she had any idea what kind of beast a feral zombie truly was. My anger was making my head start to hurt from its intensity. I am beginning to wish that I had let those four zombies bite them before intervening. That thought was a vengeful knee jerk reaction and I knew it. I also had no desire to be the main caretaker of two kids while I tried to locate a Stronghold. The implication that I couldn't keep threats at bay rankled more than anything else. I crossed the scent wall that Daniel had unintentionally created with his boundary checks. I could let loose a bit out here with no one the wiser and there was no chance of harming anyone. My instincts were running as high as my temper and the sun hadn't even set yet. I spotted a dead standing tree and jumped forward to kick it with a fierce kick. The tree trunk hadn't been much thicker than my arm and it easily snapped before toppling to the ground. My speed had already taken me well out of range of the falling tree and I was already heading towards another dead tree. I let my temper loose on the hapless trees. I eventually paused to breathe as I stood at the top of a hill. I had toppled well over a dozen trees and shredded a few others. My anger had subsided. The sun was approaching the horizon so I decided to go back and actually start patrolling instead of venting my temper. I was a long ways away from Daniel's boundary, but I could still pick up its scent faintly from here.

 

Chapter 54


 I crossed the scent wall and resumed my patrol. It was almost a relief when the sun finally set. My anger had faded, but I still felt slightly wound up for some reason. I rubbed my temples as I jogged, my headache hadn't faded, which was odd. The scenery around me hazed slightly for half a second and I came to an abrupt stop in surprise. What the hell was that? I took a deep breath of the air, but picked up nothing that seemed out of place. I didn't hear anything odd and there was no trace of the haze now. Did I imagine it? The haze had only been present for a split second, almost as if I had been looking through the heat haze above the road on a hot day. I let my instincts come forward in case they could pick something up. They had strengthened as the sun had set, but they seemed restless. I tested the air, but still came up clueless as to what had my instincts unsettled. I felt wisps of heat in my blood as the virus was also reacting to something. I glanced back, but didn't see any fog or anything that looked like a gas cloud. I was in the forest and the dense trees could easily prevent me from seeing something. My run hadn't been that cautious so far and I had been travelling openly along the path. I rarely made such a mistake of traveling in such an open fashion along a deer trail and I was once more reminded that I was a Nightstalker. I moved into the foliage and went into full stalker mode. I circled around and doubled back, trying to find what had my instincts on edge. When I moved like this in the dark, it would take another Nightstalker or a spotlight to spot me. Nothing. I climbed into a tree while I watched to ensure that nothing was trying to trail me by scent. I had circled this area a dozen times and came up empty. My instincts were still on edge, but they hadn't strengthened or shifted in any particular area. With a mental shake I jumped down. If something happened when I came through in my next lap, I would note the area and have Daniel check it out during the day. Until then I would put it down as a false alarm. Perhaps I had imagined it. I continued my patrol, but used stealth. My instincts didn't settle any and I made sure to break my scent trail several times in case something was trailing me at a great distance. None of the other animals seemed to think anything was wrong. Unless they caught my scent, they went about their lives as they normally did. No alarm calls of squirrels or other creatures came from behind me. Even the regular zombies were acting as they always did. I took time to hunt and there was one less rabbit when I was done. I left it for the scavengers. I was not about to carry a dead rabbit around until sunrise when midnight had barely passed. I had made another half a lap when I encountered the haze again. I whirled around with a snarl while testing the air. There were no odd scents and nothing was near me. It had only lasted a second, but I had definitely not imagined it. The haze had been strong enough to obscure my sight so I couldn't see. I turned and cautiously passed through the same spot several times, but the haze didn't re-appear. I contemplated the haze and began to wonder if it was actually my sight instead of something around me that had caused it. My instincts were more unsettled now and stirring in response to my own unease. A tremor passed through my muscles. I narrowed my eyes, could I be getting sick? Was it possible that I was not dealing with an external foe, but an internal one? I didn't think it was possible for zombies to get sick, so the thought hadn't even occurred to me. I focused on my body. My headache was still present and was a bit stronger. There was a very faint ache in my muscles, which I could very easily blow off as the aftereffects of my demolition derby with the trees earlier. 

I did feel slightly off, but had attributed it to how my instincts were reacting. Had I been human I would have thought that I might be coming down with something. I lowered my nose to my shoulder and took a deep breath, but didn't pick up any scent of illness. With a sigh I continued on, going slower as I took it easier. Hopefully I would get over it quickly. The last thing I needed was Nina thinking she had discovered the first ever case of illness in a zombie. I hope that Nicky's insanity is not contagious, otherwise I am screwed. I paused to watch a normal zombie. It wasn't acting oddly as far as I could tell. Then again, it was a mindless zombie, so there was no real way to tell if it had a headache or sore muscles. I had been one of the originals and it had taken the virus 3 months to appear after the flu shot. If the zombie virus itself had another internal clock that had scheduled more changes down the road, I would be one of the first to find out. There was no way to tell if this mindless zombie was an original or not. I kept going. 
 
 I paused as my vision wavered again. The haze in my vision had started appearing more often and lasting longer. The haze had also intensified to the point that I couldn't see. I actually had to stop moving in case I tripped when they happened. My headache was worse. I resumed my swift walk, not trusting a faster pace. The ache in my muscles was more pronounced. I glanced to the east and the sky was just starting to lighten. It would be an hour or so before the sun truly started to peek above the horizon. Another tremor ran through my muscles. I started heading back towards the gate and put on my sunglasses. All of my symptoms were getting worse. Something was obviously not right and it was bad enough at this point that it concerned me. As much as I hated to admit it, there was only one person here who might be able to figure out what was going on. I didn't like it, but things were not getting better. In fact, it was getting progressively worse. If my control came into question, someone had to know that I might become a potential threat. I walked through the gate and tossed the walkie talkie to the guard above. The kitchen staff weren't even up yet. I was back earlier than usual. I took a deep breath and kept my walking strides steady as my vision hazed over for almost two entire seconds. I entered the secondary building and continued down the hallway instead of going up the stairs. I exhaled gustily at what I was about to do. I knocked on Nina's door three times and waited. I heard shuffling as she got out of bed and approached the door. The door opened to reveal a sleepy looking Nina in a housecoat. She blinked in surprise at seeing me, "Trinity, is everything all right?" "Nina, I am sorry to disturb your rest, but have you ever heard of zombies getting sick?" She blinked in sleepy confusion, "No, why?" I sighed. Here we go... "Because something isn't right." She looked startled, "What do you mean?" I hated admitting any weakness, but there was no way around it at this point. "I almost feel like I am coming down with an illness or something. My vision is wavering occasionally and my muscles are trembling intermittently, although there is no weakness." She frowned, "Give me a minute to radio Daniel, then I will take you to the lab to check your blood pressure and vital signs." I waited as she disappeared into her room. I heard the click and faint buzz of a walkie talkie. "Daniel? Could you please meet me in the lab? Over." "Affirmative. Over." I was surprised that he wasn't in his room considering the sky was more dark than light. My instincts hadn't really started fading yet, so I was surprised that he was up and about considering it was technically still night. I could move around in the day, though, so it made sense that he could be active at night. I wore sunglasses and he used strong flashlights as we defied the limits that the virus tried to place on us.

Nina came back, having thrown on some clothes. She looked more awake now, "Sorry, but if you have any problems with control, it is better if Daniel is nearby." I nodded and walked beside her down the hallway. I understood her worry. A feral Nightstalker was not something that anyone wanted loose in this place. She opened up the door that lead down to the lab, "When did you start noticing the symptoms?" "The first time my vision hazed was just shortly after midnight and it barely lasted a fraction of a second." I paused on a step and shook my head fiercely as my vision disappeared momentarily. Nina looked at me as she waited for an explanation. I exhaled gustily, "And it just happened again. It is happening more often and they are lasting longer each time." Nina frowned in concern, "Let's get you downstairs and sitting down. Are you dizzy at all?" "No." Nina went into a different door on the hallway. The room looked like an oversized examination room. Nina gestured towards a chair, "Take a seat." I reluctantly sat down and watched her as she grabbed a stethoscope, blood pressure band, and some other things. I had never liked hospitals. I may come on my own power, but I still didn't like admitting that I may need help if I got too sick. Nina put the blood pressure cuff on and started to pump it up. I heard footsteps approaching at a fast walk and looked at the door as Daniel came in. He would have picked up my scent, but he still seemed surprised and confused to see me here. He waited inside of the door as he watched Nina jot down some numbers on her notepad. He furrowed his eyebrows in confusion, "Nina?" Nina didn't even look up, "Trinity said that she didn't feel well. I am quite inclined to believe her, especially considering that her blood pressure is extremely high. I have never seen numbers this high in a zombie before. I wanted you here in case she runs into problems with control. Unless something happens, please remain over there just in case she is contagious." Daniel's eyes focused on me, "Are you having any problems with control?" I shook my head, "Not that I have noticed." He nodded and relaxed a bit. Nina dropped the stethoscope end down my shirt and pressed the cold thing against my chest. She frowned and looked at her watch before moving the stethoscope to listen to my lungs. I watched her as she put the stethoscope down and started scribbling, "Well?" She glanced at me, "Your heart is flying as if you were running. Your lungs are clear though and I don't hear anything else that strikes me as being odd." Daniel blinked in surprise as he took a seat in a chair against the back wall. Considering I wasn't sure how I had contracted this illness, I wasn't sure that amount of distance would help him if it was airborne. He hadn't gotten the vaccine until later, so if it was something to do with being an original, he wouldn't notice for several weeks. Nina bent down and started lifting up my pant leg. She looked at the scar from my leg injury before letting the pant leg fall back down, "The scab is gone, not that it surprises me. No signs of infection here. I will just peek down the back of your shirt to check your shoulder." I held still as she pointed a flashlight down the back of my shirt collar. "That one is fine too, so I don't think is related to your previous injuries, unless one of them is red and inflamed looking?" I shook my head, "No, they all look normal." Nina grabbed her notepad and sat down in a chair on the other side of a nearby counter where she could see me, "Please start from the beginning. Any details at all will help, especially timelines." I sighed, "Just after midnight my vision hazed for half a second, almost like the heat haze above a highway. My instincts had been unsettled and I thought that maybe they had picked something up. I eventually kept patrolling and about an hour later it happened again." I shrugged, "At that point I realized that it was truly me and not fog or my instincts acting up or trying to warn me about something. About that time a tremor ran through my muscles. My muscles also started to ache a bit, which isn't too unusual in itself if I do a lot of physical activity.  Both of these things are happening more frequently, although the haze in my vision is happening more than the muscle tremors." Nina scribbled away on her notepad, "Does UV light bother you the same as normal light does?" I blinked in confusion at her question, "I have no idea." Nina dug around in a drawer and pulled out a flashlight, "Daniel, could you please turn off the lights? Trinity, let me know if this light bothers you." The lights went out and Nina turned the odd purple flashlight on and pointed it at the floor. I carefully lowered my sunglasses, but swiftly put them back on, "It is almost as bad as normal room lighting." Nina sighed, "Too bad, I was hoping to get a look at your eyes. Daniel, you can turn the lights back on." The lights came back on and Nina put the flashlight back before writing more notes. A tremor rolled through my muscles. "Trinity?" I glanced over to see Daniel watching me with tense muscles as he readied himself to intervene if necessary. He had seen it. "My control is fine. But nothing I do stops or affects the tremor." Nina came over, "I saw it too. Usually tremors don't affect the entire body like that, they tend to be localized." She lifted my arm and felt the muscles underneath, "Does the tremor itself hurt?" "Not really. The ache in my muscles is worse." "Is it getting worse?" "Slowly." Nina went over to a drawer and pulled out a blood collection needle and vials. She filled three vials and put them on the counter. "We will have to compare your blood to the earlier samples and see if there are any differences." I nodded and resigned myself to being down here for some time.

 

Chapter 55


 I sat in a chair in boredom and watched as Nina put slide after slide under the one microscope. I felt my instincts retreat slightly as the sun rose. Another tremor rolled through my muscles. Nina glanced up before glancing at her watch and noting the time down. "Once Louise comes I will send her off to the bigger machines and see what images they can give us. I am not seeing anything on this, although I didn't really expect to with a microscope this small." Nina picked up the blood pressure cuff and other tools again. She was taking my vitals every hour. Nina's frown told me that they had not improved. She noted everything down and put the stuff back on the counter. Nina looked at the clock, "I am surprised that Louise hasn't shown up yet. It is 9 am. Daniel, could you possibly track her down and bring her here? She may have heard that Trinity and I are here and decided to work elsewhere." Daniel nodded and left the room. He had left earlier to let Nicky know where I was so she wouldn't worry too badly. My vision hazed over and I sighed once I could see again, "My vision just went again, took about five seconds to clear." Nina nodded and jotted it down along with the time. I wasn't sneezing or coughing, which was a relief as that would have opened up a huge can of worms. A plate of fruit sat untouched on the counter, Nicky had sent it back with Daniel since she knew I loved fruit, but I had no appetite. It wasn't unusual for me to skip a meal, especially if I hunted recently. The enforced idleness irritated me, but there was no way to avoid it. There was no way for me to really do anything with my vision taking frequent vacations and my muscles acting up. I picked up my book again and tried to lose myself in the story without success. I gave up trying to read before too long. I tilted my head as I listened, "I wasn't aware that Nicky knew where the lab was, but those are definitely her footsteps clomping down the stairs." Nina's head shot up in surprise, "Neither did I. If she touches anything in here, I will break her fingers." Nicky's head poked around the doorframe before she sighed and entered the room, "I was beginning to wonder if they tied you up and just claimed that you were helping out down here. How exactly are you helping by sitting in a chair?" My absence would have been immediately noticed by the population at breakfast, so Daniel had spread the word that I was helping in the lab today. I rolled my eyes, "They lied. In truth they are trying to help me figure out what the hell is going on." Nicky glanced at Nina in suspicion before dropping into a nearby chair, "Huh?" "I had always been told that zombies don't get sick, but we are pretty sure that I am breaking that rule." She blinked in shock as she looked me over, "Well, you don't look sick to me..." I sighed, "That is a good thing since I am not feeling 100%." Nicky tilted her head in confusion, "So what is wrong?" I shrugged and glanced at Nina. Nina shrugged as well, "It isn't something I have heard of or seen before, but I had always thought that zombies couldn't get sick so it wasn't something that I ever looked into. Zombies usually do not make good patients." I grinned somewhat ferally in agreement. I had never been a good patient, even before I turned into a zombie. I was just too bloody stubborn. Daniel's footsteps descended swiftly down the stairs before I heard another door down the hallway open. His furious snarl made all three of us jump. I eyed up the door warily as his footsteps approached. I growled lowly as I picked up his rage-laden scent.

Nina blinked as Daniel entered the doorway, "Daniel, what-" Nina's voice cut off as she noticed his tense muscles and furiously glowing red eyes. I wasn't sure what had happened, but he was clearly enraged about something. A deep growl rumbled continuously off of his chest. Nicky sat still and just watched him, even she knew enough to not provoke him in this mood – and that was saying a lot. Nina took slow steps around the counter and cautiously approached him, "Daniel? What is wrong?" He snarled again and his voice was deep, "Louise is gone. No one has seen her since last night when she was helping Liz in the kitchen. The gate guards said that she came to them last night claiming that you had asked her to fetch something from a nearby Stronghold and they gave her a car." Nina frowned, "I didn't send her anywhere and none of the nearby Strongholds have anything I need." Daniel growled, "I know. She had a large backpack when she left and the guard said that she seemed nervous. I just checked the main lab room and a vial is missing." My own growl sounded as my nails dug into the arms of the chair as my mind connected the dots in a different fashion, "Could she have slipped it into a cookie? Liz was handing out cookies to the entire archery group and had made one just for me." Daniel narrowed his eyes at me, but surprisingly didn't growl back, possibly because my growl hadn't been directed at anyone in the room specifically. Nina's eyes went wide in shock, "Oh no." She shook her head, "We never tested it orally, but in theory it could work if it didn't get too warm in the oven." "That cookie wasn't quite fully cooked. No wonder there was so much cinnamon and allspice in it, she was covering any scent." My rage was causing my vision to become redder, although it also made my vision go a bit hazy, as if there was a very light fog in the room. My anger seemed oddly strong and defined, but it didn't interfere with my thought processes. My instincts surged forward in my wrath. "That traitor!" Nina had gone from shocked to livid. We all glanced at her in surprise at her outburst. Her anger rolled off of her and was clear in her scent, she was almost as furious as Daniel. My instincts subsided a bit as I realized that neither Daniel nor Nina had a hand in this. Nicky was also fuming, "Oh, if I ever get my hands on her, she isn't going to live to regret this." Daniel nodded, "I agree." His eyes were still red and he was clearly angry. I turned to Nina, "My instincts are as present as ever. How long does it take this cure to work?" Nina frowned, "It should have worked within six hours." A chill ran down my back. I should have been human by now and I clearly was not. Nina furrowed her eyebrows before jogging towards the door. Daniel moved to the side so she could get through, although he wore a confused look as he waited with us, his anger dimming with this new finding. Nina's footsteps echoed down the hallway before she entered another room. "Shit! What the hell was she thinking?" I lifted my head in apprehension. Nina came back into the room flipping through pages in a thick book with a bewildered expression. I narrowed my eyes, "What is it?" Nina shook her head, "I don't get it. She didn't give you the cure." I was stunned, "What? She nagged at me for almost five days about it." Nina found what she was looking for in the book, "She took a vial from the experimental rack, which makes no sense since we hadn't even tested those ones in a blood sample under the microscope yet. They have never been tested on an actual zombie either. In fact, they were just made the other day."

Nicky shook her head as if baffled, "I detest that woman, but she doesn't strike me as being stupid. Could she have shuffled the vials around to make it took like she had used that one when she really used a different one?" Nina glanced at Daniel, who darted out of the room to double check. Nina was reading the page with the notes as I waited impatiently. Louise had better run for the hills, because if I ever cross her scent or spot her, her days will be numbered. If this is her idea of revenge, then she had better pray I don't survive this. Daniel came back and shook his head, "Nothing else was touched and all of the labels are correct. Her scent entered the room as she headed straight for the rack and immediately left." Nina furrowed her eyebrows as she tapped her pen against her leg in thought for a bit. She inhaled sharply, "She thought she was grabbing the cure. I rearranged those shelves two days ago when I made that new batch of experimental drugs and she hasn't been in there since. Unless she read the labels on the other side of the racks where the clipboards were, she wouldn't have known." Daniel growled lowly, "And her scent did not go around the counter." Nina shook her head with a grimace, "She hasn't talked to me much since I told her off, so she didn't know that the new batch even existed." I somehow doubted that my luck could get any worse at this point. Someone had slipped me a sabotaged cookie and she had put the wrong thing in it. I growled and rubbed my temples, this was not helping my headache, "How often do your experiments fail and kill? What exactly is this thing supposed to do?" Nina made a face, "We hadn't even tested that one in a blood sample. At that stage, most do not even affect zombies. We have had much more success since you came and we understand the zombie genome better, but it is still science in a backwater lab in a collapsed human civilization." That was not what I wanted to hear. I growled faintly to get her back on track, "So what was this one supposed to do?" Nina glanced at the notes, "It was supposed to target the virus itself to prevent the wild mood swings that zombies seem prone to. It was also designed to help keep anger at bay." I snorted, "Well, I can tell you that it missed its mark. It is doing one hell of a good job of giving me a headache though." Nina gave me a remorseful look, "It hadn't even entered the first stage of testing." I sighed, "What are the odds of this thing killing me?" As much as I dreaded several of the possibilities, I had to know what I was dealing with. "In theory, it shouldn't kill you, but any drug that affects a zombie is usually pretty nasty and would have an unfortunate effect on a human." Nicky groaned, "In other words, we are flying as blind as a bat with a firecracker tied to its tail." The silence was confirmation that Nicky was right. Nina grabbed the vials of blood, "I am going to fire up the big microscope and see if I can figure out what this drug thinks it is doing." That left Daniel, Nicky, and myself looking at each other. I looked over at Daniel, "At least this means that I am not contagious with some superbug." My vision hazed out and I shook my head, although the motion was useless until it abated on its own power, "There goes my vision again..." I detested the lack of sight and it put me on edge. Daniel walked over to Nina's spare notepad and jotted down the time. If it wasn't for the fact that we needed the times to know if it was getting better or worse, I wouldn't mention them. I couldn't hide the muscle tremors, so they could easily track those. Nicky was looking at me in curiosity. I quickly explained things to her and brought her up to speed. She shook her head, "I hope your body fights it off like it does most stuff. I wonder if that stuff would survive if you bled out and died again like at the truck stop?" I made a face, "How about we leave that experiment until I am at death's door?" "That is a good idea. It sucked when you were out cold last time. You don't seem like yourself when you aren't growling or watching someone suspiciously." I rolled my eyes, but didn't comment. 
 
 Nicky brought a plate of supper for me, but I shook my head, "No thanks. I'm not hungry." Nina finally entered the room and took the plate that Nicky had brought for her. Nina glanced at the notepad that recorded my episodes, "The good news is that the symptoms aren't worsening as fast as they had been earlier, although they are not decreasing yet. How is your headache?" "I am positive that there is a rather energetic work crew in there with jackhammers." She noted that down while chewing a mouthful of food. She swallowed and sighed, "You were correct about it not targeting your disposition. This drug seems to work differently on the different types of zombies. With Runners, it does target the mood area. If put into a sample of Daniel's or your blood, it targets different areas." I tilted my head, "So what is it targeting?" Nina glanced down at her notes, "It is targeting a section of genes unique to Nightstalkers, so I have no clue what to expect." Nicky frowned, "Since Nightstalkers are nocturnal, does that mean the effects will become more apparent once the sun goes down?" Nina nodded slowly, "Very likely." She glanced at me, "Are you noticing any other differences?" I considered it, "Not really. Pretty much the same as earlier. The muscle aches and headache haven't let up any." Nina nodded, "If the episodes are occurring less frequently, that is a good thing. By the way, the cure we made earlier is not an option. The drug currently in your system is lethal for humans, so if we remove the zombie virus with the cure, that drug will kill you." Since this drug was targeting the virus itself, that had been one of the emergency backup plans. I rolled my eyes, "Lovely." Nicky chuckled, "The drug has obviously had no effect on her sarcasm." I growled halfheartedly at her, "You had better make yourself scarce before the sun sets." She grinned, "Nah, I have the best judgment of when you are bluffing or serious. Besides, if I hide behind Nina, Daniel will protect me." I snorted and shook my head at her plans. I debated for a moment before sighing, "You had better take these for the moment." It took me a bit to undo the sickle sheath since it was under my shirt, but it eventually slid down. I also removed my dagger. Daniel came forward to take both from me, "That is probably a good idea." "You should start wearing weapons. Most sane zombies do." He shrugged, "I haven't needed them yet and it keeps the humans more relaxed." I shook my head at his overconfidence, but didn't comment. Considering how often we came close to clashing, that might be a good thing for me.

 

Chapter 56

            I had never felt apprehensive about nightfall before, but there really is a first time for everything. I was tired of sitting and bored. The others were keeping an eye on me, which was also somewhat annoying since I didn't like being stared at. My instincts still felt unsettled, but I knew it was from the drug in my system. I could tell when the sun began to set. Daniel's body language told that his own instincts were waning with the sun that they belonged to. My own Nightstalker instincts were starting to strengthen already. I shook my head as my vision went hazy. It didn't help, but just sitting and doing nothing was worse than trying. Nicky had remained, although she had promised to behave. I knew the exact moment when the sun completely left the horizon. I was normally aware of it, but I was much more aware of it this time. My instincts continued to strengthen as night fell. I rolled my shoulders as I resisted the urge to pace. I was unusually restless, my instincts should not be quite this strong considering that the sky outside would not have been completely dark yet. It could be due to my own emotions, and some of it likely was, but I somehow doubted that I could attribute all of it to that. Daniel spoke quietly, "Are you having any more problems than normal with your control?" I carefully examined my inner emotions. "No, my control is normal. I am feeling more restless, but that is about it." My control was at its usual level. The smell of the two humans burned my throat and made me desire to taste their sweet blood. I overruled it as I normally did. Overruling it had gotten easier the longer I was around humans, much like a recovering alcoholic being able to resist taking a glass of wine at a wine tasting event. I may have been in a basement room with no windows, but I knew that the last traces of light were leaving the sky above. My instincts were still rising, sharpening my reflexes as the day turned into my element. I was more aware of Daniel as he sat in the corner, since he was the only one here stronger than me and that was something my instincts kept tabs on. I was getting frustrated as my restlessness built. I wanted to be outside under the open night sky and run through the forest like a silent shadow. Instead, I was stuck in a stuffy smelly basement room under the supervision of two humans and a Terror. I exhaled gustily as I crossed my legs, trying to bring up the endless patience part of my instincts to hide my restive fidgeting. My instincts saw no need for the patience that was normally part of an ambush and my attempt was in vain. Nina was writing in her notebook, "How are you feeling?" I glanced over at her, "Very restless. The headache hasn't abated any. My instincts seem stronger than usual, they do not appreciate being in a lit up basement when night has fallen." She nodded, "Let us know if anything changes." The next hour was almost painful as the restlessness grew more pronounced. I shook my head as my patience was waning, "I can't just sit here anymore." I remained where I was though. Nicky had fallen asleep in a chair in the corner. Nina looked tired, but was still awake. She raised her eyebrow, "Is that wise with the way your vision is fading in and out? What are the odds of you losing control?" I shrugged, "If I trip over something because I am too slow to stop, then I trip over something. I doubt I will attack anyone. If I have any control problems, it will be out of frustration because I want to be outside."

Nina looked over at Daniel, "Can you go out with her? Keep track of her symptoms." Daniel nodded and stood up as he dug his flashlight out, "Get some sleep. I will keep my radio on me and will contact you if something happens." I stood up, more than ready to get out of this room. I wanted to go outside so badly that I didn't even care that Daniel was tagging along. Daniel followed me as I took off up the stairs. The guard at the north gate was surprised to see Daniel with me, but dropped the radio down for me to catch. Daniel was walking beside me, although he left plenty of space between us. He had his light on, although he avoided pointing it right at me. In this mood, I really didn't care. The sight of the moon relaxed me marginally and filled a void in my mind that I hadn't realized was there. It didn't make my restlessness abate any though and it was hard to remain at a fast walk. The second we were in the trees I picked up my pace to a quick run. Daniel easily matched my pace as he kept half an eye on me and half on his surroundings. The dark had him uneasy. This speed was unwise since my vision was guaranteed to play tricks on me before too long. My only saving grace was that we were on a very flat and smooth quad trail. I took careful note of the trail ahead of me so I would be aware of any potential tripping hazards. My pace stumbled as a muscle tremor hit me. I managed to keep from falling, but I knew I couldn't go any faster since I would fall at a higher speed. Daniel glanced at his watch before noting down the time. He didn't comment on my speed and likelihood of ending up face first in the dirt, opting to merely be an observer. It didn't take long for my breathing to become heavy. I had never been meant for long runs. Daniel was barely even breathing hard. I kept to the quad trails and roads although my instincts really wanted to be more stealthy and travel through the trees. I slowed and shook my head as my vision hazed over once more. With my sunglasses on, it was dark enough outside now that when my vision hazed over I was almost completely blind. I heard Daniel's pen writing on the paper. It took six seconds for my vision to return. I was not used to being blind and those seconds felt like a terribly long time. As soon as I could see, I resumed my fast pace. I glanced around as I kept an eye on my surroundings. Small details seemed to stand out more and scents were a bit sharper after all day in the lab. I slowed to a fast walk to catch my breath as we went across a big field. "I don't understand. Usually once I take the edge off my energy, the restlessness fades. It isn't as bad now, but it is still quite present." Daniel was silent as he noted that down. He shrugged, "It is probably the drug. Those nights on the road, you never had any problem sitting most of the night. Is anything else standing out?" "Considering I have never been this restless before, I am pretty sure it is the drug. Other than the side effects that you are aware of, nothing else seems unusual. I wouldn't mind hunting before we head back though." He nodded, "We can stop in that forest to hunt." We approached a forest. I knew from past patrols that it was about twice as big as the rabbit forest that I knew so well. Daniel sniffed as he glanced around, "Meet back here in half an hour?" I bared my teeth in a mock grin, "It won't take me that long. If it makes things easier for you, there is a rabbit under that bush right there." I pointed to a small shrub where I could clearly see the furry critter. I turned and headed off in a different direction as Daniel turned his light to carefully examine the shrub. No wonder he preferred to hunt during the day. Even with his speed, a rabbit could be a problem for him to catch in the dark if it ran through tight places and went down a burrow before he caught it. The flashlight gave him an edge, but also let the animals see him coming.

I shifted behind a tree and began to run in a silent stalk through the forest. I blinked as my restlessness and instincts stopped bothering me. The restlessness was still there a bit, but it was nowhere near the relentless driving force that it had been. I went onto a deer trail and traded my silent stalk for a silent upright walk. The restlessness came back full force with my instincts behind it. I went once more for the trees, as soon as I was acting like Nightstalkers normally did, my instincts didn't fight with me and the restlessness abated. I paused behind a shrub along a deer trail in an ambush position, just to test out the various scenarios. I felt the deep patience return, although the slight bit of restlessness was undermining it. How odd... It does seem tied to how I act. I shook my head and decided to focus on the reason for stopping here. A quick sniff told me about the variety of life around me. It was a good thing I liked rabbit, because the critters were very common around here and just the right size for a meal. My instincts made it child's play to catch and kill the rabbit. It was normally easy, but my instincts were stronger tonight and more than happy to help in the hunt. The blood tasted sweeter than normal, although I wasn't sure if it was this particular rabbit's dietary habits or due to the drug going after the virus in my blood. I headed back to where I had left Daniel. I let my footsteps fall louder, which bothered my instincts. I ignored my instincts. I had overruled them for months, so it was almost second-nature now. A quick sniff told me that Daniel had indeed caught a rabbit and was in the clearing. Daniel had his flashlight on as he leaned against a tree and waited. His head was turned in my direction and I was pretty sure his flashlight was providing enough ambient light for him to see me. I walked towards him and paused as my vision went black. "Trinity?" I exhaled gustily, "My vision went again and lasted 7 or 8 seconds." My sight cleared and I rubbed my temples, which didn't ease my headache any. Daniel wrote the time and duration down before tucking them into a pocket. I continued along the quad trail at a slow jog. The restlessness was back along with my instincts telling me that I was not behaving as a Nightstalker should. At the very least I could try to wear myself out and see if that would help. 
 
 We passed through the gates as the sun was just about to peek over the horizon. My instincts had faded reluctantly with the brightening sky. Daniel walked beside me as we headed back to the lab. I didn't bother thinking about going back to my room. They wouldn't be able to track my symptoms if they weren't around me. Truth be told, I had no control over my current symptoms so there was a chance that my control could suddenly disappear as swiftly as my vision. My muscles were sore both from the drug and from my constant movement last night. I sat down in a chair in the lab and took a drink out of my water bottle. Daniel sat at the counter and started transferring his notes into the graph Nina had been working on. I felt the instant that the sun finally appeared over the horizon. My instincts were even quieter than normal, as if they had worn themselves out fighting me throughout the night. The restlessness had also faded with the approaching dawn and truly disappeared now that the sun was visible. I was tired now that my mind was no longer waging a war with me. I closed my eyes and decided to see if I could grab a few seconds of sleep. I knew that once Nina woke up I wouldn't have any opportunity. If tonight was as bad as the night I just went through, then there was absolutely no chance of sleeping as long as the sun was below the horizon. I hadn't expected to be able to sleep, but I managed to doze off. It had been almost two days since I last slept, so that may have had something to do with it. I heard Daniel put the pen down and relax in his own chair as he kept me silent company. I dozed off again in the silence of the room. The muscle tremors were the only thing that disturbed my rest. I woke to the sound of footsteps on the stairs. I remained motionless for a bit before turning my head towards the door. For some reason, I still wanted Daniel to be unaware of exactly how good my hearing was. Nina entered the door looking far too awake at this time of the morning for a human who had stayed up until almost midnight. "Good morning. How are you feeling?" How can someone be this cheerful in the morning? It should be outlawed until at least 6am. "About the same as yesterday." She wandered over to the see the new numbers Daniel had recorded for her. "Well, it looks like both the vision problem and the muscle tremors are beginning to happen a bit less frequently. The bad news is that the blackouts are lasting longer. Hmmm... I don't see any notes for the vision during the last two hours." She glanced up at me. I shrugged, "I took a nap. I somehow doubt that much has changed, but I am sure that we will find out soon enough." She nodded, "Hopefully some sleep will help. Let me grab another blood sample." I watched as she took my vitals again before taking one vial of blood. Nina left the room to go analyze the blood sample in the larger microscope. I growled lightly as my vision once more became blurry. I exhaled gustily as my sight returned, "Eight seconds." It was more solid proof that sleep had not miraculously cured me.

 

Chapter 57


 I glanced up from my book as Nicky walked into the room. I sniffed the air in suspicion as I narrowed my eyes at her. Nicky scowled at me, "Yeah, yeah. Drop your bloodhound act. I know." I sighed, "Who in their right mind gave you coffee?" Nicky dropped into a chair, "I grabbed a cup at breakfast. What did you expect? I was up half the night, woke up in a dark and empty lab, which is super creepy by the way. This morning came far too early. I needed something to wake me up." I sniffed the air again, "Just one cup?" I highly doubted her claim... Nicky grumbled, "I lost count after the third." I shook my head and turned my attention back to my book. I had forgotten just how much coffee affected this lady. Nicky sat in her chair grumbling to herself quietly. I gritted my teeth as a tremor ran through my body. Before they had been painless, but they were slowly getting more severe and were slightly painful now. An hour later Nina came back into the room. I waited for her update. She saw me watching her and sighed, "The drug is still present and doing something. I have no clue what though. How did last night go?" I shrugged, "The restlessness didn't fade until the dawn. My instincts were oddly strong as well. We stopped to hunt and when I started slipping through the trees like Nightstalkers normally do, the restlessness mostly subsided. If it is that bad tonight, I think I will run by myself and just record the times." Daniel blinked slowly, "You didn't mention that to me. We could have left the main trails if it helped." I shook my head, "I rarely let my instincts influence my actions that much around you and I doubt that your instincts would have handled it well if I acted like a Nightstalker." Nina sighed, "I think we had better pack for several days." Nicky gave her a blank look, "Huh? Whatever for?" Nina made a face, "The drug is still doing something. Chances are that tonight will be worse for Trinity since the changes are manifesting themselves at night. I think we need to try to find a feral Nightstalker for some blood tests to see if it does the same thing. The real reason is that it is safer for those here if we leave for a few days until we know exactly how this drug is going to affect Trinity." I examined Nina, "You sound as if you are quite sure that tonight will be different from last night." Nina's shoulder drooped a bit, "The drug isn't weakening yet and I don't have much of an idea what to expect. I will bring the big microscope, a battery and solar panels along to keep track of the changes. This is more of a safety precaution than anything in case your control slips." I tilted my head, "Another road trip? That is fine by me. Just promise me that you won't pick up every stray human we come across." Nina chuckled, "It can count as a road trip, but I am hoping you will keep your nose open in case you pick up the scent of a Nightstalker. No, it probably isn't wise for us to pick up people until we start to head back. I don't recall ever seeing people on foot before, so that last time was a real surprise." That just went to show how bad my luck was. Nina in all of her travelling had never seen people stuck on foot. My entire trip had been littered with strays. I nudged my backpack with my foot, "I am packed, although we had better pack food since we can't always count on looting stores." Nicky yawned, "You are leaving me in this place without supervision? This could be fun." Nina shook her head, "No, you are coming with us."

Nicky looked surprised, "Huh? Why?"  She was clearly not awake and her language skills were reflecting it. Or it might have been the coffee. Nina shrugged as she pulled out a bag and started stuffing science supplies and a huge package of notebooks into it. "Several reasons. If we leave you here unattended, you might not be alive by the time we get back. I saw your first attempt at archery and was surprised that you didn't shoot your own foot. You are also the person who Trinity trusts the most, if she starts having problems you might be the only person who can get close to her." Nicky rolled her eyes, "I guess this means I better go pack before you drag me out of the gate by my ankles." She tromped out of the room and up the stairs. Nina blinked in confusion as she watched her go. I sighed, "She got into the coffee. Don't expect to get much out of her." Nina shook her head as she continued packing. 
 
 
 I watched the trees go by as I sat in the back of the truck and leaned against the tailgate so I could see where we were going. Nicky was laying down on the mattress and watching the clouds. Daniel was driving as Nina sat in the passenger seat. This arrangement was much better than the previous road trip. We also had several jerrycans of fuel and quite a few bags of supplies to make this trip easy. Those in the stronghold were under the impression that we were going to look for a feral Nightstalker. They were not aware of the fact that I had become an unwitting experiment with an untried drug. We were heading down a remote road far from other strongholds. If a Nightstalker was around a stronghold, it would have attacked them. No such incidents had been reported, so it was pretty safe to say that no feral Nightstalkers were around those areas. I kept testing the air, but no scent of a Nightstalker reached my nose. We had only been driving half a day, so it wasn't a surprise that we hadn't stumbled across one of the rare creatures. A tremor ran through my muscles and I wrote down the time. They were letting me track the symptoms so I got used to it before heading out tonight. Several hours later we pulled up next to a small roadside motel. I glanced around while testing the air as I got out of the truck. No humans were around, which was a relief. I grabbed the extendable ladder that hung on the outside of the truck before leaning it against the side of the building so we could climb up to the flat roof. It was the safest way to camp when outside of a stronghold. Nicky grumbled as she started scaling the ladder. I shook my head before following her up. Daniel was standing in the back of the truck already waiting for me to get onto the roof. He started tossing up bags for me to catch. It sure beat carrying them up the ladder, although Daniel was going to carry the microscope. It was too fragile to toss regardless of how carefully we packed it. We set about making camp and putting up a tent for the humans. Daniel would remain on the roof by the campfire all night as a guard while I roamed the surrounding area. I started the fire, refusing to let Nicky play with fire in her current mood. Nina came over, "Let me check your vitals and grab another blood sample." I sat back and watched her as she noted things down. She left a blank notebook for me as she picked up my notes. She paused, "Are you sure these durations are correct?" "Yes." I was still losing my vision roughly every fifteen minutes. Until about an hour ago, the haze lasted for twelve seconds, but now it was back to eleven seconds. It was the first sign that the worst was finally over.

She quickly took her blood sample and headed straight for the microscope. Daniel dug through the supplies before picking out a loaf of bread and a carefully packaged container with eggs. I tested the air while he attempted to toast bread and make scrambled eggs. "There is a Runner somewhere upwind, although it is quite some distance away. I am not sure if it will show up here or not." Daniel took a deep breath, "I can't smell it. If it shows up, then we can deal with it. I doubt it is smart enough to climb the ladder the way we have it set up." I nodded as I watched him cook. Nicky was still Miss Grumpypants. We hadn't even packed any coffee. Nina preferred tea and neither Daniel nor me wanted coffee. It made things easier. Daniel called Nina over, "Supper is ready." He passed Nina a plate and made one up for Nicky. He glanced at me, "How much do you want?" I shook my head, "I'll pass, I'm not hungry." He nodded and put some on a plate for himself. I usually never ate supper. Nicky gave me an odd look, "I know you didn't eat breakfast or lunch. When is the last time you ate?" I paused to consider her question, "I hunted the last two nights in a row, but I haven't touched anything other than water since that cookie." I hadn't really thought about it and the realization struck me as strange. I had always loved my food and rarely went a day without eating. It had been almost 48 hours since I had eaten that cookie. I glanced over at Nina and Daniel who looked quite surprised. Nicky shook her head and dug into her backpack to pull out a container. She opened it up to reveal a bunch of apple slices that she must have taken from the mess hall. She held it over to me, but I shook my head, "Thanks, but I really am not hungry at all." Nicky turned towards Nina, "She is definitely sick. I have never seen her turn down fruit if she skipped a single meal." Nina frowned in concern, "Trinity, can you please try to eat a few slices? I know you don't feel like it, but people who aren't feeling the best often lose their appetites and they still need to eat." I narrowed my eyes, but sighed and took two apple slices. They were crisp, which is how I liked them, but the flavor seemed off. Their scent was fine, although it didn't tempt my appetite like it usually did. I had never had such a difficult time eating fruit. My stomach turned and gurgled unhappily. They finished their supper, although Nina and Nicky kept glancing at me in concern. Nicky held out the container again, but I shook my head. My stomach had never been upset or bothered by anything since I had turned, but it did not appreciate the apple slices. Nina washed her plate and dried it, "How is your headache?" I tilted me head as I considered the constant ache, "I think it might have actually faded a bit, or else I am just getting used to it." My stomach gurgled again and Nina raised her eyebrow. I exhaled gustily, "My stomach isn't impressed with the apple slices." In actuality, it didn't want any kind of food and I also had no interest in hunting either. She nodded slowly before heading back to her microscope. I glanced at Daniel, "Do you need to hunt before the sun sets? I can keep an eye on things for a bit." He evaluated me for a second before nodding, "I will be back shortly." He jumped off the roof and disappeared into the trees. I remained in my seat. It would be a couple of hours before the sun set. I was practically dreading it since I wasn't sure how bad it was going to be. I put more wood on the fire. The night was going to stay clear and cloudless. The morning air would feel cool to our human companions when they woke up. Daniel was back before too long and sat back in his seat. I glanced at him, "Keep the fire stoked up once the sun sets. If I somehow lose control and my sunglasses come off, I won't be able to approach the fire or any bright light." Daniel turned to inspect my face, "Do you think you will have any problems with control?" I shook my head, "No, thankfully that area has not been affected as far as I can tell. That little trick will also keep any other feral Nightstalkers at bay." Nicky yawned and dug through her bag and put two cans of tomato juice by her seat along with a bottle of liquid dish soap. Daniel raised his eyebrow at her, "And what is that stuff for?" Nicky shrugged nonchalantly, "Backup. Just in case a feral zombie gets on this roof. I heard rumors in the stronghold that you don't see well in the dark and I like to be prepared." I smirked at Daniel's frustrated expression. Nicky sure knew how to drive someone crazy without them realizing it. My smirk dropped as I glanced in the general direction of the sun without looking at the painfully bright light. A tremor passed through my body. I glanced at my pocket watch and dutifully noted down the time. I considered the sun once more. I had felt the sun touch the horizon. I had never felt that before. My senses had always known when the sun completely dropped below the horizon or when it just started to peek above it. This time was different. The sun was still above the horizon and the barest edge had just started to sink out of sight. My instincts stirred slightly, although it was far earlier than they normally started to wake. I turned to Daniel, "When exactly do your instincts fade and strengthen according to the sun?" He regarded me and spoke reluctantly, "They strengthen as soon as the sun appears above the horizon and they subside as the sun touches the horizon and starts to set. Why?" I frowned as I glanced towards the sun, "Normally my instincts start to stir the second the sun completely leaves the horizon and they fade even as the sky lightens before the first sliver peeks above the horizon. My instincts just started to stir as soon as the sun touched the horizon, which has never happened before. Even last night they didn't start to strengthen until the sun had completely disappeared below the horizon." He frowned at that news. Nina looked up and came over, "I want to get a blood sample once the sun is completely down and your instincts have strengthened. Hopefully it will show me something. On a side note, the drug is starting to break down, so that is a good thing." I titled my head, "What are the odds of my body healing back to normal once the drug is out of my system?" Nina shrugged, "There is no way to tell. My guess is that the changes won't reverse themselves, but I could be wrong." I nodded with a heavy sigh. There wasn't anything we could do other than to watch and wait.

 

Chapter 58


 My muscles twitched restlessly as I waited for the sky to darken further. The restlessness was back and a bit worse than before. It was hard to sit. My instincts were definitely stronger though. They wanted to head to the forest instead of hanging out on this open rooftop. The fire was burning merrily and giving off enough light that Daniel didn't need his flashlight to watch me, although it was in his hand just in case. My senses seemed to come alive as my instincts strengthened. Even from up here the small movements of animals on the edge of the forest caught my attention. Details were sharper and my sense of smell was even keener. A heat haze interrupted my watch of the forest. "Ten seconds. This one was 20 minutes from the last one. The one before was 18 minutes." Nina nodded and recorded it in her notepad as well. "The drug is probably breaking down faster now. I assume your headache is fading. How is your control?" I nodded slowly, "Yes, the headache is fading to something that I can actually ignore." I was silent as I evaluated my control and noticed an anomaly. I examined it in bewilderment. Nina noticed that I hadn't answered her one question and I had always answered each one so far, "Trinity? Are you having any problems with your control?" All three were watching me closely. I slowly looked towards Nina with a confused expression, "My control is fine. The bloodlust is gone though. Your scent is even less appealing than that apple was." Daniel looked at me in complete disbelief, "Are you sure?" I took a slow deep breath, I halfway expected to be hit with their strong scent, but it didn't bother me. The burning in my throat was truly gone. The faintest hint of desire for their blood was there, but I had to look for it to notice it. Normally I had to constantly use control to avoid giving into the siren-like temptation. I wasn't sure when this change had occurred. I exhaled slowly, "I know I was getting accustomed to the scent of humans back in the Stronghold, but this is different. I actually have to look for it to find even the smallest hint of bloodlust. The burning in my throat is gone as well. I am so used to suppressing it that I am not sure when it faded." Nina took quick notes, "Has your sense of smell changed?" I took another deep breath, the strong scent of the humans still didn't bother me. Daniel's scent bothered my instincts as it always did. I could smell the animals in the forest beyond and their scent caused a thread of bloodlust that I usually felt. "My sense of smell got stronger as my instincts rose. I can easily smell the wildlife in the forest. Their scent makes me want to hunt, but neither you nor Nicky cause any noticeable bloodlust." Nina looked intrigued as she made notes, "Let me get a blood sample so I can compare the samples. The batteries have about an hour of charge left." She pulled out a needle and with a sigh I held out my arm for her. I was beginning to develop a dislike for needles. Nina also took note of my vitals before heading back to her microscope. I shook myself as I stood up. The restlessness demanded attention as much as a swarm of ants did if they were under your clothing. I glanced at the three, "Unless someone needs something, I really can't sit still anymore." Daniel shook his head and Nina was too preoccupied to respond. I turned and went to the edge of the roof before dropping down. I wasted no time heading for the nearby forest and switching to my silent Nightstalker stalk. The restlessness disappeared. My instincts were still high and making me more aware of things, but they weren't trying to push me to do anything. I removed my sunglasses and looked around in amazement. The details were sharp and crisp – even more so than usual. I hadn't noticed earlier due to how dirty my glasses had gotten while riding down the dusty road.

The heat haze once more clouded my vision. Once it cleared, I noted it down. Even standing hidden in the shadows was enough for my instincts. I took a deep breath as thousands of scents hit my senses. Layers upon layers of smells for me to unravel. My instincts and mind did so automatically and almost instantaneously as they painted a vivid picture of the forest around me. There were lots of deer in this area. My mind shifted into hunting gear. I swiftly and silently tracked the nearest one. It was sleeping without any idea of the danger that lurked nearby. I examined it for a few seconds before attacking. My footsteps were silent and I broke its neck before it woke up. I growled lowly as I realized that I didn't have a blade to shave the hair away. I could have at least borrowed a small swiss army knife. My nails once more served to shave the dense hair away from the neck. The deer's blood was sweet. It hadn't just been the rabbit, my taste buds were changing. I hadn't felt hungry at supper, but nightfall had woken my appetite up. Human food didn't interest me though. I managed to drain the entire deer. I clenched my jaws with a low growl as my instincts tried to push me into making a Nightstalker scream. That would probably give everyone within hearing distance a heart attack. I exhaled slowly as I shook off the urge. My hunt was done, it wasn't like I needed to tell the world that I was here. Stupid instincts... I did a few slow laps around the motel. A few times I came close enough to see the fire that Daniel was tending. He was letting it burn quite high as I had suggested. The wind blew gently towards me and my nose wrinkled at Daniel's scent. My instincts wanted nothing to do with the higher ranking zombie. My instincts also didn't care about the humans. They saw no reason for me to remain in this area when there was an almost endless forest stretching to the west that I could explore. My humanity was the only thing that kept me here. Since I was travelling and moving in a fashion that Nightstalkers were supposed to, my instincts didn't really care what I did. It was much like when I had been in the mountains and I had done as I pleased. The restlessness was gone and my instincts saw nothing to warn me about. It was actually fairly peaceful like this. I decided to try a few things out to see what triggered the restlessness. 
 
 A couple of hours later I was pretty sure I had it figured out. It was as if the details that made a Nightstalker unique had been amplified. If I stood up straight, my instincts kicked in, which in turn stirred the restlessness up. Nightstalkers, Runners and even Terrors never stood up completely straight like a human unless it was a deliberate action. Our knees were always slightly bent the smallest amount, and never locked straight unless we overrode our instincts. Almost like when playing sports, our bodies were ready to move at a moment's notice. Keeping my knees just barely bent prevented my instincts from getting worked up. After a lot of trial and error, I realized that it wasn't so much that my instincts wanted me to hide in the trees, as they wanted me to be inconspicuous. Nightstalkers were supposed to be impossible to spot at night and my instincts were like a nagging teacher about that detail. At the moment I sat on a rock under a tree. A human would have been unable to spot me in the shadows and the deer grazing across the clearing was certainly unaware of me. I was sitting and I wasn't bothered by my instincts even though I wasn't hidden. I wondered if I could sit on the roof if I was further away from the campfire. I would have to head back before the sky lightened to test that theory. I lifted my head to test the air again. The Runner had been drifting closer to the motel all night. He was going slowly enough that I knew he had not caught the scent of my companions. I headed off in the Runner's direction.

Runners staggered around unless they were actively chasing prey and this one looked like a drunken sailor. No wonder some humans thought they were just a normal mindless zombie until the Runner started to chase them. I stalked out of the trees and onto the road that it was slowly following. It saw me and growled lowly. My instincts were insulted that the low ranking zombie dared to growl at me even though my eyes were visible and glowing faintly. I snarled at it in challenge. My fierce snarl surprised the Runner, normally snarls that aggressive were not directed at another zombie. The Runner turned and walked away from me, back in the direction that it had come from. Which was exactly what I had hoped for when I had snarled at it so. I zigzagged down the road to make my scent heavy on this part of the road. Hopefully it would keep the Runner from returning this way again. I circled the motel, occasionally putting on my sunglasses to lure the regular zombies away. I paused to scent the air and followed my nose to the small cabin that was tucked away in the forest. No one was home unless I counted the mice. It had likely been a small hunting cabin with the emphasis on small. The bed took up half of the tiny building. I investigated the three cupboards and grabbed any food I saw. It didn't interest me, but any additional food would be welcome for the others. I knew Nicky would go crazy for the Doritos. Maybe a big bag would pull her out of her coffee stupor. I continued patrolling until the sky started to lighten. Normally at this point my instincts would start to slowly fade, but they didn't take the hint. I started to head back. I put my sunglasses back on and let my footsteps fall louder as I approached the motel. "It's just me." In my mind, it was better to ensure that Daniel knew it was only me and not a possible foe, especially considering that the wind was not in his favor at the moment. I climbed up the ladder. As I had suspected, my instincts were fine until I got close to the fire. Daniel was facing my direction, "How are you doing?" I pulled my chair further away from the high burning fire, "It feels like the changes are settling down." I pulled out the notepad and gently tossed it to him to look at. He almost missed it, which surprised me. I hadn't realized that his sight at night was quite that bad. He turned his chair a bit so the firelight could let him read my brief notes. He nodded thoughtfully as he skimmed the times, "How is everything else?" I sighed, "The headache is mostly gone. My muscles no longer ache. The restlessness is actually tied to my instincts and as long as I am not too easily spotted, it more or less disappears. My instincts are quite high, although they are just watchful. They should have started to fade by now since the sky is getting lighter, but they aren't, which strikes me as strange." He glanced in my general direction, although I noticed that his eyes failed to focus on me, "So that is why you moved the chair so far away from the fire." I nodded, although I doubted that he could see the motion, "Yes. It has the restlessness down to a level that I can ignore." He pulled a pen out of his pocket and started writing on the notepad, probably noting down all of those details. I watched the earliest hints of the sunrise as the sky started to lighten. The sun had almost peeked above the horizon before my instincts finally started fading. It was a relief since the restlessness had started getting stronger as the world got lighter and I was more visible, now it began to recede swiftly. I sighed, "My instincts are finally starting to fade to normal. Normally they have almost completely subsided by now." Daniel nodded and wrote that down as well. He was almost as bad as Nina when it came to note taking. I relaxed a bit more as the sun peeked above the horizon and my instincts started to retreat more swiftly. Daniel got up and dug through our supplies to bring out a box of porridge. The sun had almost cleared the horizon when I heard shuffling from inside the tent. The porridge had just finished, so we were safe even though I was pretty sure it was Nina who was getting up. Nicky was much louder and didn't care who she woke up when she rose. Nina exited the tent and walked over to warm up at the fire. She glanced at me and Daniel passed her the notepad before she could repeat Daniel's questions. She nodded, "This is looking better. Did the bloodlust return?" "Not for humans. The desire for animal blood is more noticeable and I also noticed that it tastes sweeter. I had no desire to hunt while the sun was in the sky, but it came back once my instincts strengthened at night." Nina took Daniel's pen and started taking notes. I shook my head as the main note taker once more started analyzing the notes. I heard more shuffling from the tent and before long Nicky tromped out of the tent. She headed straight for the food before taking a seat. Mornings and Nicky often did not get along, especially if she had coffee the day before. I also wasn't too sure where her fashion sense originated from either. Her shirt looked like something a secretary would wear while her faded and stained jeans looked like they had traveled across the country on foot several times. Her one sock was pale green and the other was deep yellow. I blinked slowly before scanning our surroundings. My eyes went back to her bright socks. Nicky noticed my preoccupation, "What are you looking at so intently? Honest, the clothes I am wearing wouldn't get me expelled from school. Been there, done that. Although having the one teacher faint as he walked in was worth it." I blinked slowly, "Your sock is yellow. I haven't been able to see that color since I turned. The red haze in my vision has almost disappeared." Nina finished her last spoonful of porridge, "Very interesting. There is enough light for the microscope now, let me take a look at your blood before we hit the road again." I grumbled, but let her take the sample. I sat as I watched her play with the microscope. Less than ten minutes later she had an update, "The drug is almost completely gone. The changes look permanent though. I am hoping we can find a feral Nightstalker and test this drug on it. If it keeps a feral from attacking humans, then that is a huge breakthrough. So, let's get on the road and see if we can find one." She sounded so optimistic that my pessimism immediately kicked in. Yeah, we are going to find one as it is taking a leisurely stroll down the middle of the highway. Right. I had a feeling that this was going to be a long day.

 

Chapter 59

            I was beginning to detest long boring road trips where I did nothing but sit in the back of a truck. The air was warm and dry, so scents weren't travelling as far as they could have. Now that my control was no longer really being questioned, we were simply trying to find a feral Nightstalker. On a highway. In the middle of the day. The fact that it was late afternoon showed how well this plan was working. I took another deep breath of the air that swirled around the back of the truck. "Are you sure that a Runner won't work? There are at least three around here somewhere." This truck had a window in the back of the cab and it was open, so even Nina could hear my normal speaking volume fairly easily. Nina glanced back at me through the window, "We inoculated the last two Runners in the barn with that drug before we left and several people are keeping a close eye on them. At this point, we really need another Nightstalker to see if he or she has the same side effects." I had been pretty sure I knew the answer to that before I asked, although I hadn't known about the Runners in the barn. Daniel had his window down, but his sense of smell wasn't as good as mine was and he just kept picking up my scent. This meant that it was up to me to locate a feral Nightstalker. I sighed before taking another deep breath, trying to pick up any hint of a Nightstalker without success. This was quite a remote area and the nearest town was still three hours away. We would camp there for the night. That was still three long hours away as I immersed myself in the world of scent. The way the air swirled was very annoying, I had no idea which direction the scents were coming from. When on foot, I had a very good idea which direction something was in and how far away it was. 
 
 My eyes opened, "Daniel, could you stop the truck for a moment?" The truck rolled to a stop and I stood up to take a deep breath. It was faint, but it was there. A light growl rumbled through my chest, "It is very faint, but there is a Nightstalker to the west somewhere." Nina unfolded the map and examined the roads, "If we go to this intersection and follow this road we can get much further west with the truck." The truck started moving and I sat back down. Fifteen minutes of driving later the scent was stronger. Daniel slowed the truck down as he looked over his shoulder at me, "How far away do you think it is?" I stood up and Daniel gently brought the truck to a standstill. The smell was fairly strong and crossed the entire area. I doubted that this feral female ever encountered water except on the occasions when the rain gave her a free shower. "It is a female and definitely feral. Her scent is all over this area so her lair can't be more than a ten minute walk away." Daniel turned off the truck and got out. Nina slid over to the driver's seat, if any feral zombie appeared she would drive away with Nicky in the back. I jumped out of the truck box, I was not looking forward to what we were about to do. We were going to knock out a feral Nightstalker and truss it up so we could haul back with us. This is going to be as fun as going to a tropical beach in a wool sweater and snow boots... I leaned over to grab the bag of handcuffs and metal wire out of the back of the truck. Rope would not work with a zombie's fingernails. Daniel walked over to my side of the truck as he sniffed the air, "The scent is definitely thick around here. It is almost as if she ran around in circles. Can you track her?" I snorted at the stupid question and pointed over my shoulder. It surprised me that he was unable to sift through the numerous scent trails and pick up the stronger one on the breeze. I left my backpack in the truck and grabbed a crowbar we had picked up last night from the motel. Daniel promised to return my weapons once we returned to the Stronghold where they had been left. 

I turned to the forest I had just pointed at and started jogging. Daniel easily kept up as he ran beside me. The forest here was quite thick and this zombie had apparently covered every inch of it. I slowed to a walk as I tried to sort which direction the scent was strongest. This close to her lair, her scent was so strong that it was practically embedded in the area like a fog. Daniel was watching me as I led the way. There is a much easier way to do this... I called up my instincts and took a deep breath. The smell of damp cave was child's play to track and there was only one cave in this area. I altered my course and pushed through the shrubs and undergrowth. I had no problem shifting through the tight spots without moving branches or rustling leaves. It was part of my Nightstalker abilities to move soundlessly without giving away my location. Daniel was now following in my tracks and it was quite apparent that Terrors were not meant to navigate tight spaces. It didn't take long before I came to a stop. The cave was half hidden behind shrubs, but the resident within had worn a trail with all of her coming and going. I eyed up the opening, it was barely waist high on me. I glanced back. Daniel was glowering at the cave entrance. "Let me guess, there is no way I am getting you in there?" He growled, "Not a chance." A faint growl came from the cave. The Nightstalker knew we were here and had probably caught our scent already. I glanced at my pocket watch, my vision had faded out only half an hour ago, so I still had time if I didn't dilly dally. I dropped the bag of supplies on the ground, "Mind if I borrow your flashlight? I doubt I can spook her out, but it will keep her from attacking me the instant I get into the dark. This is the only entrance by the way, unless my sense of smell is out to lunch." He tossed me the flashlight that I had originally given him. I glanced at it to ensure that I knew how to turn it on and adjust the brightness. The crowbar was in my one hand as I approached the cave. I turned the flashlight on to its brightest setting before I even crouched down to enter the cave. Daniel would likely have not fit through the first part of the entrance. The passage got narrower further in before widening again. A couple of the spots were tight for me since my hands were full. I heard the Nightstalker snarl as it retreated from the light. This must not be a very big cave. I rounded the corner cautiously and the zombie shrieked a high-pitched painful snarl at me. The Nightstalker had her back to me as she tried to shield her eyes. I took several silent steps forward, but I needed her to raise her head in order to knock her out. I balanced the crowbar in the same hand as my flashlight as I picked up a fist sized stone. I snarled nastily at her and she rounded with a furious shriek to try and lash out at me with her eyes tightly closed. I wasn't as close as she thought I had been. The rock whipped forward hitting her in the head. She stumbled to her knees in a daze. I darted forward silently to crack her upside the head with the crowbar. The blow was hard enough to knock her out cold, but not so hard that she would be unconscious for days. I erred on the side of caution, we could always knock her out again if needed. I tucked the crowbar through my belt before turning off the flashlight and sliding it into my pocket. I examined the filthy creature, the thought of touching her disgusted me. Feral zombies had no notions of cleanliness. In the end, there was no avoiding it. With a sigh I grabbed her hands and started dragging her back through the dark tunnels to the sunlight. The low entrance was the worst and I had to go on my knees just to get enough leverage despite the fact that she wasn't that much bigger than me. I finally felt open air around me and glanced over my shoulder. Daniel was waiting with the handcuffs and other binding implements.

It didn't take long to ensure that she wouldn't be going anywhere if she woke up. With a reluctant growl Daniel threw her over his shoulder and headed back for the truck. I guess he didn't want to have to touch her either. I followed behind him, ensuring that my footsteps were loud enough for him to track. Daniel wasted no time getting to the truck and dumping it inside the box against the tailgate. He ensured that the creature was chained to the truck itself, just in case. Nicky had her back against the truck cab and watched with a frown, unimpressed with her new company. I vaulted into the back to sit with my back against the cab as well. Daniel reclaimed the driver seat and swiftly started driving. He was going to drive as long as possible, hopefully until we got back to the Stronghold. This truck had high beam headlights that were far too bright to be legal in the old world and it should be enough to allow him to see well enough to drive at night. It was my duty to keep an eye on our new friend. If Daniel couldn't see well enough to drive, then I would take over, but the lights on this truck had been installed with Daniel in mind. Daniel picked up speed until we were going as fast as we could while dodging the large pot holes in the road. On the way out, we had been driving slower so I could keep tabs on scents, but now speed was our goal. We would probably make it back before noon unless we broke down. This was still going to be a long drive even if we didn't stop for anything more than bathroom breaks. My instincts started strengthening the instant the sun touched the horizon. Sitting in the corner of a truck box in the growing darkness was inconspicuous enough to prevent the restlessness from getting too bad. My instincts were not impressed with the presence of another Nightstalker. She was an unknown stranger in the same vicinity as I was and my instincts considered her a potential rival that did not belong. My instincts were just a touch stronger than last night, but I didn't notice any other changes. The drug had finally stopped playing havoc with my body and mind. I had survived it. The aftereffects were nowhere near as bad as they could have been with an untried drug. Louise had still better never show her face, I still got mad if I thought about that despicable underhanded woman. The control that had been honed in keeping me from attacking humans was now needed to rein in my strengthened instincts and simply sit here. Nina's breathing showed that she had fallen asleep in the front seat. I was pretty sure that Nicky was close to sleep, if she wasn't already there. It was going to be a long night. 
 
 We pulled up in front of the barn just before noon. Nina got out and headed over to open up the barn doors. I stood up and kept watch while Nicky slid over the side of the truck. Daniel dropped the tailgate and grabbed our new guinea pig. I slowly followed the group into the barn. I hadn't been sure what to expect, but on the inside it looked more like a jail with a science lab at one end. Two zombies moaned against the bars in their jail cells. Nina opened up the door to a heavily reinforced cage that I was certain would contain a Nightstalker. Daniel put the Nightstalker on the floor of that cage and undid most of the bindings. He left the ankle shackles on. He closed the door as he left the cell and ensured that the door was truly latched. Nina was over on the science lab side of the building. I slowly wandered over. She looked up at my approach, "We will inject the feral with the same drug before she wakes up. Then we can see if she has a similar reaction. We have decided to call it the controlex drug since it removed your bloodlust. It will probably do something similar to any zombie."

I nodded slowly as I scanned the room, slightly on edge. I really didn't care what they called it since it wasn't going to change what it had done. Nina had already taken a dozen vials of blood from the Nightstalker while Daniel had held the feral's arms even though she was unconscious. Nicky walked up beside me, "This place is creepy. I am glad that they didn't lock the two of us up in here when we tried to run." Nina shook her head, "We wouldn't have done that. There is a huge difference between a feral zombie that will attack any human and a sane one. We would never lock a sane one up unless we were trying to help them retain control, like we did when Trinity got knocked out cold. Once we were sure that she was in control, we let her out. The door on her cell wasn't even locked." That still did not overly reassure me. Nicky frowned, "So why exactly is there a cage like that in here?" Nina started filling a syringe with some sort of clear liquid from a vial, "We had been trying for almost six months to find a Nightstalker and we had never imagined finding a sane one. We had been preparing to contain a feral." I tilted my head, "What exactly did you think that first night when you stumbled across me?" Nina glanced up at me in amusement, "We heard your scream first and thought that it was very odd considering that the sky was still quite light out. The rumors we heard said that Nightstalkers never came out until it was almost pitch black out. Daniel was hoping to corner it while he could still see. "Once we got closer, Daniel picked up your scent as well as the humans. At first we thought that a feral had been lured out early by the presence of humans and was waiting for dusk to attack. It wasn't until we got closer that we realized that this wasn't the case. The humans were relaxing on the roof without a care when any other group would have been hiding after that noise. Your scent was also mixed up in theirs. We were stunned, we had never imagined that we would come across another sane Nightstalker." She held out the syringe to Daniel who took it and headed back to the Nightstalker. He injected her before once more closing the door securely and dropping the empty needle in a biohazard bin. Nina picked up two notebooks from in front of the Runner's cages and examined them. The Runners growled and shook the cage bars as they tried to get at her. "These two were injected with the controlex drug. They had somewhat similar muscle tremors and likely had some vision problems from how they wiped at their faces. They are still attracted to humans though." I examined the zombies, they didn't seem quite as determined as most normally did, "You two are the only non-zombie creatures in the room. Have you had a rabbit or another animal nearby to see if that made a difference?" Nina looked stunned and glanced at Daniel with wide eyes. Daniel took off at full speed as he exited the open barn door. I blinked slowly before exchanging a look with Nicky. From her expression, she was on the same page as me. Neither of us could believe that they hadn't thought of that, nor did we see a real need for Daniel to take off like a freaking rocket just to test out a thought. In less than two minutes Daniel had returned with a wide eyed rabbit that was frozen in fear. He walked towards the cage and the Runner backed up from the high ranking zombie with a growl. Daniel frowned in confusion. I covered my face with one hand in exasperation, "Daniel, please use your head. You are a bloody Terror and he is a Runner. Put the rabbit in the cage beside him and give him some space." He growled at my tone, but did what I said. He backed up so that the Runner wasn't as affected by his presence. Nina inhaled in excitement while she wrote as fast as she could. The Runner was against the cage trying to get to the rabbit even though Nina had moved close to the cage. She was clearly excited, "This is amazing. I am much closer than the rabbit is, but it is ignoring me in favor of the rabbit!" Nicky tilted her head, "So you are able to prevent people from becoming a mindless normal zombie if they are bitten. You also have a cure to reverse the zombie virus. Now it looks like we have something to help with control?" Nina nodded as her eyes shone in excitement, "Yes! Exactly! This is more than we ever hoped for. It is too bad that we don't have an actual vaccine yet, but at the very least we have something for when that third wave appears in a month or so." I blinked slowly as I realized that she was right. Those who had been infected from the sneezing of the people in the second wave would be turning before too much longer. I nodded slowly, "I hadn't thought of that. I am not even sure how early I would be able to scent their infection before they started sneezing." Nina nodded, "Just keep an eye out. We can always do a blood test even if you aren't certain they are infected. It is better to catch it early and have them wear a mask than to have them sneeze even once and potentially spread it. As it is, we are spreading word to other Strongholds regarding precautions. Everyone will ensure that they sneeze or cough into a rag or something closer to the time. Many places will also have everyone wearing masks just in case." Living in the forest away from people for so long, I had forgotten that the virus waves were still a hot topic among the humans. I had barely noticed the second wave as I had already headed for the hills. It sounded like the surviving Strongholds were implementing precautions and were ready to make sure that this wave was the last one. 


 

Chapter 60

            Word of our return spread quickly. People were happy to see us back, even if a few did make a face as they spotted Nicky. Several in the archery group were genuinely happy to see me, which simply confused me although I thanked them for their greeting since they seemed to expect some sort of reply. Most were quite excited that we had managed to catch a feral Nightstalker. Some had reservations about having a stronger zombie so close, but they remained silent and trusted that Daniel or I would intervene before anyone was attacked if it did get loose. Nina and Daniel had spent most of the day in the lab. They were grabbing supper at the moment. I lounged on the chair while Nicky started eating her supper. She held out an apple slice, "Any appetite?" I shook my head, "No thanks. My stomach neither wants nor appreciates normal food at this point." Nicky shook her head, "That sounds terrible. Did you hear that the Nightstalker is awake? It is having muscle tremors that are completely in line with the ones you had. It still wants Nina more than the rabbit though, much to Daniel's ire." I rolled my eyes, "I noticed that his mood took a sharp curve downwards as soon as that creature was on its feet." I had spent remaining two or three hours of the afternoon napping and simply resting as I avoided the local population who was thrilled to see that I had returned. I had to admit that it was easier being in this place now that the smell of their blood no longer affected me. My instincts still had an issue with crowds and all of the other situations though. Nicky snickered, "Is that why you were hiding in your room? I have to admit though, Daniel gets in a pretty sour mood whenever Nina goes into that barn. He never lets her go alone either. Kind of stalkerish if you ask me." I snorted lightly, "I was letting everyone settle down. Some were so excited that I thought they might try to give me a welcome home hug." Nicky grinned, "That would have gone over well. They must have forgotten that I am the only one who is allowed to give you hugs. Although with the bloodlust mostly gone, you might have changed your mind." I growled lightly in correction, "The lack of bloodlust makes being in this oversized chicken coop easier, but it doesn't change how much I detest people invading my personal space." Nicky rubbed her hands together evilly, "Yeah, and invading someone's personal space is my specialty." "I noticed. How you are still alive is beyond my comprehension." She grinned at me, "Only the good die young and the size of my counselling file says that I will live for a very long time." I shook my head and glanced over as Nina and Daniel came onto the roof. My instincts stirred the moment I saw Daniel. His body language was still borderline aggressive. Having Nina around a feral Nightstalker was affecting him more than the dozen Runners had previously. I took a slow breath and picked up a very faint trace of Daniel's blood. My eyes eventually spotted one very slight scratch on his upper arm. It was about as big as a paper cut and easy to miss, but I recognized the mark as a scratch from a zombie's fingernail. The Nightstalker must have managed to land that scratch. No wonder he was in a foul mood. That would have severely insulted his instincts. If a Runner had managed to scratch me, I would have been pissed too. That still didn't give him the leave to put everyone else on edge just because he was too slow. I had a habit of taking out my anger on trees, but he obviously hadn't worked out a method for dealing with his temper.

I examined him carefully from the corner of my eye. Most of the time I didn't care if I pissed him off, but his current mood wasn't one that was wise to trifle with. His instincts were too high and he was still too humanized to recognize most of the usual zombie body language. Playing passive would not help me with Daniel if I riled him up. He wasn't in tune enough with his instincts. Nina sat down with a sigh and Nicky watched her with amusement, "Is the Nightstalker settling in?" Daniel growled faintly with his opinion of the subject. Nina ignored him and replied, "Let's just say that we aren't having fun. Any amount of light sends the feral into a frenzy and makes her extremely unpredictable. I wasn't aware of exactly how aggressive feral Nightstalkers were until now." They were accustomed to dealing with Runners and Daniel had never really tapped into his instincts. I chuckled darkly, "And people wondered why I was irritable during the day." Daniel narrowed his eyes at me, still in a foul mood as his instincts warred with his human mind. His human mind didn't completely understand his instincts and the two were speaking a different language. Nina tilted her head as she regarded me in curiosity, "After being around that feral, I honestly have no idea how you can sit there so calmly. It makes me wonder if there might not be something else allowing some zombies to remain in control. You are nothing like that creature in the barn." I shook my head, "The only difference is that my humanity is intact. That is the only thing that separates me from the Nightstalker that we caught. I may act human, but that shadowy side of my instincts is still there. I just suppress it as much as I can and hide it around people." Nina pulled out a notebook and started writing.  I rolled my eyes as she forgot about her supper once again. It was amazing that she didn't starve to death considering how easily she got distracted. I took a drink from my water bottle as I subtly watched Daniel once more. He was watching me while slowly eating, trying to match the feral's behavior to my comments. Nicky was gazing at the scenery as she nibbled on a bun and Nina was still silently jotting down notes. I considered the Terror that sat across the unlit firepit from me. It may not be wise to anger him at the moment, but nothing said that I couldn't mess with his head. The two humans weren't paying me any attention although Daniel's eyes hadn't left me yet. I shifted slightly in my chair, altering my body language. Humans likely wouldn't notice anything out of the ordinary, but Daniel's eyes narrowed as his instincts easily caught the change. His human mind didn't understand what his instincts were trying to tell him though. Daniel's eyes were more of a reddish orange now as he watched me with suspicion and confusion. After being around the feral Nightstalker, he knew my body wasn't reflecting aggression or warning, but that was about all he understood. Any other sane zombie I had met would have instantly recognized the silent invitation for a friendly wrestling match and would have altered their own behavior to accept or decline the game. Daniel's body language didn't shift, showing that he was clueless. I turned my head to smirk slightly at him before dropping the change and donning my human veneer once more. I had severely doubted that he would have understood the subtle signs since he barely even understood First Strike. I wasn't really in the mood for a wrestling match, but I was safe in my bet that he wouldn't comprehend what he saw. I had never really dropped my human façade around him to truly show my Nightstalker side, even that night in Nicky's room I had kept it mostly hidden. This glimpse was the first he had and it had nothing to do with aggression or threat. It had him confused.

Perhaps some confusion would lead to some soul searching. I doubted it, but playing mental games with his head had amused me. The best part was that neither of the humans had even noticed. Nina tapped her pen on her notepad as she glanced at me, "Your behavior is completely different from that feral Nightstalker. Yet you say that you just hide that side. Are you able to show it without the risk of anyone getting hurt? I would be curious to see it." Daniel stiffened as his eyes went red and started glowing. I raised an eyebrow incredulously at Nina, "Is it possible? Maybe, but far from wise. Especially with Daniel anywhere in the vicinity. His eyes are glowing just thinking about it." Nina glanced at Daniel and winced lightly as she noticed his glowing eyes. "Ah." She frowned at her notepad in thought. She wanted to see my Nightstalker side, but acknowledged that it wasn't possible if Daniel was around – and he wasn't about to leave her alone with me if he had any say in the matter. As the strongest person here, it really wasn't possible to force him either. Truth be told, I didn't really want a human to see that side of me either. I had worked hard to retain my humanity and any who saw the darkest side of my instincts would never be able to look at me the same way again. I also didn't trust her enough to let her near me in a situation like that when my instincts were so high. She was used to Daniel and could easily misstep around a non-humanized zombie and wind up with minor injuries. I really needed to distract Nina from her train of thought before she tried too much harder to find a way to get me alone. I crossed my arms and leaned back in my chair, "What are your plans if this controlex drug does remove bloodlust from zombies reliably?" Nina shrugged, "It is just one more tool in a toolbox. If a newly turned zombie is having problems with control due to bloodlust, this is an option. I did some blood tests, and with that drug gone from your system, the cure works once again." Nicky frowned, "Most of your plans revolve around someone who was already infected. What are you going to do if someone wants to become a Terror just for the speed and strength? I have seen a lot of people out there who should never have such abilities." Nina hesitated before sighing, "We never plan to let people turn just because they want to. We may have worked out the triggers to control the change to a certain type of zombie, but I would never do anything except for block the normal zombie trigger." Nina shrugged, "Besides, they would need blood or saliva from Daniel or another Terror to even have a chance of getting the Terror trigger. The other zombie ranks don't have it. For some odd reason, normal zombies carry the trigger for a Runner, but neither normal zombies nor Runners have the triggers for Nightstalkers or Terrors. Nightstalkers don't carry the Terror trigger either." That was interesting, although I knew in theory that a zombie bite wouldn't turn someone into a higher ranking zombie. I hadn't been aware that a bite from a normal zombie had a chance of creating a Runner. I tilted my head, "And if you inactivated all of the triggers, what would happen?" "That is mostly what the cure does. Without the virus, the body reverts to normal as it loses the zombie characteristics. We still haven't had any luck in creating a vaccine. Most of the drugs that affect zombies either harm humans or only last a few weeks in the blood stream." Nina took another bite of her supper as Nicky pushed a carrot around on her plate. Daniel was still watching me closely. His instincts were still high and making my own instincts uneasy as the higher ranking zombie was focusing on me. I hid my reaction and suppressed my instincts, although it wasn't easy. My previous actions still confused him and he was having no luck in figuring out what it meant. I turned my head to face him and tilted my head in silent inquiry. He was silent and blinked slowly in frustration, refusing to voice his question when we both knew what it was. Confusing the hell out of Daniel could become a new hobby for me. A glance showed that neither of the humans were paying any attention. I smirked slightly before altering my body language again. Daniel's eyes immediately narrowed as they went red. His head tilted slightly as he studied me intently, trying to make sense of what he was seeing. After ten seconds I shook my head and dropped the altered body language. It was quite clear that Daniel still had not figured it out yet. He gritted his teeth in his silent frustration and confusion. He was off balance and didn't like the feeling. His instincts knew that my body language had meant something and it was driving him crazy that he couldn't figure out what his instincts were telling him. I had never encountered a sane zombie who was so far out of touch with their instincts. Then again, I had never met a zombie who had never been apart from humans either. Like the pain in the ass I was, I took advantage of it to torment him. It was a double edged sword though, if he did figure it out, his lack of understanding also meant that he likely wouldn't understand when things were supposed to stop. I decided to give him a break and murmured quietly, "I will give you a clue. That isn't something you will see a feral do. That is also why your instincts are having such a hard time getting you to understand it. You have only ever dealt with ferals before. I will leave it up to you to figure it out though." My voice had been quiet enough that only Daniel heard it. The humans were still oblivious and I preferred it to stay that way. It was a puzzle for him to figure out and it would do him good to work it out by himself. I might give him a clue or two and perhaps let him see that body language again, but I wasn't about to just hand him the answer. When I had first met Kelly and Travis, I had recognized that body language the moment I saw it, even though I had never seen it before. Daniel was just too far out of touch with his instincts at the moment. The answer already lay in his mind, he just needed to discover it. Nicky yawned, "Feel like heading to the archery lanes? Those people will probably have heart failure if we don't bless them with our presence." "I somehow doubt that they missed us that much." Nicky huffed, "That is the difference between an optimist and a pessimist. An optimist thinks this is the best possible world. A pessimist fears that this is true. So get off your lazy ass and become an optimist." I snorted, "I am a Nightstalker. Being optimistic is not in my job description." "Then we clearly have to rewrite your résumé and submit a new application." I raised an eyebrow in amusement, "My résumé only stated that I reliably showed up to work on time and didn't answer my cellphone while on the job so it is still quite valid. They hired me on the spot." Nicky rolled her eyes before grabbing my hand and trying to pull me to my feet, "It is quite clear why you never mentioned your people skills. Come on lazybones, if I don't show up with you, they will send me back to collect you." I halfheartedly growled at the trivial insult, but let her pull me to my feet. Both Daniel and Nina looked surprised at Nicky's actions. I highly doubted that the professional scientist had ever spoken to Daniel in such a fashion and both were surprised at my tolerance towards Nicky. For that matter, so was I. Nicky was correct though, the archers were happy to see us back. Well, more so me than Nicky, but a few of them were also glad to see Nicky return. Nicky had obviously never chased those individuals around during an insanity blitz.

 

Chapter 61


 The howling wind, thunder, and downpour would have had humans seeking shelter, but it didn't dissuade me. The guards on duty had tried to talk me out of my patrol, but I had gone anyways. It was about the only large period of time that I got away from the press and stench of humans and I wasn't about to miss my chance. It wasn't as if I would come down with hypothermia. The cold barely bothered me and even though my skin was chill to the touch now, it would warm back up once I dried off. My instincts were high as they tried to survey the world around me while the storm was making it difficult. I knew that there was no chance of Daniel coming out here in a storm like this after dark. His flashlight wouldn't light up much in this downpour. The wind, thunder, and rainfall would also render his enhanced hearing useless. Truth be told, I couldn't hear much either. The rain was killing most scents and enhancing others. I couldn't see that far, but I could see far enough to satisfy me. The scent of wet rabbit was strong, some nearby bunny was unfortunate enough to get caught away from its burrow in this storm. The storm made me much harder to spot and my instincts knew how to move so I was impossible to detect. I closed in on the rabbit. It was huddled inside a hollow log, probably displaced from its burrow by a predator. I silently crept up to the log and turned my head as my suspicious instincts flared. I turned the other way and took another deep breath, but picked up nothing out of the ordinary. That didn't mean anything in a storm like this though. That first gust of wind had brought me the faint smell of wood smoke. I was much too far out to pick up the smell of smoke from the chimneys in the Stronghold with a downpour like this. It was the rabbit's lucky night as I silently disappeared into the shadows to locate the source of the smell. Smoke didn't travel far in a downpour and it didn't take me long to find the fire. I camouflaged my eyes to a non-glowing orangish brown to avoid being seen since my glasses would have made it nearly impossible to see anything with this much rain. The small rag tag group of humans was unaware of my presence. I regarded the seven people who were huddled together in an uneasy sleep under a tarp. The smoking fire in front of them was barely burning. They were a long ways away from any road, which was probably the only reason that a zombie hadn't stumbled across them yet. I was quite close to Daniel's perimeter and they must have crossed it some point after his last afternoon patrol. My footsteps were silent as I backed up and moved some distance away. I had never used this communication radio before, so this could be interesting. I also didn't want the group to hear it. "Trinity to the Stronghold. I spotted a group of seven humans near the border. Over." The radio was mostly static, but understandable, "What is their purpose? Are they bandits? Over." The voice was rude and my eyes narrowed at his tone. What kind of questions were these? Bandits didn't exactly wave a flag around announcing who they were. The man's manner particularly irritated me, "I doubt they are bandits and how the hell am I supposed to know why they were sitting in the middle of a forest in a torrential thunderstorm? I said that I spotted them, not that I sat down and had a tea party with them." The radio was silent for half a minute. A different voice came over the radio. Apparently the first man had either been fired from his radio duty or had decided to pass this hot potato to the next unfortunate victim. "Can you please provide me with as many details as you saw? Over." This guy at least had manners. I didn't snap at him like I had the previous idiot, "Four males and three females under the age of thirty. They are sitting under a tarp with a sorry excuse of a fire. They look like they have been on foot for quite some time. They are just inside of Daniel's perimeter to the south so they are quite some distance from the Stronghold. I saw a couple of daggers, some beltknives and two bows, but nothing more. Over."

"Are you close to a road? Over." "Negative. The nearest road is at least a twenty minute walk away. No nearby quad trails either. Over." This guy was much easier to deal with than the first one. The radio was silent for some time before he responded. His voice was tentative, "I have no right to ask this, but would you be willing to keep zombies away from them until this storm passes? We think they may be trying to find a Stronghold from your description. Over." I glanced at the cloudy sky and took a deep breath to sample the air. "This storm should pass in about two hours and dawn isn't long after that. I can keep a distant guard on them. No zombies in the immediate area anyways. Once the sun rises do you want me to see if I can approach them and lead them to the nearest road for pickup, or do you want me to meet you at the road and get you to walk in? You aren't going to get a quad into this part of the forest. Over." "If you can lead them to the road come dawn, that would be the easiest. I will have a couple of trucks ready to roll at first light. Which road are you closest to? Over." "The closest road is the one to the south, not far past where that big RV flipped over in the ditch. Over." "Affirmative. Just give us a shout when you want us to head out. Over." "Copy. I will let you know. Out." Just like that I managed to sign myself up for at least three hours of babysitting. The things I get myself into. Seriously, what are the odds of running around in the forest in the biggest downpour I have seen since I was human and I find a bunch of strays? This forest has Daniel and me both patrolling it several times daily and this group just has to show up on my watch in the worst possible weather when they can't possibly get any further away from a road. My luck has clearly never studied the laws of probability. I shook myself off with a faint growl as I went to check on the sleeping humans. They were still huddled together and sleeping. I quickly made a thorough check of the area, but no zombies or large predators were present. My mind contemplated various ways to approach the group. I did not have the sunny disposition to approach them with a friendly wave and greeting like most people would. That approach was completely out the window and it wasn't my style anyways. A stranger appearing in the middle of the forest was going to creep them out regardless of what I did. It didn't take long for me to make up my mind and decide on a plan. I did another check of the area in case anything had come closer, but it was still clear. I also took the time to hunt down some pheasants. Two were for me and four were for the group that I somehow ended up babysitting. Finding dry wood after an entire night in a downpour was interesting to say the least, but I managed to find some. The rain had eased up to a light drizzle at this point. I put my sunglasses on as I carefully examined the sleeping people. They hadn't woken up or moved since the first time I had seen them, so I could probably pull this off fairly easily. If they did wake before I finished, my presence would probably scare the hell out them and would be quite a rude awakening. I silently came forward to put the dry wood on their flickering fire and put the rest to the side for them to add later. The pheasants were already on a stick and I carefully propped them above the wood to cook. I left a small bag of trail mix beside the fire as well before silently backing up. Their feet almost touched the fire as they curled up, so finding this here would startle them. They would know that someone had come within reaching distance of them while they slept. It should show them that if I had meant any harm that I would have done so while they slept. Or it could just completely creep them out.

I moved away before sitting on a large rock under the shelter of a tree as I watched them in the slowly growing light. Sunrise was still about half an hour away. Once things got brighter, they would be able to see me sitting here. They had managed to wedge themselves into a space under the roots of a fallen tree as it formed a half cave. They were somehow sharing three blankets. I took a deep breath to test the air, but I couldn't pick up the faint scent from here. I had smelled it when I was putting wood on the fire. One of them was infected. It was one of the men, but they were all in such tight quarters and the smell was so faint that I hadn't been able to pinpoint which one it was. As faint as the smell was, he was probably two days from turning. I silently waited for them to wake and my instincts assisted with the patience that came with an ambush. 
 One lady stirred and blinked slowly. Her eyes focused on the fire with confusion as she noticed that the fire was burning nicely while providing some good heat. She sat up in confusion as she saw the food. Her movement disturbed the three she had been in contact with and they also started to wake up. "Who found the food?" Her quiet voice had the others looking around groggily. I remained motionless on my seat. I wasn't easy to spot with an idle glance, so they would actually have to be looking at their surroundings to notice me. The group wasted no time in falling upon the birds like they hadn't seen food in days. They had slept longer than I had anticipated and the birds were probably overcooked, but the way they were eating showed that detail was one of the last things on their mind. There wasn't enough food there to fill them up, but it gave them all something warm in their stomachs. One man picked a wing bone carefully clean, "Who caught the birds?" They all looked at one another and their confusion grew as no one took the credit. One woman examined the ziplock baggie that the trail mix had been in, "Who brought this? I can't see anyone hiding it although someone may have forgotten they were carrying it..." Looks were once more exchanged as they became more uneasy at the mysterious food that had literally been dropped at their feet. I found it somewhat amusing. "If one of us didn't do this, then who did?" Eyes turned towards the trees as they all had the same thought. I had been waiting for this. I doubted I could manage a believable welcoming or sympathetic expression, so I settled for a neutral one as I waited. It didn't take more than a few moments for someone to spot me and point. All seven were unsure of what to make of the silent woman watching them. I was far enough away that I wasn't an immediate threat, although with the dense forest I was close enough to speak to if they raised their voices. The one man slowly stood up and took a few tentative steps forward, "Uh... Hello?" At least they weren't running away while screaming. Yet. I nodded a greeting, "Good morning. I hope I didn't startle you too badly." I tried to keep it polite. The longer they thought I was human, the easier my task would be. "We didn't expect to see anyone out here. Sorry, we didn't leave any food. We didn't realize that someone brought it." I shrugged, "No worries. I already ate. If you don't mind me asking, what are you doing out here? There is a Stronghold not that far away and we are curious if you need any help." I didn't bother mentioning that one of them certainly needed help. He likely had no clue he was infected. Looks of relief appeared on their faces. One lady spoke, "Our vehicle broke down and we got lost as we tried to evade the zombies by going into the forest three days ago. We can't even find a road. Can you help us?" I recalled making a promise once before and having it drag me across the country on an unpleasant two week journey. I held up my communication radio, "There is a road about twenty minutes from here and they are willing to bring some trucks to pick you up if that is what you want. I can guide you to the road." "Oh! Thank you so much!" The lady scrambled to her feet in excitement. I was glad I was this far away, otherwise she may have tried to hug me out of gratitude. I stood up and stretched, "Let me know when you are ready." They scrambled to pack up their stuff, although they didn't have much. Only two of them even had backpacks. They came closer with a bit of caution, but they relaxed once they saw that I was only carrying a belt knife. My sickle was in its usual hiding spot. My short stature also didn't do anything to intimidate people. All of them were taller than me, but I was used to that. I looked over them, "Ready?" They nodded and I waved an arm at a deer trail, "Then let's go." I took the lead as I picked up the radio, "Trinity to the Stronghold. We are just leaving the camp. It will be about twenty minutes before we hit the road. I left a large orange streamer of flagging tape where the trail comes onto the road. Please have the doctor and Nina on hand for a checkup when we get back. Over." That was a subtle way of saying that Nina's services were needed as opposed to just the main doctor. The radio crackled to life, "I will send them off. Over." This was a different person from the two I had spoken to last night. "Copy. Out." I kept my walk slow and people followed swiftly behind me like a long line of ducklings that were desperate to not be left behind. One of the women inquired, "Which Stronghold are you from?" Her question made me realize that I was no longer really a traveler just biding my time to escape. I technically did belong to a Stronghold now. I glanced back over my shoulder, "Ironwind Stronghold." She furrowed her eyebrows in thought, "Isn't Ironwind Stronghold the one with the tame zombie? I thought I heard a rumor that it was a Terror or something dangerous." Tame zombie... Daniel would probably growl at that term, if she had said zombies, then I may also have taken offense, but I doubted that word of my presence had spread yet. This could be entertaining once they realized what I was. I would try to put off that discovery as long as possible though. I kept my voice neutral, "The proper term is sane zombie. Yes, there is a sane Terror, although you won't see much of him. He may growl if you offend him or as a warning, but I have never heard of him harming anyone unless they tried to attack him first." A man was curious, "Does he speak?" This group had clearly never encountered a sane zombie or reliable gossip. Most people knew that sane zombies could speak, so I wasn't sure where this group had originated. Odd that they knew a sane zombie was here, but weren't sure if he could talk. I nodded, "Yes. He can speak just as well as you or I. I have had several discussions with him. As long as you remain respectful and don't try to touch him, you won't have any problems." I didn't bother mentioning that I occasionally irritated him on purpose and still lived. That might just unnerve them. They were silent as they mulled that over and simply tried to keep up. Five minutes down, fifteen to go...

 

Chapter 62

            In the end, it wasn't as bad as I thought it might be. Other than the one lady following a bit too closely for my liking, there were no problems. They ventured the occasional question about the Stronghold in general, but that was it. I exhaled in relief as I stepped out of the trees. Four people and two trucks were waiting for us. I was glad that I had tied those orange ribbons to the tree so they would know where to wait. A couple of the waiting people came forward to welcome the strays that staggered out of the forest behind me. I was relieved of babysitting duty as the strays were guided to the truck beds for the ride back. One of the drivers approached me, "Can we offer you a lift? I know the back might be a bit crowded for you, but you can ride in the passenger seat." I glanced at the trucks, "You won't get me in the back when it is that crowded, but I can grab the front seat." He nodded and gestured to the truck he had been sitting in. I walked around to get into the passenger seat. The driver happened to be part of the archery group and would know to give me my space. Those in the back of the truck would likely not think anything of sitting right beside me since they had no clue that I was actually a Nightstalker. I didn't bother with a seatbelt and neither did anyone else since the trucks weren't driving that fast. The trucks headed back towards the Stronghold. The driver glanced at me and spoke quietly, "I heard that you asked for Nina to be present when this group arrives?" I nodded, "Yes, one of the men is infected. The scent is very faint, but it is there. He won't turn for a day or so yet." He nodded slowly and focused on the road as he detoured around a normal zombie. The rest of the ride back was silent although I could hear those in the back happily chatting with the other local who had given up the front seat for me. We rounded a corner and the gates came into view. I saw a dozen people waiting and recognized Nina and Daniel as they stood off to the side. The gates opened as we approached and we came to stop just inside. Nina headed toward me while glancing at the newcomers. Daniel was taking deeper breaths as he was scenting the air. I got out of the truck and went to meet her halfway. I kept my voice down, "One of the men is infected, although it was probably quite recent considering how faint the scent is. I was practically right beside them before I picked it up." Her eyes scanned the four men, "Which one?" "I am not entirely sure. They haven't spread out while I was close enough to scent them." Nina knew that if I had barely picked up the scent then Daniel wouldn't be able to. Nina looked at the group, "Well, we have to figure out who it is before they go any further into the Stronghold. You and Daniel have turned so it would take a direct bite or blood contamination for you two to spread the virus, but in the stage before a person actually turns it is much more contagious." Nina dug a pen and stack of labels out of her pocket before turning to the group and calling out, "Okay. Can I please get the newcomers to line up for me? I am going to give you a name tag." I would have never thought of that tactic. They obediently lined up and Nina looked at them before nodding at the man on the one end, "Please come up one at a time and spell your name for me. You first, sir." He walked up while the rest remained where they were. Nina started writing his name as I took a slow breath, but his scent was clean. I shook my head slightly since Nina was watching me out of the corner of her eye. I transferred my gaze to the lineup.

One by one they came forward. As the third man stated his name I crossed my arms and let a low growl out that Nina would probably just be able to hear. Daniel tensed up and Nina nodded while she finished writing his name and passing the man his label. She let him go back to the lineup and continued on with the last two waiting. I wandered over to the doctor who was going to give them a quick look-over as per our staged radio conversation, "Mike is our infected one. Mention something about his limp and send him back to Nina while you let the other ones go for their tour." He nodded as his eyes focused on the young man. I noticed earlier that he had a limp, so it was as good of an excuse as any. Nina was just finishing up the last one and I nodded my head towards the doctor to let her know that he was aware. She passed the last nametag to the person, "Okay, the doctor is by the wall there and he will give you a quick checkup before we will take you on a tour." The people shuffled off towards the doctor. I meandered back to Nina, "The doc will send him to you using his limp as an excuse." She nodded, "Good idea. He might even be limping from a bite mark or another injury. I will get him down to the lab for a quick blood test before explaining his options." Mike was lagging to the back of the line, obviously delaying his checkup as much as possible. I began to suspect that he might be aware that he was possibly infected. The first lady exited the small private side room of the guard post within a minute. It didn't take long for a second woman to join her as her checkup also passed with flying colors. She looked around and spotted me before heading over. Her friend also tagged along. "Thank you so much for bringing us here. We probably would have died in that forest if you hadn't shown up when you did." I shrugged, somewhat uncomfortable with the overly friendly woman's praise, "It was no problem. Happy to help." Daniel tilted his head at my overly human-like manner and Nina looked at me in curiosity before grinning as she realized that the newcomers had no idea what I was really was. The second woman tilted her head, "How did you find us out there?" "I smelt the smoke from your campfire." She looked confused, "The fire was barely burning and we were quite a ways from this place." I shrugged once more, "I was on patrol and I have an excellent sense of smell." Daniel looked amused at my truthful evasions. The lady was apparently the rational sort and didn't look like she was buying it. Her tone was faintly challenging "You were patrolling on foot in the middle of the night during a huge thunderstorm? And you just happened to find us a twenty minute walk from the nearest road?" Apparently she had been trying to work through this puzzle for quite some time. I leveled a stare at her, "Not much gets close to this place without someone finding out. Regardless of the time of day or weather." My answer did not satisfy her and she pressed the matter as her anger grew, "How? We were far enough out that it took almost half an hour of driving to get here. I want answers dammit!" This lady had quite the temper behind her intellect. Too bad she wasn't smart enough to see the answer that was literally right in front of her nose. Her temper was also rousing mine. I crossed my arms and matched her glare, "You want the truth? A sane zombie found you about four hours before sunrise and alerted the Stronghold. I was asked to lead you to the road come morning if you wanted help."

Both of them froze with wide eyes. The woman whispered, "Shit. I never even considered that the Terror might have been the one to locate us." Just as I had intended, she now thought the local Terror was responsible and didn't even consider that I was in fact a zombie. They knew the Terror was male from our brief talk, so it didn't even cross their minds that I could possibly be a zombie since I hadn't mentioned a second zombie. Sometimes being inconspicuous simply involved people overlooking you. As a human, I would blend in. The moment they realized I was a zombie, they would always be watching out for me subconsciously. My instincts preferred to remain inconspicuous. Nina was trying hard not to laugh and even Daniel looked amused at their mistaken assumption. "Trinity! You're back!" I glanced over my shoulder to see the redhead running towards us. Nina whispered to Daniel, "I thought we locked her up?" Daniel was glaring at Nicky as she approached, "I did and I even double checked that lock." Nicky held out her arms as she ran closer. I crossed my arms and warned her, "I am not in the mood for a hug. I just finished spending half of the night out in a downpour." Nicky took heed of my warning and posture and dropped her arms. "Aw... I wanted a hug. It sucks when you are not around at breakfast. And this guy had the nerve to try and lock me in my room!" Daniel exhaled slowly in irritation, "Just how did you get out of your room anyways?" Nicky grinned widely at him, "I picked the locks of course. Trinity keeps warning you that I shouldn't be left unsupervised and I am really not sure why you don't take her warnings seriously after all this time." Daniel gritted his teeth as a hint of red started to show in his eyes despite his attempt to keep them camouflaged. Nicky turned her attention to the two women in front of us and perked up before glancing at me, "Oh, these must be the people that you found in the forest." The one lady blinked slowly as she realized that something wasn't quite right with Nicky. She attempted to correct the redhead, "Actually, the Terror found us. I hope we can thank him later on if it doesn't disturb him." Nicky looked at Daniel skeptically, "Right... As if Daniel would get his feet wet in a storm like that." The lady looked at Daniel in surprise and her eyes widened as she saw his faintly red colored eyes and realized that he was in fact the Terror. She took a step back in surprise at the discovery. Confusion crossed her face as she looked from Nicky, to Daniel and to me as she rolled Nicky's first greeting through her head. The lady's jaw slowly dropped open as she fought through her disbelief. I narrowed my eyes at Nicky, "I thought you were going to avoid coffee?" She held up her hands in a helpless gesture, "The electricity in the kitchen went out and breakfast was delayed by hours. They gave everyone coffee while we were waiting!" The lady spoke slowly in shock as she stared at me, "You're a zombie, aren't you? I thought the Terror was a man?" She glanced between me and Daniel in confusion, trying to figure out how to fit the puzzle pieces together, but was too stunned to assimilate the clues into complete comprehension. So much for my careful cover-up. Nicky grinned at her, "They blend in well when they try, don't they? Daniel is the Terror, but Trinity is a Nightstalker. She is much easier to get along with, just ignore her growls unless she is staring directly at your eyes." Both women looked shocked and uneasy. The challenging one had lost her courage with this new knowledge. "You are a Nightstalker?" Her voice was quiet and she was having a hard time rearranging her previous opinion of me to match the rumors she heard about zombies.

I sighed gustily, "Yes." She looked at Nicky, "Is she a zombie too?" Nina started snickering and Daniel chuckled. I burst out laughing at the question, "No, she is our local lunatic who apparently got into coffee that she isn't supposed to have." Nicky smirked, "Nah, I am far too cool to be a zombie." The two women were beginning to look rather lost and confused. I shook my head, "Well, I have to turn my radio in at the north gate. Then I am going to find some dry clothing. See you later." I turned and started to walk away without waiting for a response from anyone. Daniel spoke behind me, "Nicky, you should accompany Trinity and make sure she doesn't get lost." "Aye, aye captain!" I closed my eyes and growled faintly as footsteps ran up behind me before slowing to a walk just beside me. "To make sure I don't get lost? Really?" Daniel had no problem picking up my faint irritated words that were directed towards him and responded too quietly for the humans to hear, "We had to deal with her all morning. She is yours for the rest of the day, or else we may lock her up in the barn." I scoffed, "All morning? It isn't even 9am yet." "That was still far too long when she has had coffee." I glanced at the grinning redhead who was walking beside me, "Do you purposefully annoy Daniel when I am not around?" "Technically I was annoying other people and he butted his nose in. So then I got to keep him amused for a couple of hours while we waited for your radio call." I heard Daniel's barely audible growl as he contradicted her words. "I somehow suspect that amused is not the term that Daniel would use in this case." Nicky rubbed her hands together like she was plotting world domination, "Oh, he may not use that term, but I sure do. He is worse than a kidnapper I tell you! He kept trying to tie me up and when that didn't work he locked me in a tiny room!" "You mean your bedroom?" "Yeah! He could have at least locked me in his room so I could have snooped through all of his stuff and doodled on the walls." I rubbed my forehead, "And just how do you find being tied up and locked in your room amusing?" She laughed, "Because I always get out! Their expressions are priceless when I round the corner." I sighed and shook my head, this could be a long day... "You are lucky that he didn't use the handcuffs and restraints that we use on feral zombies." She threw her hands in the air in wild excitement, "But he did! And I picked those locks too! They were even easier to get out of than handcuffs are." I gave her an odd look, "Do I even want to know how many times you have been handcuffed?" She chuckled, "I am pretty sure that I got to try on every single pair of the cops' handcuffs in my town at least twice. I picked those too. Then they got smart and just told me that if I got into the car that they would give me a donut at the station while we waited for my counselor." How Nicky had survived the zombie apocalypse was completely beyond my comprehension. We made it to the north gate, although people were giving Nicky some odd looks. I suspected they were worried because she was loose again. I tossed the radio to the woman above and she caught it. I glanced at Nicky, "What are your plans for the day?" I wasn't about to get a nap in if she was anywhere in the vicinity and considering that she wasn't currently working, it was safe to say that she probably wasn't going to be doing much today. Nicky shrugged, "I have absolutely no idea, so I might as well hang out with you. At least I know that you aren't about to volunteer to pick weeds or rocks and I have no idea how those things keep appearing in the gardens considering how often we keep removing them." Just my luck. I got stuck with Nicky while she was on a coffee buzz. I tilted my head as I rapidly thought of options, "Why don't we grab your bow and go hunting? We can see how good your aim has really gotten." It would also get her outside of the Stronghold, which would be a relief to anyone inside of it. I would just have to take care that her bow never pointed anywhere near my direction. I could change my clothing in the forest since I had clean clothes in my backpack. Nicky perked up, "That is a great idea! The hunting groups might even let me join them if I can prove how good my aim is." I nodded towards the garage, "Go grab the side by side and I will grab your bow." She took off running towards the garage and I headed towards the archery shed while trying to shake off any misgivings I was having about this plan.

 

Chapter 63


 I passed a bag of trail mix to Nicky, which she took with a groan as she lay on the grass. I carried the snacks just to use as bribes for her. The morning had passed quietly into the early afternoon. I had managed to keep out of Nicky's line of fire, not that it had helped her aim any. She still hadn't managed to shoot anything yet despite dozens of rabbits taunting her. I sat on a log and watched her in amusement. Nicky had asked me to track down some rabbits for her and I had used my nose to cheat so it wasn't like we had been having trouble locating the numerous furry critters. I looked up and examined the tree above me. "So exactly how did your arrow get up there?" Nicky glared at the arrow, "I refuse to answer that question." I smirked, but didn't comment. Her coffee high had given way to grouchiness some time ago. She closed her eyes as she rested in the warm sunshine in the clearing. I sat silently as I kept tabs on the scents and sounds of the forest around us. Nicky's breathing evened out as she fell asleep. I quietly climbed the tree to retrieve the arrow. If I hadn't seen her watching the rabbit, I would have assumed that she had been trying to shoot a squirrel. Nicky may do passably well on a stationary target, but moving animals were an entirely different ballgame. I put the arrow back in her quiver and carefully scanned the forest around me. We had circled this forest several times and I knew there were no big predators nearby. We hadn't found any zombies either. I did smell some deer nearby though. With a glance at Nicky I started moving through the trees. She would be fine for five minutes. I circled the clearing a few times to ensure it was safe before heading towards the deer. I watched from the trees as the deer approached. How thoughtful of them to come find us. We really did need to have something to show for being gone most of the day, although the people would probably be more than happy to just have Nicky gone when she was like this. Each of the three does had fawns and I didn't want to take any of them. My attention turned to the two young bucks that were traveling with them. Taking a young buck wouldn't hurt the population any. The wind was in my favor, so they had no clue about the danger they were walking into. I climbed  halfway up a tree and waited with endless patience as they followed the deer trail. The deer didn't realize the danger until I launched out of my hiding spot. A swift blow easily shattered the buck's neck with my momentum and it fell to the leaf littered ground as the other deer scattered in a panic. The sun was in the sky and I had no desire for its blood after what that drug did to me. I snorted before gutting the deer and leaving the entrails for some scavenger to enjoy. I hefted the deer on my shoulder before returning to the clearing. I put the deer on the back of the side by side. Nicky was still sleeping, unaware that I had even left for a few minutes. I resumed my seat on the log and looked around in boredom. I leaned back against the trunk of a tree and closed my eyes. I hadn't slept since yesterday. It wasn't easy to sleep during the day in the open, but I managed a light doze as half my mind tracked every sound and scent. A distant rumble of thunder made me open my eyes. I had smelled the small storm approaching on the humid air, but our time was now up. We had to start heading back if we didn't want to get rained on. It must be the week for thunderstorms. I stood up and walked over to Nicky, "There is a storm coming. We have to go." She groaned and rolled over before pulling part of the blanket she was laying on over her head. Great. It is going to be one of these days. I walked over to the side by side before reclining the passenger seat as far as it would go.

I walked back over to examine the human shaped blanket burrito. With a sigh I bent down to pick her up and carry her to the side by side. I carefully put her on the seat before using the seatbelt to ensure she didn't slide anywhere. If Nicky noticed, she didn't care. The keys were still in the ignition and I slowly drove back while avoiding any bumps or potholes that may wake the cocooned creature. It wasn't an innocent butterfly that lurked in those layers of blankets. The guards looked confused, but didn't comment as they opened the gate for us. For once, luck was on my side and the garage door was already open. I drove in and parked in the back corner. Three mechanics watched me, confused as to why Nicky was bundled up and not moving. I grabbed the deer and walked towards them. I kept my voice down, "Nicky is sleeping so you may want to keep any noise down." The men exchanged looks that clearly said that they did not want to be the one responsible for waking her. One man spoke to his friend, "How about we head to the other garage? Considering how she acted this morning, I don't want to be around when she wakes up." The other two nodded and managed to beat me out the door. I shook my head. There was never a dull or relaxing moment when Nicky got into the coffee. I was positive that whoever had given her that coffee had learnt their lesson. I fervently hoped that it wouldn't happen again. I dropped the deer off with the butchers. They were happy for the meat. A man intercepted me as I was leaving the building. "Nina and Daniel are asking if you can join them in the lab." "Thanks." I nodded and headed to the lab wondering what they wanted. I descended the stairs as the smell of chemicals grew stronger. Nina was in a room that I hadn't been in before. She was doing something with microscope slides. Daniel wasn't in the room. Nina glanced up as I entered the room, "Thanks for taking Nicky earlier. I hope she isn't getting into trouble at the moment." I sat on a tall stool, "She was asleep in the garage the last time I saw her." My response startled her and she gave me an odd look. She shook her head and recollected her thoughts. "Well, Mike was infected. I have no idea how you managed to smell it though, it took three blood samples before it tested positive." I shrugged wordlessly. Nina continued, "He chose to get the cure and doesn't want his companions to know. He is in the Stronghold somewhere, although he did promise to be careful and come back later for another blood test. To be honest, the test barely detected it last time and I am hoping that you wouldn't mind checking his scent." "I don't see why not." "They all plan to transfer to another Stronghold since the idea of sane zombies makes them nervous. There are some traders coming in a few days that will probably take them. We will just have to keep an eye on them in case someone else was also infected." My head turned as I heard the door at the top of the stairs open and two sets of footsteps descended. Nina noticed my distraction and had a good guess as to the cause even though she wouldn't be able to hear our company approaching, "That is probably Daniel and Mike." I easily recognized Daniel's footsteps so Nina was probably correct in regards to the second person. Their footsteps headed straight for the room we were in and Daniel entered the room as Mike cautiously trailed behind him. He swiftly noticed me and became even more uneasy. The two women must have told the others that I was a Nightstalker, otherwise he wouldn't have reacted so. I remained sitting on the tall stool. Nina walked towards the nervous man, "How are you feeling Mike?"

He was sweating with nerves, but remained carefully polite, "I am feeling fine, thank you." Nina gestured towards me, "I will grab a blood sample just in case, but I will also have Trinity check your scent. Her nose is quite keen and she was the one who noticed your situation earlier." The man held still as Nina quickly collected a blood sample, but he kept glancing at me nervously, "Check my scent?" I was halfway across the decent sized room and he was almost petrified. As faint as the zombie scent had been earlier, I was too far away to pick it up if it was still present. If I got closer, the stench of his fear could easily overwhelm any fainter scent. I exhaled slowly, "A human's scent changes as the zombie virus gets established. We caught you quite early and I noticed it when I was building up the fire. Toss me your shirt for a moment." He blinked in confusion, but pulled off his shirt and balled it up before lightly tossing it towards me. I easily caught with one hand and held it close to my nose while slowing inhaling. He had gotten a shower and a new shirt since arriving, so there weren't too many older scents to contaminate the more recent ones. I could pick up the scent of a human from kilometers away if I was downwind. The close range and my focus on my sense of smell had the odors assaulting my nose. I was very glad that my bloodlust no longer wanted human blood or it would have been torture. I closed my eyes to help me concentrate. I could smell the drug that Nina had injected into him. I memorized the smell of the cure in case someone else decided to try what Louise had done, although considering I no longer ate human food that possibility was next to zero. His emotions, anxiety, and general state of nerves had left a sour smell on his shirt. To say that he was having a stressful day was putting it mildly. I could smell each ingredient and spice in the stew he had eaten for lunch. I dug deeper into fainter scents, seeking the heavier scent that came with the zombie virus. I opened my eyes and tossed his shirt back to him. All three were waiting intently for my verdict. I turned to Nina, "If he is still infected, then I cannot detect it. I can clearly smell that drug you gave him and even the rabbit he ate two days ago, but as far as I can tell his scent is clean." Mike exhaled in relief and Nina relaxed as she nodded, "I took five blood samples while you were doing that and all came back as negative." She turned to Mike, "You should be good to go, but take care for a few days just in case. I do want another blood sample before you leave this Stronghold as well as have Trinity double check just to ensure that it is truly gone." Mike nodded and looked relieved. Daniel glanced at Nina, "Unless you need anything else, I will guide him back." Nina shook her head and Daniel left with the human in tow. Nina looked back at me in curiosity, "You could tell what he ate two days ago by smelling his shirt?" I made a face, "It depends how deep I dig down. He hasn't really eaten much until today, so it was easier than it would otherwise be. That was a new shirt too, so that helped." She jotted down some notes before grabbing a couple of empty blood vials. "Since you are already down here, mind if I grab a few blood samples?" I sighed but nodded, "Go ahead." She quickly took three vials of blood. "I did some tests earlier to see if the controlex drug affected how the virus in your blood might spread. It may have slightly altered the virus in your blood, but the part of the virus that infects others hadn't been changed. Even if we used your blood to cause someone to turn, the resulting zombie would feel the bloodlust. The changes that the drug caused don't carry over." I raised an eyebrow, "How about we concentrate on making a vaccine instead of trying to create more zombies? Could you imagine the tension that would result if there were half a dozen zombies in this place?" Nina winced, "Point taken." I didn't bother telling her that most sane zombies wouldn't have the problems that Daniel and I did. As long as they weren't as humanized as Daniel, he would be the odd one out. If Nina ever did start letting people become zombies then I would insist on hauling them outside the fence and ensuring that they got in touch with their instincts as soon as possible. The slam of the lab door at the top of the stairs had both of us glancing over our shoulders in surprise. Stomping footsteps were easily heard by both Nina and myself. "Sounds like sleeping beauty woke up and I somehow doubt that a prince kissed her awake." Nina paled a bit, "That is Nicky?" "Unfortunately." The scowling lady appeared in the doorway, "What the hell gives?! I fall asleep in a forest meadow and I wind up waking up in the garage while wrapped up like a bloody mummy with a seat belt strapping me to a seat!" I tilted my head at her rant and examined her soaked hair, "I knew you would escape and I didn't want you to catch a chill in the approaching storm. I take it that the storm has arrived and it is raining quite hard outside?" "No shit Sherlock." I pointed to the far counter, "There are towels in the last cupboard." She grumbled and stomped over to the far side of the room to find the indicated towels. I caught Nina's eyes and nodded towards the door. Nina wasted no time in quickly making her escape. I was once more left on babysitting duty. In a room full of glass, chemicals, and other things that shouldn't be touched. How do I keep getting myself into these situations?

 

Chapter 64


 Nicky narrowed her eyes and pointed, "That is the guilty one." I exhaled slowly in exasperation, "Are you sure?" "Oh yeah. I would know that face anywhere." I huffed in annoyance, "Fine. Then lure him over here so I can set him straight." Nicky quickly marched off and I shook my head. Unbelievable. I can't believe I agreed to do this just to get her out of that lab before she broke something. It didn't take more than two words from Nicky before she was tearing back towards me full tilt with him hot on her heels and hell bent on revenge. Nicky was right about one thing though. This particular turkey really hated her. I was very glad that there was no one else around to either see or hear this. Nicky darted past me, "I told you that thing was possessed!" The turkey focused on me as the closest target. It was apparently not the brightest bird in the flock. I pulled my lips back from my teeth as I snarled at the bird that had almost reached me. It practically did a somersault as it tried to come to an instantaneous stop. I growled lowly at it as it managed to regain its balance and tear off in the other direction even faster than it had arrived. I glared at Nicky, "Happy now?" She finally grinned, "Yep. It was worth the caffeine crash just to see that overgrown drumstick finally meet his match." I highly doubted that anyone in this place would agree with her. I know I certainly didn't. I shook my head as I started to walk away, "No more caffeine for you. If I ever catch you drinking coffee again, I will lock you in the chicken coop with all of these turkeys, including that one. I will have Ben hold the door shut as his own version of revenge so you won't be able to pick the lock and get out." Nicky mumbled, "Shit. Her threats are worse than anything Daniel ever came up with. Note to self, avoid coffee unless she is taking a daytrip somewhere." I sniffed the air, "If you hurry, you can probably be the first in the supper lineup. They have your favorite potatoes." My muscles tensed as I heard her run up behind me and crash into my back in a hug. "I must be forgiven for you to tell me that! Thank you." I growled lowly and shook her off. Nicky grinned at me before running ahead, "I have to grab some before they are all gone! I'll see you later!" I shook myself lightly to settle both my clothing and my instincts. I had recognized her non-aggressive mood in her approach and it had been enough like Kelly and Travis's playful ambushes that I hadn't struck out at her. Very few humans would manage that without getting snarled at though. I glanced at the clouds as rain once more started drizzling out of the sky. We wouldn't be eating on the roof tonight and I didn't feel like having company anyways. I zipped up my raincoat and headed for the gate. The guard on duty was surprised to see me, "Heading out already?" I snorted, "I was stuck with Nicky while she was on a coffee high for several hours." He winced as he dropped the radio down, "Point taken." I shook myself lightly, "Please pass the word around that no one is supposed to ever offer her coffee. The next person to do so will be babysitting her for the day." "I'll help spread the word." "Thanks." I headed out the gate at a slow lope to the trees. I headed straight for the perimeter and did a circuit to ensure that no people had crossed it recently. The only scents I found were those of our hunters and others who normally went further out.

That didn't really surprise me though. Daniel had made a run past the perimeter earlier to see if any other survivors might have been near our border. He had not found anyone, and neither had a few trucks that had also driven further. They had found the broken down truck, but no traces of any other survivors. I took a deep breath of the deep forest air. The wilderness smell was relaxing and invigorating. I could still smell the faint traces of the distant human Stronghold though. A faint rumble of thunder told that this light storm wasn't about to let up anytime soon. The thunder also meant that I didn't have to worry about crossing paths with Daniel out here. He disliked rain and detested thunderstorms. I was pretty sure it was because the rain prevented him from seeing far and the sound of rainfall made his enhanced hearing a moot point. The louder cracks of lightning in a good storm hurt my ears so I could only imagine what it did to Daniel's more sensitive hearing. I dismissed the matter with a shake of my head. We hadn't crossed paths outside the fence since I had decided to stay so I doubted that it was going to happen anytime soon. I was ranging further afield and patrolling several times a day as well as night. My scent circled and crisscrossed the land to such an extent that it would make me rather hard to track for anyone other than another Nightstalker. The thick clouds dimmed the light, which didn't hurt my feelings any. The evening wore seamlessly into the night as I made my rounds. I headed back to my room as dawn approached. 
 
 "Trinity! Daniel!" I lifted my head at the frantic call and ran to my bedroom window before jumping out. I landed lightly on my feet and took off running. A few early risers were also running towards the commotion. Most were probably just starting to wake up. The heat rose in my blood as I pushed my limit for speed. Daniel usually went out hunting shortly after the sun started to rise so he may not be back yet. "Let me at 'em!" I growled at the sound of Nicky's voice. What was she doing out here? I thought she had gone for a shower like she normally did. This was not how I had planned to wake up from my morning nap. I rounded the corner and narrowed my eyes at Nicky as she beat against a shed door with her unsheathed sword hilt. A handful of people stood at a distance, but none wanted to go near the crazy woman while she brandished live steel in her hands. I was somewhat cautious as I slowed in my approach. I had never seen her bring out her weapons in an insanity blitz before. Sticks and cans for bruises, yes; but not actual weapons being wielded to inflict serious harm. I could smell her anger from here. She was completely pissed off about something. It was still no excuse for threatening someone with a weapon though. She could easily get exiled for shit like that. I approached from behind and growled sharply to catch her attention, "What the hell do you think you are doing with that sword?" She kicked the door, "Those two idiots were making plans to burn this place down because they let you and Daniel stay here. I plan on kicking their asses for that underhanded scheme!" The slowly growing crowd around us started muttering unhappily at this news. I glanced back at the crowd, "Someone go wake up Nina and get her to radio Daniel. I also want someone in charge of the guards who can make calls in this situation to get here ASAP." Several people took off running. I wasn't stupid. I may be a Nightstalker, but I had barely been here for a month. I didn't set policy for this place and I knew it. There would be rules in place for situations like this. Besides, then the two guilty culprits could blame someone else.

There wasn't exactly one person in charge here. A handful seemed to make the decisions and Nina was one of those. I watched Nicky continue to work her anger out on the door and didn't bother intervening. It would keep the two pyromaniacs inside and let Nicky vent at the same time. There were about fifty spectators by the time Nina finally rounded the corner at a slow run. An older man was running beside her and I recognized him as one of those who oversaw the guard schedule. Nina looked more awake than the man did. She looked around before walking over to me, "What is this about someone trying to start a fire?" I looked towards Nicky who was still banging the snot out of the shed door although she was starting to tire and slow down. "Nicky said that two people were planning on burning down this place because they allowed zombies inside. I didn't get anything else out of her and decided to wait for others before trying to question her. Besides, she is doing a lovely job of wearing out her temper on that door." Nina sighed as she regarded Nicky, "Do you think you can get her to put that sword down and talk with us?" "Hey Nicky, put that sword away for a moment and come tell us exactly what you heard. I will guard the door instead." If that didn't scare the crap out of those inside, then I was sure that Daniel wouldn't be long in arriving. I could only think of seven possible suspects that might plot something like this and all of them were scared of zombies. Nicky paused in her assault on the door as I walked towards her. She was breathing heavily as she glanced between the shed and me. I gestured towards Nina who waited thirty feet behind me, "Put the sword in its sheath and go tell them what you heard. Once they decide what to do with those you trapped, then I will help you break down that door." Nicky nodded and sheathed her sword, "Deal." I watched her walk past me. She was still mad, but she was focused and collected. This had not been an insanity blitz after all. I tilted my head, but the people in the shed weren't moving. They were probably huddled in a corner or trying to hide while attempting to come up with an escape plan. I hated to break it to them, but with a Terror and a Nightstalker around, their plans were futile. I watched the shed and kept my ears open. "What exactly did you see and hear Nicky?" "I was heading for a shower this morning when I heard people whispering about different ways to start a big fire. It sounded pretty fishy to me so I followed them. The guy said, and I quote, 'We should burn this corrupted place down around their ears before those zombies lure any more people to their deaths'. The woman agreed and said something along the lines of making sure that neither zombie survived. They were about to go collect some flammable supplies they had hidden behind the second garage. But by that point I already had my sword out and they ran in there." The smell of two terrified humans was oozing out of the shed. I picked up Daniel's scent on the wind and knew that he was approaching rapidly. The crowd was growing more agitated and angry after hearing Nicky's story. This was their home and having someone whom they had helped attempt to burn it down was not sitting well with them. "You, you, and you go check behind the garage and come back to tell me what you found." Three sets of footsteps ran off. I began to hear faint whispering inside and silently walked closer to the shed to listen better. "How are we going to get out of this one?" "I am not sure, think fast." I glanced over at the sound of Daniel's footsteps as he approached the group. I held my finger over my lips to mime for silence before waving him over while looking at the shed. Daniel narrowed his eyes, but with Nina's nod, he came over.

He stopped far enough away to be comfortable for both of us. His whisper was almost too soft for me to hear, "What is going on?" I didn't have a chance to answer as those inside kept plotting ways to get out of their predicament. "We should claim that the red haired lady is insane and lying. She clearly isn't all there in the head." I gritted my teeth as I fought a growl down at their insult of Nicky. Daniel's eyes narrowed and flashed red, but he didn't say anything. My instincts shifted with the Terror's warning, although I also kept silent. We needed to hear more. "That is a good plan, but how do we explain the stuff they will find behind the garage?" "We can say that she framed us. We only arrived yesterday after all and we wouldn't have had a chance to collect that much stuff." "Why did we have to end up in this Stronghold of all places? The only place in the country that was tricked into allowing zombies inside and we end up in this cesspool of corruption." "This group is probably the one responsible for those Strongholds that were overrun. A fence won't stop a Terror, and if he didn't speak, they would have no way to tell him apart from a feral. It would be easy for them to just blame the wild zombies and pillage to their hearts content." "I saw both zombies talking to that one woman that the Terror follows around. I bet she is the ringleader behind this. She is probably a zombie too, either that or she is able to control the zombies somehow. We might actually be able to bring this place down if we can kill her." My growl was drowned out by Daniel's furious snarl. His eyes glowed bright red and I slowly edged away from the shed and Daniel. Both of the dimwits inside the shed inhaled in alarm and fright as they realized at least one zombie had been eavesdropping. I kept my movements slow and smooth as I carefully backed away from the enraged Terror that was barely maintaining control. My instincts rose with the possible threat, but they just wanted to avoid the higher ranking zombie. I turned sideways passively, hoping that with his instincts this high he would subconsciously recognize that I wanted no part of a fight. Daniel's fists shook as he struggled to hang onto his control. The observing humans behind us started to back up, which was a wise move on their part. The only exception was Nina who took a step forward, "Daniel, what's wrong?" My quiet voice was urgent, "Nina stay back. He is too close to losing control." Daniel was so humanized that he wasn't accustomed to fighting this hard for control. His instincts were also extremely high which meant that his bloodlust would also be hitting him harder than normal. I knew from his interactions with the caged ferals that he had also never discovered a way to redirect his anger and aggression. That was the most dangerous part. I hesitated before calling out softly, "Daniel, go for a run in the forest and destroy a few trees to get yourself under control. I will protect Nina until you return. Honest, I won't leave her side until you get back. Go before you lose control." I kept my voice soft, otherwise the words could come across as an order and that would have made this situation much worse. Technically, thrashing my hide would also help him work out his excess aggression. In this kind of rage, he would probably kill me. My only saving grace was that as long my body parts were touching I would eventually heal and recover, or so the logical side of me knew. That was NOT the route I ever wanted to go down. Being ripped to pieces was not a fate I wanted to encounter. I didn't even want to imagine how much pain that would entail. The recovery time from something like that would be longer than I cared to contemplate. Daniel's muscles still trembled in his rage as loud growls reverberated off his chest ceaselessly. I tried once more, "I will protect Nina. If you lose control, you could end up hurting her or another innocent person." His growl deepened before he was suddenly moving far faster than I would ever be able to. He was leaving. He took off down a road with mindboggling speed and the grace that only higher ranking zombies possessed. Moments later I saw him jump the fence and race towards the forest. Many people looked rattled at his speed and anger. They probably hadn't seen him this mad or move so fast before. I exhaled slowly in relief and walked towards Nina, "That was a close one." She looked confused, "What happened? Why did he react like that?" I growled unhappily, "The fools decided that simply burning this place down wasn't sufficient. They decided that you were somehow controlling Daniel and me and using us as weapons to destroy other Strongholds, so they figured that their best plan was to kill you." Nina's eyes widened as I heard gasps and angry murmurs from those behind us. I stood beside Nina and crossed my arms while exhaling in irritation, "This means that you are stuck with me in the meantime. I have no desire to discover how Daniel would react if he returned and I wasn't guarding you." Nina's eyes went to fence Daniel had crossed mere seconds ago, "How long do you think he will be gone?" I shrugged, "Not sure. Depends exactly how angry he was and how fast he calms down. If he returns within fifteen minutes then he is rushing and I won't be going near him. If I go on a good rampage it can take anywhere from half an hour to over an hour before I have worked it out of my system. Daniel is a higher rank than me, so it could very well take him longer." Nina furrowed her eyebrows in thought, "Hmmm... But Daniel has never been as irritable or touchy as you usually are. No offense meant." I rolled my eyes in exasperation as she still failed to see the danger that Daniel could pose in a rage, "None taken. Keep in mind that I have a fair bit of practice in redirecting my anger in mostly harmless ways. Daniel lacks that experience." Nina's expression plainly said that she disagreed with me. Nicky shook her head and walked over to interrupt our argument, "Regardless of the small details and gibber jabber, a pissed off zombie that is close to losing control is not a good thing. I am sure that everyone here can agree on that." Nina nodded slowly, "That I can definitely agree with. My main question now is what do we do with those two in the shed?" I snorted, "You aren't going near them after what I overheard. In fact, I would prefer it if you left this area and left those two to the others who have gathered here." Nina looked around and realized that we had gained quite an audience. Word had spread quickly and at least half of the population was now lingering within sight. Quite a few had grabbed weapons and returned. The guards were closer to glorified sentries who normally carried guns and bows, but even a bow or sword would easily keep the two in the shed under control. The older man in charge of the guards came forward, "Trinity is correct. For Daniel's sake, please go for breakfast or to the lab while we dig those two out of that shed and deal with them." Nina gazed at the shed reluctantly, but nodded and started to walk away. I walked beside her and kept my eyes open for the other five guests that were kicking around this place somewhere. If Nina got shot on my watch then Daniel would kill me. I doubted the newcomers would manage to get their hands on the carefully guarded guns, but I wasn't taking any chances.

 

Chapter 65

            Nicky tagged along on the other side of Nina as we headed for breakfast. A few in the room who hadn't heard the news gave me an odd look as I remained beside Nina like an impromptu bodyguard while Daniel was absent. We took our usual table in the far corner and I watched the people entering and leaving the hall more than I paid attention to the two women who were eating. Nicky didn't even bother offering me a piece of fruit. None of the food here appealed to me. As much as I hated to admit it, that drug had made my life a bit easier with the absence of the bloodlust. The restlessness at night was a pain in the butt if I didn't remain inconspicuous though. I didn't see any of the people that I had guided through the forest, which I found kind of strange. My instincts shifted in agreement. The odds of them not showing up for food after going hungry for several days was slim to none. They may have already came, ate, and left, but I doubted it. The locals who saw the commotion may be keeping them away from Nina though. Nina finished and glanced at the clock on the wall, "Daniel will probably check the lab first since I am usually in there." Nicky yawned, "I can also go leave word with the gate guards and they can tell him when he returns." Nina nodded slowly, "That is a good plan. Thank you." Nicky left to go relay the information and I followed Nina out of the room. Word of what had occurred was spreading like wildfire and most people probably knew by now. I relaxed a bit as we headed down the stairs. No one would be staring at us down here. There was only one entrance so I would know the instant someone showed up and I only had one direction to guard. Nina went into a room with hundreds of small test tubes of colored liquids. She shrugged in apology, "Sorry, but it is going to be boring." I snagged a stool to sit beside the doorway, "At this moment, I will take boring. It makes my life easier." Nina hadn't been joking. She took small glass slides, put a drop of Runner blood on it, and another drop from one of the many vials. Some of those vials had a rather strong and unpleasant odor. Copious notes were taken as she watched the results through a microscope and even more notes were taken as she put it through a couple of different machines. A door opened and I leaned my head out the door. "It is just Nicky." "I don't want her in this room." With a sigh I stood up and went to intercept the redhead on the stairs. The moment I saw what Nina was doing, I had expected that she wouldn't want Nicky around so many glass vials that were arranged in meticulous order. Nor would she want the rather distracting Nicky interfering with her concentration. I sent Nicky to a different room that resembled an examination room. There wasn't anything that she could really get into in that room and I had given her something to keep her occupied. I had considered sending her out of the lab entirely, but decided against it. She would likely cause problems if left alone and if someone unwelcome did manage to locate the lab, then Nicky could possibly be of assistance. She actually did know how to use that sword of hers passably well, and if nothing else, she was quite distracting and loud if she put her mind to it. Time passed slowly. I pulled out a book in an attempt to keep boredom at bay. An hour later Nicky grew bored and dragged a chair over to sit beside me while we played tic tac toe on some scrap paper. If nothing else, Daniel wasn't rushing. I was curious to see how much damage he did to the forest, but that would have to wait until later.

Only a handful of games later I looked towards the lab door at the sound of Daniel's footsteps. "He's back." Nina was relieved and got up from her seat. She leaned out of the doorway as Daniel descended the stairs, "How are you faring?" He sighed, "I am back in control." He looked a bit tired to my sharp eyesight, which didn't really surprise me if he had been trying to work off his anger. Numerous small scrapes and tiny scratches on his arms showed the amount of time he spent on the trees. They would disappear within the day. His knuckles were bruised as well from the punches he threw at the hapless trees. Daniel looked at me, "Thank you for that tree destruction suggestion and also for watching Nina." I shrugged, "No problem. Trees grow back, but just take care to avoid humans when you let loose like that." He nodded slowly, "I will keep that in mind." Nina glanced at the door, "What have they done with those two arsonists?" Daniel growled and clenched his jaw as the touchy subject came up once more, but his eyes remained brown and showed that he was indeed in full control. "I am not sure. I came straight here." Nicky stood up, "I can go ask and come back." Nina frowned, "I am coming too. I stayed down here to make it easier for you, but I am sure that a dozen people and two zombies can protect me from two prisoners." Daniel didn't look happy at her opinion. His eyes strayed to me. I raised my eyebrow, "Don't look at me. That is your call. I was relieved of bodyguard duty the moment you returned." He growled a sharp warning at my tone and I bared my teeth in response, although I managed to suppress a growl. Nicky clapped her hands a few times, "Break it up, how about we focus on the two who want to burn this place to ashes instead of dwelling on the fact that both of you have anger issues?" Both Daniel and I leveled a glare at her, but Nicky, being Nicky, completely ignored us as she headed for the stairs. It didn't escape my attention that she gave Daniel as much space as the hallway allowed as she went by him. Nina walked up to Daniel and tilted her head towards the door. With a reluctant and gusty sigh he gave in and turned towards the stairs. He glanced over his shoulder at me, "I would appreciate it if you would tag along in case we have a repeat of what happened earlier." I nodded, "I am curious to find out what they are doing as well." I turned my attention to Nina, "If he leaves, you aren't going near any of our guests." Nina grumbled but reluctantly agreed. Several people were actually waiting outside for us. The older man who organized the guards didn't even wait for us to start asking questions, "Those two were clearly guilty, although the other five are innocent as far as we can tell. They actually originated from two different Strongholds and were just traveling together. They had no idea what those two were up to." Nina skipped to the part that interested me the most, "What is being done with them?" "The two guilty ones are already outside of the fence. We quickly tattooed the words 'murderer' and 'arsonist' on their foreheads. A truck is taking them and a leaky canoe to a river past our borders. They know their life is on the line if they return. The canoe can take them a long ways away quickly." Nicky shook her head in disbelief, "You didn't whip them with ten lashes or anything?" He shook his head, "Technically they hadn't done anything wrong yet. It was all in the planning stage and they could have easily backed out or been gone before they tried anything. Besides, most places won't let them in with those tattoos, so this is pretty close to a death sentence without any blood on our hands."

As much as my Nightstalker mentality preferred to ensure that a threat was well and truly dead, my human side could see where they were coming from. "I assume the other five will be leaving in the near future?" He nodded, "Yes, there is a group of traders that should be arriving tomorrow and they can probably be convinced to take that bunch with them. Many places will happily accept most newcomers." Nicky groaned, "Well, I sure hope they take them with them. I assume someone is keeping an eye on them?" The man sighed, but nodded, "Yes. I also have people set up to keep an eye on the door at night in case they try something. They know they are under surveillance and have to be on their best behavior." Nina spoke up, "Was Mike one of the guilty ones?" He shook his head, "No, in fact he was quite upset when he heard that those two had tried to burn this place down." Nina nodded as she looked more relaxed, "So what is the plan now?" He shrugged, "Our two troublemakers are gone and the others are being watched closely. Everyone else is already going about their usual routine. Not much else we can do today." Nicky chuckled darkly, "I say we tell them that it isn't safe to leave their room because the zombies hunt at night. Tell them that only the guards leave the buildings and they stay in the towers to avoid any accidents. They won't so much as stick a toe out of their rooms then." I growled as I vetoed that idea, "No, the last thing I need is more people thinking I am an insane bloodthirsty killer. I have met far too many humans with that mindset in my travels." Nicky sighed, "Yeah, I suppose it isn't really wise to start such rumors." Nina shook her head at Nicky's idea and looked at Daniel, "Feel up for a trip to the barn? We haven't checked on that Nightstalker since yesterday morning and this will be day three for the controlex drug." Daniel nodded and Nina started heading towards the gate. I gave Nicky a measuring look, "What are you doing today? Am I safe to leave you unattended if I patrol until lunch?" That caught the attention of several people who lingered to hear her response. Nicky considered the matter, "It is Tuesday so I usually help out with the livestock. I should be fine until lunch unless that goat poops on my shoes again." I exhaled gustily, "Fine. Then I am heading out on a patrol." "Don't destroy too many trees. See you at lunch." I snorted as I refused to respond. A few less trees in the forest wouldn't matter in the long run. Besides, I still wanted to see what kind of damage Daniel had inflicted. The fact that she knew that I was going to vent my own anger was surprising. I thought I had done a good job of hiding the fact that I also needed blow off some steam. I wasn't overly worked up either. Some days she is far too perceptive. I somehow think that may be wise to never play poker if she is around. I left the gate and slowly circled away from the Stronghold in my usual pattern as I checked the areas closest to the walls. Daniel's earlier scent trail was easy to find, although this close to the Stronghold it simply went straight. His scent was a bit patchy from the speed of his passage, although I could still clearly smell the anger from his scent. The most recent trail going to the barn had no such strong overtones and was normal. I still planned to give the barn space since Daniel was in there with a feral Nightstalker, which was guaranteed to put him in an unpleasant mood. I slowed to a stop and simply stared. I was halfway to the border and it was quite clear that Daniel had started venting out his rage on the trees at this point. When I attacked trees, I usually picked on dead standing ones and scattered my damage here and there over a long hard run. Apparently Daniel had a different technique. He destroyed anything in his path using several different methods. Some trees had simply been toppled over, but most had been snapped in a few spots from hard kicks or punches. Daniel had completely delimbed a couple of smaller ones before tossing the pieces everywhere. I wasn't sure if he simply hadn't been certain as to how someone exactly destroyed a tree and was trying out various ways or if it had just been an enraged whim. I decided to follow the path of destruction to see how far it went. The further I went, the clearer it became that Daniel was slowly developing his own technique as he worked out his anger. Whether it was a conscious decision or not I would probably never know. I still didn't see the end of the trail of destruction. I was almost to the border now and Daniel had become much more selective in which trees he targeted. He seemed to favor hitting or kicking larger trees into numerous smaller pieces. His trail kept going past the perimeter scent wall and I decided against following it. Daniel had been moving quickly and had been gone over an hour. I wasn't sure where the trail ended and I wasn't curious enough to spend several hours looking for it. He had picked a good spot to leave such destruction though, his trail remained in the deeper part of the forest that was far from any road or trail. Humans would likely never cross it and even if they did, they probably wouldn't even dream that it had been caused by a zombie. They may blame a small tornado though. The animals were wiser and none were currently near the trail. A deer hadn't been fast enough to evade Daniel and the kill and blood had probably eased his mood considerably. I shook myself lightly before starting to follow the border. I had a couple of hours before lunch. After this morning's events, I wouldn't mind shredding a tree or two as well...

 

Chapter 66


 Nicky was halfway finished her lunch before Daniel and Nina made their appearance. Judging from how Daniel narrowed his eyes at Nicky the moment he entered the room, I was pretty sure I knew what was on his mind. Daniel grabbed a bottle of water, but didn't take any food as he kept Nina company on their way over to our table. Daniel slid into his seat, still focused on Nicky, "How did you manage to find colored permanent felt markers in the lab? Even Nina wasn't aware that there were any down there." Nicky chuckled, "Oh, I didn't find them. Trinity gave them to me while you were out landscaping the forest." Daniel's irritated focus shifted to me. I smirked, "It kept her busy and out of the room Nina was in. She had been plotting revenge on that shoe for a long time." Nina chuckled which earned her a sour look from Daniel. She apparently found it pretty funny, "I have to admit that I wasn't aware that Nicky was capable of that level of detail." I shrugged, "I never did see the finished product so I couldn't say. It definitely kept her busy for a long time." Nicky grinned, "I plotted for hours on exactly what I was going to do to it. It was all planned out." Nina smiled at me, "Well, you will have to come to the lab after lunch and see it. I also wouldn't mind another blood sample." I suspected that the second half was closer to her real motive and it put a dampener on any humor I had felt from Nicky finally getting her hands on Daniel's shoe. Why he had left that pair there was beyond my understanding. "Okay." Nina shook her head at my lack of enthusiasm, "That feral Nightstalker no longer has muscle tremors and has no interest in me at all as long as I don't approach the bars. Otherwise it is still extremely aggressive and tends to strike out at anything that approaches it, regardless if it is a stick, a remote controlled car, or Daniel." "I assume the lights were on?" Nina made a face, "We have no other way to observe it-" Nina cut off as she blinked at me in realization. Daniel glanced at her before comprehension also dawned on his face. Nina started to get excited, "But you can see in the dark! You would also have a better idea if it was behaving normally compared to other feral Nightstalkers because you have encountered them before!" How do I get dragged into these situations? I sighed, "It will probably act different in a cage than out in the open, so I am not sure how valid the results will be." Nina waved that concern away, "It will be better than what we have. I would also be curious to see how it reacts to a human entering the barn in the dark as well." Daniel growled, "You aren't going into that barn at night with no lights. I wouldn't be able to see it or hear it if it got loose somehow." Nina frowned, but realized that this argument wasn't one she was going to win with Daniel. Her eyes tracked over to Nicky speculatively. Daniel also tilted his head in consideration as he regarded the redhead. Nicky noticed and looked at them like they had lost their minds, "You want me to go into a dark barn in the middle of the night when there are two Nightstalkers inside? Are you nuts? Even I have some sense of self-preservation." Nina clearly considered this matter as being debatable, "That Nightstalker hasn't managed to get out yet and I am sure that Trinity could protect you if it did." "That is completely beside the point. You want me to go into a barn with not one, but two Nightstalkers. In the dark. You might want to make an appointment with a counselor or a therapist. I can recommend a couple of decent ones if you like. Not sure if they are human or zombie at this point in time though."

Daniel growled lightly, but Nina gently waved him off, unconcerned by the mild insult, "It would really assist us Nicky, is there anything we can do to make you consider it?" Nicky crossed her arms stubbornly, "I highly doubt it." Nicky did not look like she was going to agree to anything. Daniel snorted, "I will let you color my other shoe." She gave him a look that plainly questioned his bartering ability, "That is only because you would refuse to wear the colored shoes." Daniel huffed and looked away, refusing to admit that she was correct. Nina was thinking hard, "What if I get you a week off the work schedule?" Nicky rolled her eyes, "The reason I work is so that I don't get bored. I am pretty sure that Trinity may cause some bodily harm if I hung around her all day for a couple of days in a row." Nina tried a different tactic, "How about I get the cooks to make your favorite foods for a few days?" "Not worth going into a creepy barn in the dark with zombies hidden inside somewhere." Nicky really didn't like the thought of that barn in the dark. Then again, she hadn't been that fond of it in the daylight the one time she had gone inside. Nina was trying to pick things that would tempt Nicky, but she wasn't quite hitting the right buttons. Perhaps I simply knew Nicky too well. I tilted my head, "What if you got to handpick the next turkey they butchered? We can also throw in letting you color Daniel's other shoe, and he has to wear both shoes for a day." Nicky squirmed in her chair, clearly tempted and undecided. Daniel glared at me and I grinned, this could be worth it just to see him wearing those shoes... Nina was watching Nicky with bright eager eyes, hoping that Nicky would agree. I threw in one more tidbit, "I will also take you fruit or berry picking for three afternoons and you can decide what kind of fruit we will go after." That did it. Nicky sighed as she reluctantly agreed, "You are just evil. I had planned to say no to anything I was offered. How can you tempt me like that? Fine, I agree. I had better not die doing this either." Nina grinned triumphantly, "Excellent. We can try tonight after the sun sets. Daniel and I can remain outside and Trinity can go in first to see how it reacts to her. Afterwards we can send Nicky in and see what it does." I rolled my eyes, "Let me go out there at least ten minutes ahead of you so it doesn't hear or scent you." I wasn't looking forward to this. My instincts would be well awake once the sun set and this Nightstalker would also likely have its instincts hyperactive with the drug's aftereffects. I had a hard enough time with it out cold in the back of a truck as we drove at night, I wasn't sure how my enhanced instincts would react to a feral Nightstalker snarling at me now. Nina nodded as she accepted my tweaking of her plans, "Certainly. Please take careful observations though." I nodded, "Might want to warn those here that they could hear a few Nightstalker screams. Feral Nightstalkers detest company and it will not be happy to see me after sundown." Nina finished off the last of her lunch, "We can certainly do that." She turned to Nicky who had also finished her food, "Feel like heading to the lab and coloring Daniel's other shoe?" Nicky sent a big grin towards Daniel, "Yep." She was clearly enjoying his discomfort and knew that Daniel wouldn't retaliate since it helped Nina. Daniel exhaled slowly, not looking forward to what we had roped him into doing. I hoped that Nicky made those shoes stand out. All four of us headed to the lab. Nicky retrieved the felts from wherever she had hidden them and set to work on Daniel's right shoe. I walked over to inspect the left one that sat on the counter. One thing was clear. Nicky had talent. "She even colored the bottoms and insides." I glanced over my shoulder at a rather amused looking Nina. I picked the shoe up to examine it better. She was correct. Tiny intricate flowing swirls of dozens of colors whirled and waved on every visible surface of the shoe like a kaleidoscope of color. I couldn't figure out how Nicky had managed such thin lines with those thick markers. Yet she had done everything freehand. I walked over to see how Nicky had managed the thin lines. Nicky ignored me as I watched her. She had found an exacto knife somewhere and had trimmed the tip until it was as big as a pen tip. No wonder it had taken her an entire hour to color a shoe. "Pretty impressive." Nicky grinned at my comment, "Thanks. The one councilor thought I should go for a painter, but such work takes inspiration, planning, and emotion. I have lots of that when I hang around you and Daniel, but otherwise I just tend to blank out." I watched for a few moments as Nicky's fingers easily traced out lines that only she could see in her mind. She somehow left the perfect amount of room to allow for a 3D loop as the ribbon of color twirled around itself. I shook my head, "I would never be able to manage something like that." Nicky was lost in her world of color and didn't respond. I glance over my shoulder showed that Nina was still waiting for me. With a faint sigh I went to donate yet more blood. 
 
 I regarded the barn door in distaste. The sun had set a few hours ago and my instincts were not impressed with this Nightstalker on my turf. How my instincts had decided that this Stronghold and area was my territory was beyond me. Either way, I didn't like this Nightstalker here. For some odd reason, Daniel's scent didn't affect me this way. Perhaps it was because he had been here first or maybe because he wasn't a feral Nightstalker. I didn't know, and unless another sane Nightstalker showed up, chances were I would never figure it out. I had delayed the inevitable long enough. The barn door opened with just the faintest creak. A snarl marked the moment the Nightstalker picked up my scent. I slowly entered the room in a half crouch. The Nightstalker's red eyes were locked onto me. The instant she saw my red eyes she let loose a high pitched challenging scream as she protested my approach and presence. The scream sounded slightly off for some reason I couldn't pinpoint. I retaliated with a scream of my own, more fierce with my instincts having laid claim to this land for weeks. I exhaled with a rattling breath as I realized that my own scream also sounded somewhat off. Both of our screams had sounded slightly different. I had a sneaking suspicion that the drug was to blame somehow. The Nightstalker backed up a step with a snarl as she turned sideways. She wanted no part of a First Strike challenge, knowing that she was on my territory. I tilted my head as I silently regarded the faintly growling zombie. It had backed down much faster than I had expected. Its low growls were from its dislike of my presence as opposed to a challenge or warning. Had it not been caged, she would have left the area swiftly. I pretended to ignore it while walking around the lab. It watched me, but did nothing since I was not focused on it. I straightened out of my crouch to walk like a human and it snarled viciously as it charged the bars. I rounded on it with a snarl of my own as my eyes glowed a brighter red as my instincts surged even higher at its threat. It once more turned sideways, although it continued growling lightly at my human body language. I narrowed my eyes, it should have realized from my scent that I was a Nightstalker regardless of how I moved. I was pretty sure its actions were due to how it was trapped in here though. Like a chained dog, it made more noise and acted more unpredictably. I resumed my slightly bent-kneed zombie stance and it fell silent. It understood zombie body language and it wanted to stay out of my way since it didn't want to challenge me. It was using the zombie rules to its advantage. If it didn't challenge me, I wouldn't attack it. I moved to the far side of the room and took a seat on a chair. It watched me, but didn't move. I waited for the next stage of our test.

 

Chapter 67

            Minutes later I heard the side by side drive up. That would be Nicky. After some discussion, they had decided to send Nicky out five minutes ahead of Daniel and Nina just to prevent Daniel's presence from messing up this test. The moon provided just enough light for Nicky to see the door and open it. The Nightstalker watched silently from its spot as she entered the room. Nicky glanced around and saw the two pairs of red eyes in the darkness watching her. She started walking down the hallway towards me. The Nightstalker silently watched her walk past the cage, but didn't move or do anything. Nicky stopped in front of it and stared directly at it. The Nightstalker closed its eyes, knowing that she could see them. Seconds passed and neither of them moved. I could smell Nicky's nervousness, but the Nightstalker wasn't feeling bloodlust so it had no interest in her. Nicky could have been a log bobbing in the water for all the Nightstalker cared. The Nightstalker's instincts wanted her to remain invisible and she was simply following her instincts. Nicky kept walking to me, "Okay, this is super creepy. Those screams earlier really riled up Daniel. We were by the gate when we heard them." "That barely even classified as a disagreement. Did you bring the cages?" "Yeah, I will go get them." Nicky carefully made her way back through the darkness that was barely lightened by the moonlight through the windows. She ducked out the door before coming back in with a few animal carriers. She closed the door before opening up the cages. Soon a dozen wild rabbits were scampering around the lab as they tried to find an exit. The Nightstalker had opened up its eyes and was watching them intently as it slowly walked back and forth along the bars of its cage. It was determined to silently stalk the rabbits so it wasn't banging on the bars or making any noise. One rabbit made the mistake of squeezing through the bars on the far side of the cage. The faint scrape of its nails on the hard floor caught the Nightstalker's attention. The rabbit had barely taken two hops before the Nightstalker was on it. It screamed in pain as the Nightstalker swiftly grabbed it.  Like any predator, the Nightstalker went straight for its throat. Once the rabbit was limp the Nightstalker started eating it. I wrinkled my nose in distaste. My bloodlust for humans may be gone, but it still longed for the raw meat of animals. Watching this Nightstalker chew mouthfuls of raw meat had my instincts egging me on. I ignored the urge as I had in the past. It was easy to overrule considering I had hunted before coming here. Nicky was a bit pale, "That just sounds disgusting. Please tell me that your table manners are better than that." I snorted lightly in distain, "I only drink the blood. Considering I don't return with blood-splattered clothing, the answer should be quite obvious." I heard a truck pull up and stop. This could be interesting. Nina had somehow managed to convince Daniel to at least attempt to come into the barn with no lights. He would be nearly blind. The door opened and Daniel's brightly glowing eyes showed that he was worked up. His eyes located mine on the far side before tracking over to the halfway visible eyes of the feeding Nightstalker. He knew where both of us were, although until Nicky moved or spoke, he would have no clue where she was. The scurrying noise of the rabbits would also create a number of small sources of sound that he would undoubtedly be tracking since he couldn't see. He took a couple of slow steps into the room and I could see his flashlight grasped tightly in his hand in case he needed it. The Nightstalker was still busy voraciously feeding and she hadn't noticed Daniel yet.

I groaned internally as I saw his body language. His stance was highly aggressive and on edge. I wasn't wagering much on his level of control in this situation either. This could get dicey. If I acted like a Nightstalker he could easily go overboard and attack. Considering how much he hated the dark, I had wondered about this. The Nightstalker noticed Daniel and growled. Daniel retaliated with a vicious snarl as his eyes flared brighter with his emotions. The Nightstalker backed into the far corner with its rabbit, still growling over its kill. It was focused on Daniel though. Daniel wasn't quite acting like a zombie and the Nightstalker had realized it. I had played zombie with enough ferals that I could pass through their ranks easily, but Daniel had obviously never practiced with feral Runners like I had suggested. I examined my own instincts and knew roughly how this Nightstalker was viewing the world. Animals were food. Zombies were the same species and could be tolerated or they could possibly be competition. The controlex drug had rendered humans as a non-entity. Daniel's behavior and movements were speaking a different language. It was different and something that shouldn't be. The Nightstalker could see parts of the zombie body language, but some parts weren't lining up. Like the Runners with my sunglasses, this Nightstalker would not truly believe that Daniel was a Terror unless it tested him and lost in a First Strike match. I had better warn him before he approached the cage like we had originally planned. I spoke quietly, "You aren't acting like a real zombie. I can see it and so can she. She will attack you just like the Runners test me." Daniel watched the feral for a few moments before slowly approaching the cage anyways. The Nightstalker's eyes dipped a bit lower as she sunk into a crouch. She dropped what was left of the rabbit on the floor and took a few silent steps forward. Daniel followed the movement of her eyes with a low growl. The Nightstalker narrowed her eyes at the sound, but wasn't dissuaded. The glow of her eyes disappeared as she closed them. She knew he could see her eyes, although I hadn't pegged a feral as smart enough to realize this. I suspected that her instincts realized it and pressed her to close them. If something was staring at you, then you clearly were not inconspicuous. "She is moving to the side a bit as she is getting closer. You aren't close enough to the cage for her to reach you." I kept Daniel updated. His muscles were tense and he growled continuously as he lost sight of her. He wasn't sure where she was and he couldn't hear her. He did not like this in the slightest. "She is homing in on you by your growling. She is crouching and getting ready to jump." Bang! Daniel's snarl ripped through the air as he turned his flashlight on as the feral hit the cage bars full force. I halfway expected the light and closed my eyes with a wince. The Nightstalker had not expected it though and shrieked in pain as she scrambled back against the wall as she shielded her sensitive eyes. I put my sunglasses on and blinked a few tears away. Shit that hurt. Daniel was noticeably relaxing now that he could see. I crossed my arms and leaned against the wall behind me, irritated from having the light temporarily and painfully blind me. It may not have been pointed in my direction, but that light was bright enough to still cause pain. The rabbits scrambled to the corners as they tried to get away from the people they could now see. The Nightstalker was hunched over in a position like I had found her in the cave. She was just as aggressive and unpredictable as she had been then. Feral Nightstalkers did not do well in the light and became hyper-aggressive since no trace of humanity remained. A feral Nightstalker only wanted the night. The human side of me preferred the day while my zombie instincts chose the night. Both sides of Daniel's mind chose the day. In an odd fashion, I was stuck in both worlds. Footsteps hailed Nina's arrival. She had come in once she saw the light. I commented idly to her, "Feral Nightstalkers do about as well in light as Daniel does in the dark. They get too uptight to think rationally." Nina already had her notepad out, "How did she do in the dark?" I shrugged, "About normal for a feral Nightstalker. The drug has had an affect though. At this point the Nightstalker is only concerned with animals and other zombies. Humans might as well not even exist. The previous Runners would reach for humans if nothing else was around, but the Nightstalker simply watched Nicky even without the rabbits. She can probably smell the wildlife in the forest around us while the Runners couldn't." Nina nodded, "We already know that the controlex drug targeted slightly different areas between Nightstalkers and Runners. How did she react to Daniel?" "Like the Runners with my sunglasses, she tried to test him, but simply couldn't get close enough due to the cage." Nina winced, "I see." I highly doubted that claim, but didn't correct her. If I couldn't get Daniel, who was a zombie, to understand, then there was no chance of explaining it to her in a way she could truly comprehend. Nicky yawned, "Well, I held up my end of the deal. If no one needs anything else, I want to get out of this haunted house." Nina shook her head. Nicky grabbed my wrist and started pulling me towards the door, "You're riding shotgun in case a zombie blocks the road." I may have tolerance for Nicky, but her tone and order combined with grabbing my wrist was a bad mixture when my instincts were so high at night. A quick twist of my wrist freed my hand as I growled a faint warning. She blinked in faint surprise. "My tolerance has different limits when the sun sleeps." She sighed, but nodded. I followed her out the door and felt both Nina and Daniel watching us. I got on the side by side and Nicky started driving. She hadn't used the headlights on the way here to avoid disturbing the Nightstalker, but she used them now. I left her at the gate as I went to do my patrol. It was over an hour before Nina and Daniel headed back to the Stronghold. The only reason I knew was because the lights in the barn went out. 
 
 Nicky yawned, "Are you sure I can't have just one cup of coffee to help me wake up?" "No." Nina, Daniel, and I all spoke at the same time. Nicky blinked sleepily at us, "That isn't how you spell yes." Daniel shook his head, "That is because we said no, not yes. Besides, we have other important tasks for you today." "First I heard of this. What tasks?" "Those traders should be showing up sometime around lunch. Once they show up we want you to keep Trinity company since your manner tends to make people keep their distance. They won't know she is a Nightstalker and this group is known to be a bit rowdy." Nicky rolled her eyes, "In other words you want me to keep her out of their way and prevent her from killing anyone today?" Nina shook her head, "Not the most diplomatic wording, but essentially, yes." Nicky shrugged, "Fine by me, but I want a particular turkey's drumstick on my plate by next week sometime." Nina smirked, "Deal." They grinned at one another. I shook my head in disbelief. Nina had better not join Nicky on the dark side...

 

Chapter 68


 My pre-lunch patrol was cancelled due to the expected arrival of the traders. It had been politely worded, but the whispers I picked up afterwards told me that they wanted me inside the fence in case this group decided to hunt a feral zombie or two and somehow accidentally targeted me. There may be a feral Nightstalker in the barn, but the people here still feared losing me. They had looked for a Nightstalker for far too long to get over their trepidation easily. Some of them counted me as a friend, much to my bemusement. I was halfway amused as I overheard a few plans to try to keep me out of the way of the traders without me realizing it. I was somewhat surprised to learn that they knew exactly which people in the archery group I spoke with the most in the evenings. It was a fairly unanimous decision that I would object the least to their presence and they were being enlisted to keep me company when the trading group arrived. Six of them were already chopping wood on the other side of the wood chopping area. I wasn't too sure where Nicky had gotten to, but no one really wanted her swinging an axe. She would appear when the traders arrived. Or she might just chase them right out the gates... It was hard to say with Nicky. I looked over at my newfound followers, "So what is our plan once these traders arrive?" The one guy took a breather as he replied, "The traders have been here before and about twenty come each time. One group really likes to hang out on the roof of the secondary building and drink while relaxing. Have you been on the balcony of the dining area yet?" I tilted my head, "The one the archery group hung out on while spying on Nicky and me when we were on the archery range?" He turned a bit red, "Yes, that is the one." He seemed a bit embarrassed that I had noticed and remembered. I chuckled at his discomfited expression, "Sound good to me. I am hoping that someone can dig up a chess game. It has been a long time since I played." He glanced at another man who put down his axe and went to go find the discussed game and presumably put it on that deck. I was surprised that he had taken me seriously. I had been halfway joking. Perhaps I needed to work on my joking tone more... We continued chopping wood until a horn sounded. "That would be them. It might be best if we head to the deck now to avoid the crush of people that is going to occur very shortly." I nodded and put my axe back in the shed. The group gave me plenty of space as we walked towards the mess hall. The only way onto that deck was to use a staircase at the back of the mess hall. The trucks were just arriving at the gates as we went inside. The staircase was fairly narrow and I looked around as we came out on the deck. A somewhat battered chess board sat in the middle of a patio table with a dozen bottles of water and a plate of snacks. It looks like they were ensuring that we wouldn't have to leave for any reason. I took a seat on a lawn chair and watched the trucks and buses rolling into the Stronghold. The others made themselves comfy and also watched as some people left their tasks to go greet the traders. I looked over at the woman across the table from me, "So what exactly is keeping them from coming up here? I can't see them being unaware of this deck if they know about the one on the secondary building." She grinned, "The kitchen staff was covering the door in caution tape and a sign that warned people that the staircase was closed due to structural damage." I smirked as I played the devil's advocate, "And just how are people going to explain our presence up here?" "Easy. We climbed up a rope to the deck." She pointed to a coil of rope in the corner that was already tied to the deck railing. Someone had been hard at work planning all of this.

"How do you plan to get Nicky up here whenever she decides to appear? The amount of noise and complaining she is bound to make is going to attract attention." A guy commented, "We are ahead of you there, the kitchen staff are going to sneak her into the staircase." I nodded, "Good plan. Just how long are these people going to be here anyways?" The man shrugged, "They don't trust leaving their trucks and goods inside another Stronghold overnight, so they will leave probably right after supper. They can just make it to a safe area by sunset and they can continue on to their Stronghold tomorrow or they can keep driving and arrive there before midnight." The woman leaned on the railing, "They will take turns coming for lunch while setting up. Trade will go for several hours and even I don't like the crush of people around those booths. They will pack up just before supper, eat, and leave." I watched the trucks and buses park in the middle of the Stronghold. People began to unload tables and supplies. It sounded like a lot of the bigger stuff and many supplies were pre-arranged trades while people were able to barter for smaller items on the tables. After a while I got bored of watching. This deck was near the archery lanes and some distance from the main area of the Stronghold. It was a quieter area and that suited me just fine. I turned my attention to the untouched chess game, "Okay, it has been years since I played. Who here isn't going to humiliate me?" A different lady grinned, "Considering I stink at chess, I am probably your best bet if you want to win." I did manage to remember how each of the pieces moved. Interestingly enough, my Nightstalker instincts had an interest in strategy, almost as if I was working out how to sneak up on something. The competitive instincts also focused my mind. "Watch where you are walking!" "Hey, you ran into me, not the other way around. But I have things to do and places to be, so if you and your lackeys would kindly move, I need to get going." "It can't be that important that you run visitors over." "Well, it is important enough to me. I was walking anyways, otherwise I would have rebounded from running into someone as big as you. If you and your friends would kindly move your derrieres out of my path, I will get out of your way." I sighed at Nicky's gracious and insulting demeanor. And of course she had to bump into a few of the traders. Life would be too simple otherwise. "Watch how you talk to me or I will clean your clock for you. A shrimp like you should know better." I narrowed my eyes, that voice sounded almost familiar. Have I met this man before? A couple at the table leaned over the railing a bit to look at whoever was below. I couldn't see them at this angle, they were almost right below the deck. "I am not a shrimp! I am short! There is a huge difference. For starters, I don't live in water." "What kind of idiots are they keeping in this place? Please tell me that you aren't one of the ones they are trying to send back with us. The last thing we need is a village idiot in our Stronghold." I growled lowly as I got to my feet. I didn't care if someone annoyed Nicky, but insulting her was crossing a line. A couple of the archers got to their feet as I walked the few steps to the railing. I ignored them as I jumped up onto the railing and sat down sideways on it. My Nightstalker balance made it easy. I glanced over at one of the men and held out my hand, "Can I borrow your water bottle for a moment?" The man frowned in confusion, but tossed it over. I easily caught it and unscrewed the lid. I leaned over slightly as I looked down. Now I recognized this man. His demeanor didn't really surprise me. I tipped the water bottle so the long stream of water fell on the brown haired irritant below. It splattered as it hit his head and the resulting spray also managed to hit most of his friends.

"What the hell?!" The man and his followers backed out of reach as he wiped the water away from his eyes. The man's furious eyes swiftly found the source of the water, "Who the bloody hell do you think you are?! You think you are pretty brave up there, huh? I dare you to come down here and try that again!" He was furious and had obviously not recognized me. I found it strange that he threw insults and tried to start fights so readily. This group had to have known that there was at least one zombie around somewhere. Daniel's presence wasn't exactly a secret in this place. I snorted, unimpressed with his tough act, "Justin, I beat the crap out of you back in highschool when you thought you were a tough football jock. Don't tell me that you forgot that lesson about bullying my friends?" His pissed off expression turned into one of confusion as he tried to place me. His brain was obviously working overtime, although I had no clue why he was having such a hard time recognizing me. We had been in some of the same classes in high school and I hadn't changed that much since graduating ten years ago. We had seen each other occasionally since then which wasn't a surprise since we had both lived in the same town. "Trinity?! Shit, I didn't know that anyone else from our town survived. I was away when the outbreak occurred." He had gone from furious, to stunned in disbelief, to overjoyed in the matter of a minute. He held out his arms, "Why don't you come down and give an old friend a hug?" He had obviously been standing in the hot sun too long. All bystanders were watching us, the traders with confusion and the locals with an evaluating gaze, one or two were likely considering ways to keep this so-called 'old friend' here despite his earlier words to Nicky. I rolled my eyes, "I think the sun baked your brains to cause such memory loss. It would cost you your life." He dropped his arms, "Yeah, I guess we really didn't get along. Any chance of starting off with a clean slate?" I raised an eyebrow as I gazed down at him from my perch, "Considering you were hassling my best friend, I fail to see how you consider that as a clean slate." "Aww... Come on, don't be like that. I thought everyone I knew was dead or undead." He paused with a look of confusion, "Wait, I thought that everyone in your workplace got the flu shot every year? Didn't you get it?" A stranger rounded the corner just behind the group and his eyes locked onto Nicky, "Oh shit. Nicky ended up here? Justin, whatever you do, don't let that redhead come back with us regardless of what this place bribes you with. She chases people around on a daily basis. It isn't worth it. She is insane."  That last comment crossed a line and my temper flared. Nicky clenched her jaw in anger as she refrained from responding to the man that she obviously recognized. I could see that the comments had hurt her even though she was trying to hide it. I bristled at this new man's attitude as my opinion of this trader group continued to drop, like an overripe apple from a tree. All that remained to be seen was how big of a splat it was going to make upon impact... I growled as I shifted my weight to drop off the railing I was perched on. It was nothing for me to drop down one story and land lightly on my feet. Gasps sounded as the traders realized that I wasn't human. I took several smooth seamless steps forward with a grace not possessed by humans as I walked up beside Nicky. My gaze was locked onto the latest man. Anyone could tell that I was not impressed and my stance clearly said that he had made a serious blunder. The man took a few shaky steps back as others swiftly made sure that they were not between him and me. 

My voice was a low growl and dangerous, "It is one thing to annoy my friends, but when you insult them you play a dangerous game." The man was terrified and still slowly backing away without a response. I decided to let him sweat and worry for a bit. I turned to the side to face Justin and my voice was close to what it had been when I was talking with him earlier, "I did get that flu shot, although I was out of town when I turned." Justin blinked in surprise and was also speechless. He had not realized that I was actually a zombie. Some of the archers had rappelled down the rope to the ground. I noticed that several local guards and more from the archery group were also swiftly approaching from various directions. One of the archers from the deck was not in a good mood as he approached the man who had insulted Nicky, "You will not come in here and insult our people. You can wait outside the fence until your friends are done. Move it." The man looked at him in disbelief, but a glance at the other stern armed fighters who had just arrived showed that this wasn't a joke. He turned and headed towards the gate and the newly arrived fighters followed him. The archers may not be that fond of Nicky and her mood swings, but they had accepted her and would defend her. Word of how she had defended the Stronghold from the two arsonists had also had a huge impact. I crossed my arms as I watched the guards and archers usher the man away and commented idly to Nicky, "It is a good thing that I like those archers as much as I do. They are clearly not aware of how dangerous it is to intervene in a zombie's quarrel. Although it may be for the best, I could have a hard time explaining to Daniel exactly why I thrashed a visitor." Intervening was not a wise move on their part, most zombies would have taken almost as much offense to that as they would have over a stolen kill. My level of control, the way they had stuck up for Nicky, and the fact that I didn't really want his blood on my hands gave them a pass, but it was a cautionary word for the future. Most zombies would have reacted quite poorly though. Nicky gave me a shaky smile, still trying to hide the wounds those callous words had left, "Don't mind the archers, they did what was best. It really shouldn't come to bloodshed. Besides, if you want to pick a fight with that Terror, I can think of better ways to piss Daniel off." I chuckled darkly, "Oh, so can I. It is pretty easy to annoy him if you do it right." I wasn't sure who that man was that he had gotten a reaction like that out of Nicky. They clearly knew one another, but he would be wise to not show his face again. Justin and his four lackeys were speechless and clearly not sure what to make of me at this point. Most humans went far out of their way to avoid a zombie and here we were idly considering how to piss off a Terror. Life had taught people one thing since the zombies had first appeared – zombies were dangerous. I was also a zombie. Justin was practically shaking in fear since he had insulted me before he realized that I was a zombie. I turned to face Justin and he paled as my gaze once more rested upon him. "I don't know who that was, but he would be well advised to keep his distance. My patience when I was human was slim and it is worse now. My ire is not an easy thing to bear, as you should well recall." He shuffled his feet nervously and I could smell his anxiety at the topic at hand, "Uh... I will have a word with him later." I snorted, halfway amused at the irony of the situation, but still annoyed, "As if you have any room to talk. Time and survival have clearly not done your disrespectful manner any favors." He was sweating and couldn't come up with anything that wouldn't land him in more hot water. He clearly expected that he would not walk away unharmed. He had good reasons to expect that, he had been a jerk in highschool and made the mistake of punching some of my friends for no reason on a few occasions. The first time I had walked away with bruises, a split lip, and a black eye. His parents ended up taking him to the ER and he was put on bed rest for a week. That wasn't the last time we had clashed either. If his friends didn't intervene, he never came out on top. Just because I was short didn't mean that I couldn't clash with a wannabe football jock. Even back then I had a tendency to play dirty. Justin apparently decided that an apology and a bit of groveling might be the best way to appease a zombie's wrath, "I apologize for what I said to your friend." I raised an eyebrow with a low growl, "Telling me that you are sorry when she is standing right here is not helping your case any." Throughout all of our high school years I had never managed to get him to apologize to any of my friends directly, regardless of how many fights it caused. I could smell the fear rolling off him, as well as the mixed emotions from the remaining archers. None of them were sure where this was going. Justin visibly swallowed his over-inflated pride as he faced Nicky, "I am sorry for what I said. My temper sometimes gets the best of me." Nicky tilted her head as she considered the apology. She finally nodded, "I'll buy that lame excuse this time. I suggest taking some yoga or meditation though. Zombies are a lot like fairies. You often don't realize what they are until they decide if they like you or not. If they like you, great. If not, you are up shit creek without a paddle." This has to be the first time that I have ever heard of a zombie being compared to Tinkerbell... He nodded slowly, "I will keep that in mind." Nicky frowned, "Oh, and keep Kane away from me. If he tries anything, I am sending Trinity after him." "I will do that. We won't bring him here again." That was a wise plan on their part considering Kane's life may hang in the balance. I was tired of this nonsense and exhaled gustily, "I'll ignore our past disputes, but keep a civil tongue in your head. I am not the only sane zombie kicking around in this world and quite a few would have attacked you for such comments." Justin nodded in relief at his lucky break. "Thank you." I snorted lightly and shook myself as I turned to climb the rope back up to the balcony. Nicky managed to get up the rope with far less difficulty than I had anticipated. Justin and his group swiftly made themselves scarce. No surprise there.

 

Chapter 69


 I ignored the chess game as I leaned against the wall and let my temper slowly cool off. Nicky had taken over my pieces and was soundly getting her ass kicked in the game. She kept thinking that the queen could teleport anywhere on the board. No one disturbed me. They probably realized that I wasn't in the mood for idle chit chat. So much for them keeping me out of the way of the traders. They were lucky that I only growled at them. I was still tempted to track down that Kane guy and chase him through the forest while I stalked him. "This isn't a game. This is a carefully disguised method of torture." That would be the third game in a row Nicky lost now. The lady across from her wasn't very good at chess either. Nicky groaned and glanced over at me, "Your turn. I have been humiliated enough for one day by this crazy game. You are the one who asked them to dig up this thing anyways." I didn't really feel like it, but she did have a point. With a sigh I moved to the empty chair beside Nicky as she reset the board. My mind switched gears from dwelling on irritable people to trying to plan several moves ahead while making allowances for the other player's strategy. One of the men spoke quietly, "I hope you aren't too mad that we hauled that guy off. It didn't occur to us that it could upset you." I could tell that this had been weighing heavily on his mind. I exhaled slowly, "This time it wasn't too bad. Mostly because you were defending Nicky and I didn't actually want to kill anyone. I advise caution in the future though. Most zombies do not react well if people try to remove someone they are mad at if they aren't done with them yet. Even Daniel or I could easily snap if our instincts are high enough." "I am really sorry." I shrugged, "It is done and over with. Let the matter be forgotten." He nodded in relief. Now I just hoped that I could truly let the matter rest and not dwell on possibilities for revenge. Scaring the crap out of Kane while stalking him in a dark forest still sounded awfully good to my mind... Nicky yawned, "Supper is in an hour and they will leave as soon as they finish eating." That was the best news I had heard all day. 
 
 Nina sighed as she sat down with her breakfast, "That feral Nightstalker is dead." I glanced at Daniel with narrowed eyes. He shook his head, "I am innocent." I raised an eyebrow at Nina. How could a Nightstalker just die? A feral couldn't even starve to death and it had been just fine two days ago. Nina made a face, "We were checking to see if the cure would work with the controlex drug. Good news is that it still works and the human body is unaffected. The problem arose when we tried to infect the body with the zombie virus again." She took a sip of tea and sighed, "The virus must leave some sort of marker in the body somewhere and if you try to re-infect a person to make them a different zombie rank, that marker prevents the change. We tried to change her human body into a Runner and once the body went into the seizures that mark the turning point, she never recovered. She wasn't breathing and her heart wasn't beating." Nicky was as confused as I was. She shook her head, "Trinity was like that when she got injured, but she recovered. Are you sure it is truly dead?" Nina nodded, "We have seen this a few times before when we tried to turn a Runner into a Nightstalker. They are well and truly dead. No drug works on them at all and they start rotting within hours."

I furrowed my eyebrows in concentration, "So you can control a human's first change, but they can't change their rank after they turn?" Nina nodded, "Pretty much. We would be able to turn you back into a Nightstalker, but you wouldn't be able to turn into a Runner or a Terror. We did a bit of testing and those markers mean that you wouldn't even need any intervention if you became human and got bitten. Even if a normal zombie bit you, those existing markers would control the change and you would end up as a Nightstalker." I blinked slowly, "Very interesting. As I mentioned before, perhaps we had better focus on a vaccine instead of how people may, or may not, yoyo between being humans or zombies?" Nina grinned, "It is fascinating research and you know it." I snorted, "I also recall the pain that came with those seizures. Only the truly insane would consider doing it more than once." Daniel winced at his own memory and Nina made a face. Once they finished breakfast we all headed out of the mess hall. "Shit. How are we going to manage this without them seeing?" Both Daniel and I turned our attention to the hushed whispering as a handful of men stood by the side of the building watching the main road that ran through the Stronghold. We were behind them and they hadn't noticed us yet. We altered our intended path as we headed towards the muttering men. Once we were closer Daniel inquired, "What are you trying to do?" The five men all jumped in surprise and turned around. The man who had originally whispered sighed, "That old blue truck broke down again and we are trying to get it out of the Stronghold without Trev's group seeing us. They want to keep trying to fix it, but it breaks down so often and is so hard on gas that it just isn't worth it." Another man commented, "If it just disappears, they won't even remember it, but if they see us hauling it away, then it will be war. They hate throwing anything away, but there are lots of trucks along the highway that are just out of gas. We plan to haul this old junker across the border and dump it in a lot with other wrecks." I took a few steps so I could see around the building. There about fifty people on the main road and more that would be able to see this street. I guessed about a dozen belonged to the 'group' in question. Daniel considered the matter, "What about taking it out in the evening or at night?" The man shook his head, "We already considered that, but they either hang out or have rooms where they could see the road." Daniel, Nina and Nicky all looked at the road. Breakfast was mostly over and people were out and about. Clearing such a large area would take a small miracle. Or a nightmare... With that thought, I shrugged off my backpack and dug through it. The group stopped talking to watch me in confusion or curiosity. I pulled a can of tomato juice and small bottle of liquid dish soap out of my backpack. I turned to face Nicky as I balanced them on palms of hands. I grinned ferally at her, "Think you can pull an insanity blitz out of a hat?"  She smiled evilly as she reached for the articles, "I'll put that particular captain at the helm of the ship, but you have to deal with her afterwards. Weirdly enough, she really likes you and actually considers you her friend, which is bizarre since she doesn't like anyone." Oh, boy. Her most crazy personality had decided that an irritable bloodthirsty Nightstalker who got caught in an evil experiment was her friend... I could only imagine what her psychiatrist would think. One of the men gazed on in horror and whispered in shock, "She is talking about herself in third person?!"  He had obviously not spent much time around her. 

Daniel shifted his weight as he narrowed his eyes at the objects in Nicky's hands. These were the very two objects that Nicky had alluded to time and time again and he still hadn't figured out how they were used against zombies. The fact that I was carrying them in my backpack was not going to put him at ease either. We moved so we would be out of sight as Nicky rounded the corner. She shouted, "Who wants to play zombie killer with me?! I got some weapons and I need someone to be the zombie for target practice!" Ben had been one of the people on the street and his eyes widened in horror at the familiar objects, "Run!" I looked at the man, "If you move quick, everyone will be too busy to notice." The five men took off at a run to get the truck. I could see it attached to another truck with a tow rope just down the road. Their path to the gate was now clear. People had scattered as if by magic as they decided to busy themselves in places where Nicky wasn't likely to find them. I crossed my arms and leaned against the building as the truck was rapidly towed towards the gate. I glanced at Daniel, "The hardest part will be disarming her. Feel like seeing how good your reflexes are?" He growled faintly at the idea of going near her when she was like this. He had undoubtedly noticed how frantic Ben had sounded when he yelled at everyone to run. I watched Nicky race around a corner with a maniac grin on her face. Nicky had officially managed to pull a record-breaking insanity blitz out of a hat. Everyone else seemed to realize it too since I only saw a couple of people when dozens has been present a mere minute ago. Nina shook her head, "As you once told Ben, you riled her up, you deal with her." I winced, "Do I have to? I am not sure I want to meet this captain she was speaking of." Nina grinned, "Well, she did say that you were the only one she liked, so you are the best candidate. I am heading to the lab and locking the door behind me. Have fun." Nina headed off with Daniel following on her heels. I sighed gustily. Looks like I am on babysitting duty once again. I had apparently not thought this through since I now needed to come up with a way to separate Nicky from the rest of the population and get her back to normal. Considering she had already eaten breakfast, my main go-to of stuffing her full of food was out the window. I had to move fast before someone got truly mad at Nicky instead of cautiously humoring her. The keys were in the side by side, and I quickly fired it up. I sped over to where I heard Nicky calling for volunteers and slid to a stop beside her, "Change of plans. We are playing Smokey and the Bandit, and we need to get to our next stop before the Sheriff catches us." She jumped into the passenger seat, "Pin it!" It was a good thing that she was very easily distracted when she got like this. I hit the gas as the tires spun for a moment and headed straight for the gate. They saw me coming and it was open long before I got there. 
 
 I drove slowly down the street that was empty of zombies, "Okay Bandit, which house do you think has Coors and snacks in it?" Nicky examined the abandoned houses and pointed, "That one. Whoever chose to paint their fence neon green was either drunk or high. We will either find beer or munchies as long as the owners didn't eat them all." Good enough for me. I pulled up in front of the house and carefully tested the air. No zombies were around or inside the house. I still planned to play it safe, "I'll go in first. You cover me." Nicky was as suggestible as ever as she flattened herself against the side of the house with a can of tomato juice in one hand and a bottle of liquid soap in the other. I wasn't aware that Smokey and the Bandit had such a poorly equipped SWAT team in it... I tested the doorknob and was unsurprised to find it unlocked. This town was just outside the border and every building had likely been picked over several times. I carefully entered and went down the hallway for good measure, "All clear." Nicky entered and closed the door behind her as she looked around and started rooting through mostly empty cupboards. From the noise, she had found pots, pans, and other cooking implements. If she found any food I would be surprised. I used my nose to check for any hidden stashes that might be in odd places. In the end we did find some food that had been missed. Most of it was in bizarre locations or hidden behind non-food items. It took us two hours to thoroughly scour the house from top to bottom. I had tired of digging through another person's possessions long before that point, but Nicky slowly wound down to her normal self. She held her bag of chips tightly, "Okay, I am done. Let's go. I am not sure which version you were watching, but I do not recall seeing any scene in Smokey and the Bandit where they rooted through someone's sock drawer in hopes of finding a granola bar." I checked outside, but the coast was clear as we got into the side by side. I was driving once again. Nicky put her seat belt on, "That is another thing. This ride is a far cry from a Pontiac Firebird Trans Am. I still say that the Dodge Charger from the Dukes of Hazzard is cooler though. I mean, come on, it has to be a great car if guys will drive it with a neon orange paint job!" I nodded, "Ah, but would they drive it if it had been painted fluorescent pink?" Nicky grinned, "I am not sure about them, but I sure would. It may never be the same after I take it for a spin though." I chuckled, "You wouldn't get me in that car with you either. But you might want to eat those chips before Ben sees them and thinks you should share." Nicky promptly opened up the big bag and started munching. It would both silence her and bring her the last little ways back to what classified as normal for Nicky.

 

Chapter 70

Nina watched Nicky as she took a seat with a supper plate on her lap. Daniel also took a seat while keeping an eye on the infamous redhead. Nicky ignored them while picking through her salad.
 Nina broke the silence, "Nicky, I spoke with the person in charge of the turkeys and he will meet you at the coop after supper. You can pick out your turkey and they will butcher it for you." Nicky grinned in excitement, "Finally! I told that turkey yesterday that his days were numbered and he didn't believe me." Nina nodded, "Yes. I also told that turkey that he wouldn't be bothered by you tomorrow. So pack your bags, we are going on a road trip." Nina was also talking to animals now? Please tell me that this wasn't contagious... Nicky blinked, "Road trip? What road trip? I just got back from a road trip and we didn't even find any beer!" "We heard a rumor that there is possibly a feral Nightstalker to the south, so we are leaving first thing in the morning to see if we can catch it." Nicky narrowed her eyes in suspicion, "What is this 'we' shit? I don't want a feral Nightstalker and dish soap only goes so far if it decides it wants me." Daniel growled faintly at her tone. He didn't appreciate the soap reference either. Nina shrugged, "Technically it is Daniel and Trinity who will be doing most of it. You and I are just along for moral support and peacekeeping." It was my turn to narrow my eyes, "This is news to me. I do not recall volunteering for this." "You have the best chance at finding it and if it is in another narrow cave, then we will need your help." Nicky groaned and turned to me, "If I have to go, then so do you. Consider yourself voluntold." I growled at her, not liking her attempts to boss me around. It still riled up my instincts, the drug had not changed that aspect at all. Nina tried a more tactful approach, "Trinity, we need you to help us find this Nightstalker before someone gets hurt. Right now it is near a safe area where people can stop overnight. The last few people through there were carrying guns and small spotlights and somehow managed to drive it off, but it will likely come across a Stronghold before long and kill hundreds. Please. We need you." Nicky sighed and added her own two cents as well, "You can't leave me with Daniel on a road trip. He might leave me behind or use me as bait. If that thing comes by at night, we probably won't even know it is there until it attacks. You know we need you. You are our kryptonite against the nighttime bogeymen." I knew they were both right. That didn't mean I had to like it. I growled reluctantly while knowing that I was giving in, "Why do I have a suspicion that I will end up regretting this?" Nicky grinned at me, "Because not a single one of our road trips has ever gone as planned?" That did not reassure me. 
 
 "You know, I think this might have just been an excuse to get me out of the Stronghold for a few days." "That may be possible." In fact, it was a very strong possibility that they just wanted a break from Nicky after her last few days there. "How long do you think they are going to drive around out here?" I shrugged, "No idea." We had been on the road for two days already and I hadn't picked up the faintest hint of Nightstalker. We wouldn't get to the area it was supposed to be in until around noon tomorrow. I was tired of sitting in the back of a truck.

Daniel pulled up in front of a house and turned the truck off. He got out of the truck, "This is the best we will find for tonight. People have stopped here before and the windows have bars over them." I eyed up the bars, "I am pretty sure that you or I could manage to get past those bars. They may hold Runners and regular zombies back, but I doubt they will protect against anything else." Daniel snorted, "That is why the two of us are here." He did have a point there. I grabbed several bags before jumping out of the back of the truck. The inside of the house had seen better days and quite a few travelers. I put the bags on the floor and left Nicky to start the fire. Daniel glanced around, "I am going to go hunt before the sun sets." I nodded, "I will help them set things up." Daniel nodded and left. In truth, there wasn't much to set up or even carry in. We traveled pretty light. I gathered some wood and left it by the fireplace with Nicky. Nina was checking the garden. Someone passing through had taken the time to clean it up and plant some basic plants like lettuce, strawberries, and some other hardy stuff that would keep on growing. Wind shifted and I lifted nose to air while growling lightly. This wasn't good. Nina glanced over with a questioning look.  I pointed to the door, "Go inside and lock yourself in the bathroom, don't come out until either Daniel or I return." I started running in the direction of the smell hoping I wasn't too late. I cursed the wind for not shifting much earlier and alerting me to what was further south. The scent had been that of Daniel's blood and three Nightstalkers. I heard the door close as Nina retreated swiftly inside. Hopefully it would keep their scent down enough that the Nightstalkers wouldn't notice. I ran silently and eventually began to hear growling and snarling. The wind was blowing towards me, so they hadn't caught my scent. I crept closer until I could see the four standing in a small clearing. Daniel had quite a few scratches on his arms as he snarled at the three circling male Nightstalkers. The fool still didn't carry any weapons with him. If he survived this, I suspected that he would correct that problem. I watched for a few seconds as I silently pulled some objects out of my backpack. Several scenarios ran through my head. Even with me helping Daniel, we were going to have a hard time coming out of this fight without serious injuries. They were sane, which meant that we wouldn't have the advantage that we otherwise would with a feral. They were playing with him like a cat played with a mouse before killing it. I didn't understand why they were doing it though. I held a crowbar in one hand and left my other hand open. I silently left the trees as I started my smooth predatory stalk along the perimeter of the clearing in full view of the four. My instincts rose as I called on them. My body language was purely Nightstalker, with no human veneer showing at all. This could come as a surprise to Daniel since he had never seen me like this. One of the Nightstalkers caught my movement out of the corner of his eye and whirled to face me with a surprised snarl. I bared my teeth silently in response. I kept slowly traveling along the edge of the clearing as I began to slowly circle those in the middle of the clearing. I now had the attention of all four zombies. Daniel's eyes widened in recognition as the other three shifted uneasily as a new and unknown player entered the field. I carefully watched their every move as I passed the quarter way mark of the circle. My silence had them on edge and I was clearly not just a passive observer passing by. A brown haired man growled, "What do you want?" I spoke and my deep rough voice betrayed how high my instincts were running, "I have an outstanding debt to repay." They would know from my voice that I wasn't here just to sniff the daisies.

The man bared his teeth, "This is our kill. You are too late to get revenge." I tilted my head in consideration as I kept slowly walking. I took my sweet time in responding since my silence was keeping them off balance. "That is what I have a problem with. Why are you trying to kill him anyways? I will grant that he can be as annoying as hell the majority of the time, but I see no reason to actually kill him." Two of the men growled at me now that they knew for certain whose side I was on. The one closest to me dropped into a deeper crouch, "You are outnumbered. Go away before we kill you too." Their behavior wasn't quite right, but after being around Daniel for so long, I knew the cause. They had never lived wild. Admittedly, they weren't anywhere near as humanized as Daniel was, but they were still not truly in tune with their instincts. If I hadn't met Kelly and Travis, I would be beginning to wonder if I was the weird one. I was almost at the far side of the clearing by now and chuckled darkly, "Ohhh... There is no way that you three are originals. Let me guess, second wave? Those who were bitten are usually smarter than this." One growled at the end of my first sentence, clearly uneasy that I had so easily guessed that detail. The other two snarled at the insult. Daniel was remaining where he was since he was still surrounded by the hostile Nightstalkers. I was now upwind of them and they could scent me. The first man snarled at me, "On second thought, you stink of humans too, so you are in league with them. We'll come for you afterwards. Better start running while you can." I grinned ferally at them as I stopped moving and faced them, "Now why would I run?' They blinked in surprise since that was clearly not the response they had been expecting when I was outnumbered so. I gave a small pointed glance at the place I had entered the clearing. It was downwind of them, and if someone else had been hidden there, they wouldn't have been able scent them. Two of them snarled defensively as they glanced between me and that section of the trees as they realized this. I had circled to the far side of the clearing which put them between me and the imaginary hidden foe. With Daniel, the trees, and myself they now had three fronts to watch, which just so happened to be in different directions. Their postures had shifted slightly towards a more defensive stance and I doubted that they were even aware of it. My grin widened as I realized that only two of these idiots even carried a belt knife. The third moron was simply relying on his nails and Nightstalker strength. That was plenty when dealing with the average human, but it was a huge blunder when attempting to fight another sane zombie. They were likely accustomed to relying on strength in numbers if they met a more dangerous foe. That was their mistake and it was going to cost them this time. They may decide to run, but it wouldn't be accomplished without injuries. The second man was getting riled up by my smug and superior attitude, "If you don't leave now, we will kill you too." I had a suspicion that he was uneasy and just trying to get me to leave so they could fight us one at a time. I wasn't stupid enough to fall for that divide and conquer tactic. At this point, I also knew that if we didn't kill them they would keep coming back until they killed us. I knew their weaknesses since I was also a Nightstalker. They were probably aware of them as well, and had likely practiced fighting one another in boredom. Hopefully I knew some dirty tricks that they were not aware of. I waited silently for several seconds as the silence and suspense increased like a drawn bow. I was clearly not leaving and one of the men shifted his stance with a low snarl to try and intimidate me. I turned my head infinitesimally towards the trees as if something had caught my attention and I was trying to hide it. The Nightstalker between Daniel and that section of the trees whirled to face the trees with a growl, expecting an attack from the hidden enemy in the trees. 

The other two glanced back thinking that he saw something and they wanted to know what other unknown foe they were dealing with. I whipped my crowbar at the growling Nightstalker's head full force. With an echoing thud, the crowbar slammed into his head and he dropped to the ground unconscious. The moment the crowbar had left my hand, I had charged forward with silent footsteps as I reached back toward my backpack. One hand pulled out my sickle and my other hand grabbed the can of spray paint I had stuck in my water bottle holder. I raised the can and snarled viciously. The one closest to me whirled around with his knife at the ready, but I had already depressed the plunger on the spray paint. He had not expected me to have any ranged weapons and the paint hit him full in the face. He skipped awkwardly backwards as he tried to swiftly wipe his welding goggles clean. I threw the can at him and pegged him in the shoulder while launching myself at him. He swiped at the can with his knife, thinking it had been me. I grabbed his wrist to stop him from using his knife while I slashed at his throat with my sickle. I only managed a glancing blow before jumping backwards. He lashed out with his knife. I snarled in sudden pain as he managed to cut the outside of my arm. He had sustained more damage though, the side of his neck had been cut and was bleeding heavily. I hadn't managed to cut his throat though. I heard snarling behind us and knew that Daniel was fighting the third Nightstalker. Hopefully he knew enough to watch both the knife and the Nightstalkers nails. Daniel might take some cuts from the armed Nightstalker he was fighting, but unless he was a terrible fighter, I was pretty certain who the winner would be even if he was unarmed. My fight against this larger Nightstalker was a much more even match. My main advantage was that I had taken him by surprise by playing dirty and my weapon was better than his. I circled him silently before darting in and attempting to strike at his goggles. He scented my approach and managed to block me, even though he gained a cut on his forearm. I reached down to pick up the can of spray paint again. He had managed to rub most of the paint off his goggles with his forearm, but it was a streaky mess. If I could keep him partially blinded, bloodloss would slow him down before too much longer. I didn't dare let him get a good grip on me since he was likely stronger than me. He charged me with a snarl and I pointed the spray can at his face. He tried to hold out his hand to block it, but I swung my sickle to cut deep into his arm. I managed to hit his face again with an indirect haze of blue paint. The downside of my curved sickle was that if it couldn't cut through something, it tended to get stuck. My sickle hit the bone in his arm and he managed to wrench the weapon out of my grasp as he yanked his arm back. I snarled fiercely as my favorite weapon was thrown into the trees from the force of his arm movement. At least he didn't have it in his grasp. I grabbed my belt knife and held it at the ready as I dropped into a deeper crouch. My other hand still held the spray paint. My vision had a slight red tint to it due to how much the fight had elevated my instincts. I bared my teeth silently, hoping to unnerve him since I was plainly waiting for him to attack, just like in an ambush. He was too far gone to think rationally as his instincts overwhelmed his mind. He dropped his knife and launched at me with a deafening snarl. I tried to dodge him, but he managed to grab onto my arm. I slashed my knife at his throat and managed to slice it partially open, although this blade was not good enough to cut through his spine. He jumped back as he managed to avoid the worst of my strike. He snarled as he lunged forward again and managed to tackle me onto the ground. I snarled as I hit the ground. I reached up and managed to snag his goggles before ripping them free and throwing them far to the side. Nothing could distress a feral or out of control Nightstalker as much as bright sunlight. He reared back with a pained snarl as he instinctively covered his eyes with his hands. I kicked his leg as I rolled out of the way. He stumbled, but remained on his feet. I froze as Daniel darted up behind him and struck his head. The Nightstalker flew across the clearing with the force of the blow. His head was practically crushed, there was no way he was going to recover in less than two weeks. Daniel turned to face me and I tensed up. His eyes were glowing a brighter red than I had ever seen before and I wasn't entirely certain that he was in control. I remained where I was on the ground as I watched him carefully. There was no way I could outrun him and I was less of a threat on the ground. He was breathing heavily and his muscles were tensed as he watched me. He suddenly stood up a bit straighter as he came out of his crouch. His eyes dimmed a bit as he regained control. His voice was a deep growl as he tried to suppress his instincts, "Are you all right?" I relaxed somewhat and nodded, "I'm good." I slowly stood up, cautious of triggering his instincts after he had killed two Nightstalkers. I gave myself a quick look-over once I was standing. The cut on my forearm was the worst and went almost to the bone. I had numerous small bruises and scratches from the Nightstalker's nails. I glanced over to appraise Daniel's condition. His speed as a Terror had stood him in good stead, and as far as I could tell, he didn't have any more injuries than what he had when I first arrived. He still had far more scratches than I did on his arms. I brushed some leaves and dirt from my clothes, "I assume you aren't too badly injured?" He shook his head. I sighed heavily, "Good. I am going to track down my sickle and I think that we had better ensure that these guys don't get back up. Then we should go back and let Nina know that she can stop hiding." His eyes flickered at Nina's name. I was using the same tactics that he usually did, talking and mentioning someone he was close to. He would want to return as soon as possible to ensure that she was alright considering that we had left her alone for so long. I was more worried about leaving Nicky and Nina alone together as opposed to being concerned that another unknown danger might find them. To the best of my knowledge, those two had never been left unsupervised together in an enclosed area. It took me only seconds to track down my sickle by scent in the dense brush since it was covered in zombie blood. Daniel had already forced one of the Nightstalker's belt knives through the neck of the one I had knocked out with the crowbar. I took care of my foe while Daniel dealt with the last one. I looked at my thoroughly bloody clothing, "Well, I have to change before I return. Do you want to run ahead?" He glanced at his own clothing before heading for his discarded backpack, "I had better change as well." I quickly went off into the bushes to swiftly change. I quickly wiped down my arms and legs with a clean section of the bloody shirt. I tore a strip of clean cloth off the destroyed shirt before wrapping it around my forearm as a makeshift bandage. I left my shirt and shorts in the dirt. They were so bloody from the fight that there was no salvaging them. I reached the clearing and saw Daniel filling a handful of small glass vials with the dead Nightstalkers' blood. I found his actions somewhat unsettling, but dismissed the feeling. They were already dead, so it wasn't like they would care. He finished seconds later and stood up as I slowly entered the clearing. He stuck the vials in his pocket, "Ready to go?" I nodded and he took the lead as we went back to the house. 

 

Chapter 71


 Daniel kept his pace to something I could keep up with. I had to push for speed, but I managed it. He reached the door and furrowed his eyebrows as he realized that the handle was locked. I called out, "Nina, Nicky, we are back. Can you please unlock the door before Daniel breaks it down?" Daniel had his head tilted, obviously listening to their movements. I heard them unlock the bathroom door before coming to the front door. The door opened to reveal a worried looking Nina. She blinked in shock as she immediately noticed Daniel's arms were crisscrossed with numerous scratches, "What happened?" She glanced at me and noticed that I also had scratches. Her eyes darted between the two of us in confusion. Nicky peered over Nina's shoulder as she also blinked in surprise. Daniel exhaled gustily, "I got ambushed by three Nightstalkers." Nina's jaw dropped and her expression was incredulous, "In the daytime?" Daniel shrugged, "They were sane and were wearing sunglasses." I snorted, "I don't count those three as sane. In control is a better term. They clearly had more screws loose than Nicky on a bad day." Nina shook her head as she sighed in resignation, "Let me grab my medical kit and patch you two back up." Daniel made a face as she turned to go back inside. Apparently he wasn't a fan of letting someone near his wounds either, although he didn't seem irritated or upset. I headed over to sit on a stump before digging into my backpack for my water bottle and some paper towel. I planned to beat Nina to cleaning my superficial wounds. Nicky wandered over to look at bloodstained cloth wrapped around my forearm, "Shit. Did they have an axe?" "No, he had a very sharp belt knife." I had a dozen or so shallow scratches from where fingernails had barely grazed my skin. Several of them were a bit deeper. There were a few scrapes from when I hit the ground. I slowly  exhaled as I carefully unwrapped the makeshift bandage over the worst cut. It throbbed and hurt. The bleeding had mostly stopped, but the wound went deep. If it hadn't hit the bone, then it was awful close. I carefully used damp paper towel to wipe away dry blood from the skin around the wound. Nicky stood beside me, "Anything I can do to help?" I nodded towards my backpack, "If you open the main flap there should be a few leftover big adhesive bandages in the back compartment from when my leg was injured." I tidied up the cut as Nicky found the bandage and passed it to me. "Don't put that on yet. Let me clean it properly." I closed my eyes and exhaled slowly as Nina caught me. I hadn't been quite fast enough. I turned my head to watch the scientist as she made her way over to me first. She hadn't even paused to patch up Daniel. It looks like she knew that I had taken the worst of the damage once more. It hadn't been by much this time though, and if it hadn't been for that one big cut, Daniel would have had the most tokens to show for our fight. She already had gloves on and dampened a cloth with some sort of sharp smelling disinfectant. Daniel was watching to ensure that I didn't act up too much. I tried to will myself to be patient as Nina started wiping down my arms to get any dried blood I may have missed. The cleaner stung in the shallow scratches and cuts. She was more careful around the deeper cut and examined it. "I assume a blade of some sort did this?" "A belt knife." She nodded as she pulled out a tube of polysporin and carefully spread gobs of it across the long cut. Nicky passed her the big square adhesive bandage and Nina carefully put it on. I was patched up to her satisfaction and she turned her attention to Daniel.

Nina took more care while cleaning up his arms since most of his scratches were deeper than mine. Most of mine had been shallow grazes from glancing strikes. Those three Nightstalkers had circled and purposely toyed with Daniel knowing that he couldn't attack one without leaving himself open to attack from the other two. The scratches would completely heal in about a week tops. The deep cut on my arm might take two weeks for the scab to fall off. The rest were mostly superficial injuries and wouldn't really hamper our ability to fight if we had to. Nina finished up with a sigh, "That's about all I can do. I assume those Nightstalkers aren't going to show up again?" Daniel shook his head, "No. We beheaded them and threw the heads far away from the bodies. They will start to decompose by morning. I got two blood samples from each of them." "Why did they attack?" "Apparently they had a grudge against humans and they could tell by my scent that I was around humans a lot." Nicky tilted her head from where she had been observing, "Do you think that they might be the source of the rumors we heard? Could it have been those three instead of a feral?" Nina blinked in surprise, "It is very possible. We should probably continue south tomorrow just to check it out in case there is a feral." Daniel glanced at me, "How come you didn't pick up their scent?" I shrugged, "Wind wasn't in my favor and they had not passed through this place yet. The wind just happened to shift for a bit when I picked up their scent, but you had already encountered them by then." He grunted before glancing at the rapidly setting sun, "Let's go inside." We all went inside and sat in the open living room as Nina and Nicky ate some supper. I chose a chair in the back corner that the firelight didn't really reach. Daniel could tell the sun was setting as his instincts settled somewhat for the night. Mine were starting to wake and were stronger due to the recent fight. Being hidden in the shadowy corner kept the restlessness mostly at bay. I knew Daniel couldn't see me at this point. His eyes flickered in my direction, but never focused on me. A couple of hours later I whispered, "I am heading out for a while. I will stick close enough to keep an eye on this place." Daniel nodded. Nina and Nicky were fast asleep as I silently crossed the room and let myself out. My instincts protested crossing the firelit area, but for the handful of seconds it took, I was able to suppress the restlessness reasonably well. I couldn't see another Nightstalker being in the area, but I would still keep my eyes out. Especially the way my luck tended to run. Daniel would not be impressed if he had to come out in the dark to bail me out of another unequal fight. Chances of that were slim at night considering the way my instincts were enhanced now. I somehow doubted that even another Nightstalker would have much success spotting me at night unless I allowed it. Terrors didn't stir at night, so I was safe on that front. I sniffed the air carefully. Information poured into my mind as scents painted a vivid picture of this part of the forest. I wanted a break from rabbits and pheasants. This forest had plenty of wildlife and there wasn't much for human activity so it had flourished this last year. The smell of a pack of coyotes was tempting. I hadn't hunted a predator since that bear that was trying to break into the live trap. One coyote would be sufficient and this pack was large enough that the loss of one member wasn't going to do much.

I silently tracked the scent of the wild canines. Most were sleeping, but a couple were awake and catching mice in the long grass. I picked an older male with a limp and approached from downwind.  The coyote trotted right by my hiding spot and I ambushed it. It didn't even manage to yip in surprise before it was dead. The sweet heavy blood was one I had not tasted for a couple of months. It was a welcome variation in a usually pretty monotonous menu. I continued patrolling the area, but the night was quiet. I didn't find any Runners, nor did a Nightstalker make an appearance or even call out. A rabbit scurried across my path unaware of my presence. I paused as my instincts prompted proper doctoring of my wounds. Should I? Nina would be able to compare my healing rate with Daniels quite easily and some of our scratches were fairly similar. A mischievous grin grew on my face. Hell, why not. He will figure it out eventually, even if it takes him a few decades to get to that epiphany. It took mere seconds to catch and dispatch the rabbit. I carefully doctored the big cut with as much blood as I could. The cut got hot as the heat in my veins focused on the wound as it absorbed the blood. I made sure to give each little scratch, cut, and scrape a good doctoring as well. Several laps around the forest later I headed back inside. Being inside at night was much harder for me now, but hiding in the corner made it tolerable. It was about as fun as a get-together with unfriendly in-laws, but tolerable. I tried a few times, but as I had noticed before, sleep was no longer possible at night. I glanced at Daniel, although with my sunglasses on he had no clue I was watching him. I subtly compared our scratches and grinned evilly. Even just a few hours after one doctoring, my scratches were healing almost three times as fast as his were. It was barely noticeable, but the fact that I could see the difference this soon was surprising. It was barely after midnight to boot. Perhaps my healing had also increased due to the way the controlex elevated my instincts. Sitting in a corner of a room is boring. Extremely so. I eventually approached the fire silently. My Nightstalker abilities allowed me to open up cans and get the soup ready without making a single sound. I could feel Daniel watching me, probably surprised that I could play with cans, a can opener, and a pot without making any audible noise. Then again, it was silent for my ears. He may actually be able to hear me for all I knew. I didn't like being in the firelight considering my instincts wanted me to remain hidden, but I put up with it since I could go outside soon. I whispered, "The soup is prepped. It just needs to be put on the fire. I am tired of being cooped up in here so I am heading outside." He nodded silently. I once more made my way out the door. We had acquired two regular zombies since I came back. I lured them away and lost them in the forest. Wandering in circles in the forest was more entertaining than sitting in a corner like I was in timeout. I occasionally tried to see how close I could get to animals without them realizing it. A sleeping fox didn't even wake as I gently stroked its bushy tail. I left it to continue its sleep. Another hapless rabbit went to that great big carrot patch in the sky as I once more doctored my injuries. I didn't return until the sun had risen and my instincts had subsided to normal. The restlessness that occurred if I wasn't inconspicuous was a real pain in the ass. Although I should be thankful that it only happens at night. If it also occurred during the day, I would have Nina looking for a reversal. I could smell that Daniel had put the soup on the fire. The last thing we needed was for Nicky to cross to the dark side on this road trip. My footsteps became audible as I approached the door so I didn't catch Daniel off guard. That guy didn't handle surprises well. Nina and Nicky had just woken up by the looks of things. Both were drowsy and had full bowls of soup in their hands. I wandered over to look out the kitchen window despite the fact that I had just been outside. My instincts were practically obsessive compulsive about knowing what was going on and it wasn't as if I had anything else to do. The humans ignored me as they tried to wake up. Daniel was watching me in boredom, perhaps thinking I was keeping an eye out for something. Well, if he is bored, then I may have a cure for that... I glanced sideways at him and shifted my body language to something less defensive. He hadn't seen it since that one day on the roof when I had messed with his head. He immediately blinked and focused on me with a combination of confusion, suspicion, and curiosity. It amused me that he still did not see the invitation for a playful wrestling match for what it was. I smirked and shook my head in disappointment at his cluelessness as I dropped the intentional body language. He would have something to think about while driving today at any rate. The best part was that Nina hadn't noticed it and he couldn't even ask her for her thoughts. I looked out the window while watching Daniel from the corner of my eye. He was clearly thinking hard and trying to figure the puzzle out. It was just as clear that he wasn't having any success either. This kind of subtle humor suited me very well and provided me endless amusement at his expense.

 

Chapter 72


 I stared idly at the scenery while our human companions ate their breakfast. Many humans had stopped in this house. A few scents I recognized from our Stronghold, but most were strangers I had never met. That didn't surprise me considering how far we were from Ironwind Stronghold. It was more surprising that I actually recognized three scents from Ironwind Stronghold. I took a slow deep breath as I tried to place them. Two were from a group that occasionally went trading. One was a guy I had never spoke to, but I was pretty sure he did a lot of traveling. My instincts shifted as they picked up something out of place. I took another deep breath as I tried to figure out what tipped off my suspicious instincts. I closed my eyes as I focused on the world of scent. It wasn't anything outside, or I would have noticed it in my patrolling. That narrowed it down by a fair bit. Several more breaths didn't yield any results either. I was getting frustrated as I failed to see what my instincts were detecting. Sometimes the easiest way to find the answer was to actually focus less and just let your mind wander. I opened my eyes and took slow breaths as I just tried to loosen up my concentration. The smell of soup was prominent. As was the rather sharp scent of the Terror that was still watching me. I could pick up hints of the mice in the walls. There were a few bats in the attic along with a bee's nest. Nina was wearing that odd flowery perfume that somehow almost masked her human scent. Nicky was wearing her socks from yesterday and was trying to sneak a handful of peanuts out of her backpack without Nina noticing. A bag of beans in one of our bags was at the point where it might start growing mold. My instincts flared and my mind honed in with sudden suspicion. We hadn't packed any beans. I turned as I slowly crossed the kitchen floor to a different side window while testing the air. It was stronger halfway along my path. I peeked in the one cupboard, but as I had expected, there was no food to be found. The scent was not coming from behind the cupboard doors either. It might have just been a bag of beans, but I was determined to find them. So many people passed through here that anything edible should be long gone by now and this had to be a large bag of beans from the smell of it. It didn't make sense and contradictions like this tended to catch my interest. Daniel noticed that something had caught my attention and he was watching me in curiosity from his seat. I slowly walked across the kitchen again towards the first window. I turned and examined the room as a hunch grew stronger. Why was the smell the strongest in the middle of the floor? I scrutinized the floor in suspicion. The old black and white linoleum tiles were fairly dirty. My sharp eyesight saw that the gap between several tiles was larger than the rest. I walked over to the gap and a faint creak in the floor told me that my intuition was likely correct. I doubted that this was just a squeaky board in the floor. I was quite certain that there was a well-hidden trapdoor here. There had to be a handle hold of some sort to allow people to open it. This house wasn't that fancy or expensive, so it was unlikely to have anything high tech. The creak had also told me which side of the gap the door was on. I just needed to discover which end lifted up and how to do so. A glint of metal in the one joint caught my attention. I crouched down as I examined it. That motion caught both Nicky and Nina's attention and they watched me in confusion. Daniel was intently watching me. I probably look like a right idiot who might be watching an ant. It looked like a paperclip was wedged into the gap. The tip of my fingernail lifted it halfway out before encountering resistance. A firm pull yielded a click and showed that a thin cord was tied to the paper clip. The click resulted in the trapdoor lifting slightly as the latch no longer held it firmly down.

My fingernails easily found purchase on the edge and lifted it up. Stale air and various scents wafted up as I lifted the trapdoor. Footsteps told me that all three were coming to investigate my unexpected find. I pushed the door until it wouldn't open anymore. It opened far enough that it leaned to the other side and remained open. Daniel eyed up the dark hole in the floor in disfavor. Nicky peered down into the blackness in curiosity, "Any idea what's down there?" "One way to find out." I ignored the ladder as I stepped off the edge to drop down to the rough wooden plank floor below. Those above could see me with the light that came in the windows behind them, but that was about it. I turned on the spot as I swiftly looked around. I glanced up, "Looks like storage for things they rarely used. I will take a quick peek." I ducked under a floor truss as I went over to the shelves along the wall. The ceiling couldn't have been more than six feet high and in some places even I had to duck under support beams. The shelves were the source of the smell of old beans. One bag on the floor had gotten faintly damp. Additional bags on the shelf were fine. This family had been a fan of canning their own food and numerous jars filled the shelves. Three closed doors were on the other side of the room. I took a precautionary sniff before opening the first one. Spare bedding and boxes of odds and ends lined the shelves in this room. The second room resembled an odd wood shop with dozens of small barrels in various stages of construction. I paused as I opened up the third door. Shit. I think we just found a moonshine factory... This room was much larger than the others. A dozen large stills were set up and half of the room looked more like a lab than a rural beer shop. I wonder if Nina could use any of this equipment? I headed back to the trapdoor and climbed up the ladder to stick my head out, "Hey Nina, would you possibly be able to use anything from a moonshine lab? Some of the stuff in the one room looks somewhat sciency." Nina turned to Daniel, "Can I borrow your flashlight?" Daniel already had his flashlight in his hands, "I'll come down too." This surprised Nina. For that matter, I had not expected it either. It didn't occur to me that Daniel would enter that trapdoor with his aversion to dark narrow spaces. He must have seen that it was an open room below and that could have been sufficient. He had entered that one cave to find me, although he refused to enter that feral's tiny dwelling. Maybe it was because this was a building. I looked at Daniel, "It is clear down there other than the odd mouse or two. Do you want me down there or up here?" "Up here." I had assumed that, so it didn't come as a surprise. He wouldn't want a Nightstalker in a dark place he was entering if he had any other option. I climbed up the rest of the way and headed over to the kitchen window off to the side. Daniel turned his flashlight to the max and it easily lit up anything it was pointed towards. After a few seconds he jumped down into the now-lit area. Nina quickly descended the ladder until she was out of my sight. I remained where I was since I knew what was down there and it didn't interest me. Nicky yawned and went back for seconds of the soup. I checked a few more kitchen cupboards in boredom, carefully scenting the air and looking for any other oddities in case there were more hidey holes. I pocketed a tiny jar. I could use it to carry some blood to dress that cut in my arm. Just because I very rarely had difficulties in making a kill, didn't mean that I was always successful. Sometimes bad weather sent animals into hiding. Rabbit burrows could easily be deep and larger animals were sometimes not that common in certain areas. 

There had been a night or two in the past where I had ended up going after much smaller prey like rats or tiny quail. I had even tried fish blood once and I vowed that I would never repeat that experience again. When I had been human, I had loved battered or fried fish. Fish blood was slimy, musky, and left a foul lingering taste in my mouth as a zombie. I didn't find anything else of interest, although from the noises below, Nina was having a great scavenger hunt downstairs. I went over to sit by Nicky while waiting for the other two to resurface. "You didn't bring me any moonshine?" If I thought Nicky was bad with just a cup of coffee, then I didn't even want to contemplate what an alcoholic beverage might do. I shook my head and lied, "There was none down there. Just the stills and whatever they were using to check the quality." "Hmmm.... The best way to check the quality is to drink it. I bet they had some wicked parties in this place with that stuff on tap." Footsteps on the ladder showed that Nina had finished. She had a bucket with a bunch of items in it as she climbed up the ladder. Daniel waited until she was out of the way and simply jumped straight up. Show off. Daniel had several bags of stuff that he put down before going back down for another load. I tilted my head, "Find anything good down there?" Nina glanced at the stuff with a grin, "That had been a very sophisticated setup for a rural moonshine operation. Some stuff I had been running low on and there were even a few things that I didn't have." She glanced at me in curiosity, "How did you find that trapdoor?" I shrugged, "I picked up a scent that just didn't make sense." "What scent?" I smirked, "There is a bag of beans down there that is just starting to grow mold. We didn't pack beans and I couldn't see any travelers leaving anything that resembled food. It would have to have been very well hidden for this many travelers to miss it, so there might have been other things with it." Nina blinked in surprise before rummaging through a closet for cardboard boxes and any rags that would work as padding for some of the more delicate objects she has found. Daniel finished his last trip and closed the trap door. He stepped on it and it closed with a click as the paperclip once more fell into the crack. Nicky started washing her bowl, so I took that as my signal to begin carrying stuff out to the truck. 
 
 I leaned against the tailgate as I absently watched the road ahead of us. Nina turned around in the front seat of the cab to look through the open window in the back of the truck, "Do you smell anything yet?" I blinked slowly at the stupid question. With my sense of smell, my world was halfway made up of scent. I decided to avoid an overly sarcastic response this early in the day. "You are going to have to be more specific." "Are there any Nightstalkers around? We aren't that far from where the rumors reported it." I took a deep breath once more and thoroughly checked for any zombie scents, "The only Nightstalkers I am scenting are those three musketeers from the other day, although it is pretty faint. Several Runners and a couple dozen regular zombies." Nina nodded although she looked somewhat disappointed. She must be the only human out there who was disappointed when she didn't find a feral Nightstalker. I was seriously beginning to wonder if Nicky's questionable judgment was contagious. It could also explain what I was doing in the back of truck with this group again.

The smell of permanent felt markers made me wrinkle my nose. I turned to look suspiciously at Nicky, I had not been aware that she had brought those felts along for the ride. This was the first time she had taken them out. I shook my head as I realized how she planned to pass the time today. Nicky had somehow managed to get a spare pair of socks out of Daniel's bag and was ensuring they would match his shoes. I shook my head with a sigh, if Daniel didn't want to wear the colorful socks, then he would just have to wear a pair of socks two days in a row. Or wash an old pair in a bucket of water and let them dry. I didn't have enough ambition to intervene when it was just a pair of socks at stake. It guaranteed a couple hours of peace and quiet with Nicky and that was more than worth a pair of socks. I would even give her a pair of mine if it kept her amused. I wouldn't be wearing them afterwards though. Around lunchtime Nicky managed to finish one sock and was diligently working on the other one. We pulled up in front of what looked like an overgrown wooden tree fort with a tall chain link fence surrounding it. I had to give credit to whoever built it though, the rope ladder would stop Runners even if they did get over the chain link fence. A large empty firepit was below. If they had a bonfire going all night, that would keep any Nightstalkers at bay. Someone had put thought into building this place. My nose told me that although no one was here currently, it was a popular rest stop. Nina got out of the truck and looked at me, "Anything?" I shook my head, "No one is home at the moment and the only Nightstalkers that scoped this place out were the ones we already encountered. I don't scent a feral upwind either." Nina nodded in disappointment and looked at Daniel, "I don't see any real reason to stop here then. Feel like continuing down the road? We can keep going south just to be sure, but I have a feeling that this is going to be an empty trip unless we stop at another Stronghold to visit." Daniel glanced at Nicky and me before shaking his head, "I don't think visiting a Stronghold is wise with those two in the back." As much as I didn't even want to see another Stronghold, the way that Daniel said it 'wasn't wise' sounded far too much like we would be the ones to cause trouble. That irritated me a bit since I never caused problems intentionally. I just didn't like crowds or strangers, which would be a guarantee. Daniel took a noticeable sniff of the air before focusing on Nicky in suspicion. She had been smart enough to hide both the socks and the markers when we had stopped, but that didn't help with the lingering fumes. He growled in suspicion, "What were you coloring?" Nicky gave him a confused look, "No idea what you are talking about." Her acting was pretty good, but not good enough with the pungent scent of markers lingering in the air. I could easily smell the lie as well. His eyes flashed red briefly in warning, "I can smell the felts. Now what were you coloring?" "None of your business. They are my felts now. Trinity should have never given them to me. I get plenty of inspiration for coloring whenever I am around either of you two." Why did she drag me into this? Nicky's words and tone were not helping with Daniel's mood, although after the stunt Nicky had pulled last time, I could kind of see where he was coming from. He seemed out of sorts today as well for some reason. Nina decided to try a different tactic, "I love your coloring ability, although I doubt you can color that well in the back of a bumpy truck. Can you show me what you did so far?" The combination of flattery and possible doubt of her skill had Nicky pulling out a rather colorful sock for display. Daniel instantly recognized his sock and growled in aggravation at Nicky. I growled faintly in reply and narrowed my eyes as Daniel turned his focus to me. His eyes went red as his instincts did not appreciate the challenge. My tone was clipped, "It was just a pair of socks. I will find another pair for you later. She can color a pair of mine next." Daniel narrowed his eyes in displeasure. I didn't look away from him and I knew it would rub his instincts completely the wrong way. Nina was looking between the two of us in concern. She tried to break up the slowly building quarrel, "How about we keep driving? The damage is done and Trinity will keep Nicky away from your stuff." Daniel turned with a huff as he got back into the driver's seat in a surly mood. I was glad that I wasn't the one riding in the cab with him. The tires spun a bit with his peeved acceleration. I could see the back of his head through the window and some of his face in the rearview mirror. He was pointedly not looking at us in the mirrors. I wasn't sure what had started this tiff of his, but it was odd to see the normally restrained Terror get irritated so easily with a human. I could understand him growling at me at the drop of a hat since I was a zombie, but his control around humans was usually impeccable. My instincts didn't understand this slight change and neither did I. Daniel hadn't been this upset when Nicky had colored his shoes, so something else was bugging him and this had just pushed his temper a bit further up the temperature gauge. Admittedly, having me purposefully vexing his instincts probably hadn't helped any. "Okay, where are your socks?" With a sigh I dug into my backpack to toss Nicky a pair of light grey socks. I wasn't sure why she was after them yet since she hadn't finished Daniel's last sock. I caught a glimpse of Daniel's eyes in the rearview mirror. They had a noticeable tinge of orange in his customary brown. Either he wasn't controlling his eye color as much as usual or he was peeved about something. My bet was on the latter option. My disrespectful challenge had probably irked him and it was going to take some time for him to cool down. Nicky's obsession with turning his wardrobe into a rainbow was just icing on the cake. This was going to be a long ride.

 

Chapter 73


 It was late in the afternoon by the time we found a place to camp. It was an old gas station. I grabbed a few bags of supplies as I jumped off the truck and sniffed the air, "There is at least one regular zombie around, but nothing else that I can detect." Nicky stood up and brandished two rather vividly colored pairs of socks, "I finished them!" Daniel grumbled, "Fantastic." Nicky beamed at him, "Great! I want both you and Trinity to wear these at least once." A growl from Daniel and me told Nicky what we thought of that plan. Nicky raised her chin, "If I spent hours coloring a sock, then the least you can do is wear it for a day. One freaking day. Is that really too much to ask?" Daniel gritted his teeth and growled faintly. Nina moved closer to him and was whispering too quietly for me to hear from over here, which was a remarkable feat. I narrowed my eyes at the flamboyant objects in her hand as my mind tried to find an easy way out of wearing that mortifying object. Perhaps there was another way around it. It wasn't so much that I didn't want to wear a pair of socks as that the color would damage my rather over-inflated pride and lead to people staring. Having people stare at me set my instincts off in a rather unfavorable fashion. I tried to think of another alternative. Sometimes indirect plans were the easiest... I had to clarify some details to know if my potential plan held any merit. "One day? You just want us to have them on our feet, correct?" Daniel sent me a surprised look, startled that I was giving in so easily when I had growled earlier at the thought. Nicky nodded, "Yes. Just wear them for one day. I don't care who sees them, I just want you to wear them." I didn't like being pushed into any situation, but her conditions allowed me to form a plan for this particular one and that made it bearable. I huffed, "Fine." Nicky turned expectantly towards Daniel, who intentionally avoided her gaze as Nina still tried to convince him to not hurt her feelings. I wished her luck with that one considering the mood Daniel was currently in. I walked towards the door to take the first load in. This place looked even worse from the outside than the previous house did. I pushed the door open. Instinct made me try to dodge the trap even before I realized what was happening, but I was not quite fast enough to completely avoid the bucket of stagnant water that had been precariously balanced above the door inside. I snarled in rage as I shook myself off. My vision took on a reddish hue in my indignation and fury. My clothing was halfway soaked and I was not a happy camper. Nicky gasped, "Are you all right?" I dropped the bags and my backpack on a dry spot on the ground as I wrung out my long braid with a half-snarl, "Just peachy."  I knew that Nicky was honestly concerned, but I was too angry to manage a civil response. Who the hell would prop a bucket of water above a door in a random building?! I would be checking the scent on that bucket before we left. If I ever crossed the path of that person, we would be having a little discussion. My sunglasses had water splatter on them and taking them off for a cleaning wasn't possible with the sun shining on us. Even if I switched to a backup pair, the few seconds when my eyes were unprotected would be uncomfortable even if I stood in the shade of a big tree. I hated dirty glasses too. Daniel seemed to find my impromptu shower funny and smirked, which didn't help my temper any. He faintly chuckled, "You look like a dog that got caught out in the rain with your hair like that."

I rounded on him and snarled furiously at the insult. The rude and challenging snarl hit Daniel's instincts and roused his temper with a vengeance. He stalked forward with a threatening stance as he snarled at me to back down. My conduct had just crossed several lines and pushed his instincts far past what any higher ranking zombie would tolerate. "Daniel!" Nina tried to catch his attention, but both of us ignored her. Nicky jumped out of the truck and slapped a hand over Nina's mouth before pulling her back out of possible danger. At least one of them had some functioning brain cells. I snarled back at him, completely pissed off at this point and my instincts didn't want to back down. They urged me towards First Strike in an attempt to determine that he was even truly a Terror. My instincts had seen too many inconsistencies to believe him just based on his snarl. My mind knew differently, but my instincts wanted real evidence. Neither of us was in a good mood and neither of us was backing down as we got in one another's personal space. Daniel's eyes were solid red and glowing strongly. He couldn't see my eyes, but they were probably the same as his. His deep rumbling growl was a warning that practically vibrated the air. Terrors seemed to prefer giving warnings and having others back down as opposed to attacking a foe out of the blue. Pity for him that Nightstalkers had no such qualms. I snarled and struck out as fast as I could at his arm, aiming for First Strike. Rationally I knew that he was fast enough to dodge me as easily as I could dodge a Runner. I didn't stand a chance of hitting him. He growled fiercely and tensed up as his eyes narrowed at me. He didn't move his arm though. At the last second I curled my fingers up a bit so the back of my fingers skimmed his arm harmlessly as opposed to leaving deep bloody furrows with my razor sharp nails. I snarled and backed up several steps in surprise. The shock that he had let me actually get a strike in on him had distracted me from my anger in my disbelief. It shook me out of my rage and instinct induced trance. Daniel was still growling, but watching me with a look of concentration on his face as if he was trying to figure something out. He shifted his stance slightly and I narrowed my eyes as I dropped into a deeper crouch. I knew that stance very well. It was the same one that I had seen numerous times with Kelly and Travis. The very one that I had taunted Daniel with this morning and several days ago. An invitation for a harmless wrestling match. Daniel wasn't quite sure what he was doing, but he likely had a guess. His movements were tentative as he tested the waters of this new silent language. I could approach this in two different ways. If I chose to take it easy on him, I could go slow so he could easily learn. Or I could just push him into the river and see if he could swim. I altered my own body language before launching at him with a snarl. He saw me coming and tried to brace himself, but the force still sent both of us to the ground as we both snarled at each other. The tone of our growls had changed slightly, neither was truly serious as both our instincts shifted gears for a play fight, although I doubted that most humans would be able to tell. Nina was practically in a panic and managed to get Nicky's hand off her mouth, "Stop! Don't hurt one another!" Nicky grabbed Nina by the belt and hauled her down to the ground beside her, "Sit down and shut up. If Trinity was serious, she would have drawn her weapons." Nina shut up in surprise as she realized that Nicky was right. Both sat in the dust beside the truck and stared at us. I ignored them as I concentrated on Daniel. He was much larger than me, although I knew more moves and had more practice than he did. That experience was my only edge since the Terror was much stronger and faster than me, although he was holding back some.

I didn't use all of my tricks and Daniel was managing to keep up fairly well in this new 'game'. Teeth were bared and fingernails glinted in the light, but no injuries were dealt and no blood flowed. It looked vicious and dangerous, but it was just a way to blow off some steam and stress without actually harming one another. He was cautious in this game and was aware that he may not know all of the rules. Several minutes later he managed to wrap his arms around me and pin me. I stilled for a couple of seconds and growled faintly. He understood the signal as the sign that he had won this wrestling match and released me. He stood up and held out a hand with a faintly feral-looking grin. I bared my teeth at him in a silent grin for a few seconds before taking his hand and letting him pull me to my feet. The cut on my arm throbbed, but it hadn't bled through the bandage. I chuckled darkly, "There may be hope for you yet." Daniel looked amused and no trace of his earlier foul mood was to be seen. Wrestling matches tended to be a silver bullet for settling a sane zombie's instincts and temper. I took a step back and shook myself off. My clothing had dried a bit in the wrestling match, but I needed a change of clothing before I sat down on anything that even remotely resembled furniture. My temper was back on par after that little workout. I was still irritated with whomever had put that pail there though. The wrestling match used different parts of our instincts since we were both zombies. The no killing rule kept things fairly risk free. In an odd and unique fashion, it also allowed our humanity to show through and overcome our testy instincts. It allowed the game to remain a game. Nina slowly stood up from where Nicky had dumped her in the dirt. She looked completely confused. Nicky wandered over to peer through the open door to the inside of the gas station, "I hereby nominate Daniel to check this place out before I so much as stick my toe in there." I brushed some dirt from my pants and glanced at Daniel, "I already had my fun. Besides, your reflexes are better than mine are. Although with my luck, that was the only trap." Daniel exhaled gustily as he slowly approached the door. He peered inside for quite some time before slowly entering the building with caution. I went to bring a few more bags to the door while Daniel scoped the place out for more hidden traps or dangers. Nina came over to me as I grabbed a couple of sleeping bags. She still looked perplexed, "What just happened?" Nicky snorted, "Someone put a pail of water above the door and Trinity was the unlucky person to win the lottery. Obviously." Nina shook her head, "I meant afterwards." I exhaled gustily, "Consider it a mostly friendly wrestling match between sane zombies. You saw me tackle Kelly like that too." Nina was still confused, "You both looked like you were about to get into a serious fight. How did it end up as a wrestling match?" I shook my head, "With our instincts that high, the zombie rules come more into play and serious injury is actually less likely. A wrestling match like that is actually partially rooted in our instincts and is one of the very few situations where it is possible for our humanity to co-exist with our instincts. When he let me land that first blow it startled me enough to distract me from my anger, which also kept it from turning into an actual attempt at retaliation." Nina started scribbling in her notebook although she still looked more confused than anything. It wasn't an expression I was used to seeing on her face. "I don't think I have ever seen Daniel do this before..." I shrugged, "That is a question for him, although I somehow suspect that he has never tried it before. This isn't something that ferals will do." Considering that he hadn't even understood the body language this morning, I could safely bet that he had never had a friendly wrestling match with another zombie. He may have only realized it because I had pissed him off so much that his instincts were strong enough to finally clue him in. Daniel came back outside and looked at me, "I can't find anything else, but I may have missed something. Can you take a quick look before we let these two in?" I sighed, but nodded. I passed Daniel and noticed that the faint tension that was usually present had waned. It took me a few seconds of thought, but I realized that our recent wrestling match had brought Daniel a bit closer to his instincts. Perhaps it was also because he now knew that I wouldn't inflict a serious injury on him even if I was furious. He was somewhat more relaxed around me now and he wasn't triggering my instincts as much. It was a marginal improvement, but it was still an improvement. Hopefully it would make co-existing in the same area easier. I slowly entered the open door. My instincts roused once more and I examined the room with intentional suspicion. If there was anything out of place, I wanted to know about it. I took a slow breath as I tested the air. I narrowed my eyes as I was bombarded by information and details from both inside the store as well as outside. My keen instincts found nothing amiss in the scents so I took a few more steps inside. I slowly scanned the room while testing my instincts in case they spotted something I didn't. Mindful of the last place we stayed, I also kept an eye on the floor in case of a pitfall trap instead of a trap door. The way my luck had been running, it was a realistic possibility. There were only two back rooms in this gas station and I cautiously checked those as well. I exhaled gustily as I headed back to the front door. Despite checking every corner with sight and by scent, this place had come up clean. Even with my suspicious instincts on the job, they had been unable to even find something to fret about. This was how my luck worked. There had been one booby trap in the entire building and I had blundered into it. I bent over to pick up the pail and sniffed it. Stagnant water was the most prominent, but I could smell the young man who had placed this here about a week ago. Nicky wandered up to the doorway, "So, I assume by the lack of snarling that it is safe to enter?" I dropped the pail back down to the floor, "I didn't find anything, but it is still enter at your own risk." Nicky snorted, "The insurance guys wouldn't even sell me life insurance. Or any kind of insurance for that matter. Perhaps the cops warned them." I chose the easy route out of this conversation, "We'll blame the cops since they aren't here to defend themselves." Nicky nodded, "Yeah, let's do that. Because it surely couldn't have been due to the fact that my face made the front page of the newspaper two weeks in a row." I gave her an odd look, "Why did your face appear on the front of a newspaper?" Nicky grinned, "Because they lost me." "Dare I ask?" She chuckled and rubbed her hands together, "It was a great game of hide and go seek that spread across the entire city. I stole several empty pill bottles from another patient in the psychiatric ward and hid them in my bed before sneaking out of the hospital. The nurses thought that I actually took the drugs, never once considering that they always had to fight to get me to take my own for the four weeks I was in there." She smirked at me, "Let's just say that the public was advised to call the police if they saw me since I was off my medication. It was like a game of peek-a-boo that went on for days! I would show my face in one spot and run off to a different part of the city. Of course I always had to dress up before letting the public see me. The one of me in a chicken suit on top of the fountain juggling rubber turkeys actually ended up in the paper." Nicky was capable of taking crazy to a whole new undiscovered level. I shook my head, "And just how did they catch you in the end?" She sighed dejectedly, "Someone offered me coffee and a donut. I didn't realize he was an off-duty police officer. I should have recognized him though, we had plenty of long chats in the past at the police station while waiting for my psychiatrist. They still can't figure out how I managed to climb on top of that water fountain while it was running." I seriously hoped that they had given that man a raise.

 

Chapter 74


 I checked the scabs on my arms from the fight with the Nightstalkers. The shallowest ones had fallen off a bit earlier. The rest would likely come off in a day or so with the amount of doctoring I had done to my injuries. Even the one bigger cut was much further along than anticipated. I was healing leaps and bounds faster than Daniel was due to my cheating. He hadn't noticed the difference yesterday, but I couldn't see him missing it today. Especially if some of the bigger scabs came off. The night was quiet as I roamed the fields and checked out the small stand of trees near the gas station. To call it a forest would have been an understatement since it would have fit into a baseball diamond.  The endless fields of grasses were almost waist high on me. I could only imagine what kind of game of hide and go seek someone could have in here if they crouched down. Other creatures were playing that very game as well. My nose easily picked up the scent of numerous rabbits, mice, quail, as well as several foxes and a few other predators. One scent seemed a bit different, it smelt like rabbit, but not quite. I tracked it out of curiosity. It didn't take me long to find the creature napping under a clump of grass. I blinked slowly at its huge ears and long legs. I had not seen a jackrabbit since I had been human, possibly because they didn't like the hilly forested areas further north along the mountains. I left the jackrabbit alone and continued circling the gas station. Towards dawn a rabbit hopped directly in front of me and sealed its fate. I was hunting more after that drug had taken effect, but I wasn't eating normal food, so it was probably balancing out somehow. Back in the mountains I only hunted a larger animal every three or four days and it was sufficient. Once the humans were around, I had hunted a smaller creature every night just to help with my control. After the controlex drug tweaked the virus in my blood I was hunting at least one rabbit a night and every few days I also went after something larger or hunted a couple of times in one night. The rabbits around here weren't very bright. Another one was hopping around in front of me. I hadn't tended my wounds yet tonight and the opportunity was too good to pass up. My instincts were all for having these pesky wounds healed so it didn't look like I had lost so many First Strike matches. I was surprised that Daniel never noticed his own instincts given the amount of scratches that crisscrossed his arms. I trickled the blood over the various small scratches before turning to the larger knife wound that still sported a bandage. I peeled back the bandage and shook my head at the amount of polysporin Nina had put onto it this morning. I used a kleenex to carefully wipe the gel away. The polysporin had kept the wound from forming a proper scab, so I also wiped away the sticky half-congealed blood. I carefully dripped the rabbit blood into the rather ugly wound. It disappeared like water hitting sand and I felt the wound heat up from the blood application. The heat was soon almost painful and I stopped doctoring the wound. I drained the last of the rabbit blood into the small apricot sized jar that I had pilfered from the last stop. I stashed it away in my backpack. No sense wasting it. The night was oddly quiet. I didn't even come across any zombies. Normally the regular zombies were guaranteed to show up and I would have to lure them away. We hadn't even dodged any on the road the last fifteen minutes of our drive. It was distinctly odd. I slowed my pace and carefully tested the air. I could smell zombies, so they had passed through, but the traces were old and faint. My instincts stirred and I agreed with them. We were along a decent sized road that saw weekly traffic, zombies should be roaming up and down as they were lured in by the scent of humans.

I narrowed my eyes in suspicion. If I hadn't been circling this area for most of the night to know that there was no immediate danger, I would have been alarmed enough to warn Daniel. I was more surprised that I hadn't noticed it until now. I must be slipping, but the lack of roaming zombies wasn't exactly something I had been on the lookout for. I had been watching for trouble, not its absence. I had scented one regular zombie when we first pulled up though. I tested the air again, but didn't detect it. With large fields sprawling around us, it wasn't exactly easy for a zombie to hide. Other than Nightstalkers, no zombie cared about remaining out of sight. It certainly hadn't been a Nightstalker, so where on earth had it gotten to? With a huff, I picked up speed as I headed downwind to find the blasted creature. 
 I was seriously confused by this point. The sky was starting to lighten and I still hadn't located a single zombie. I had gone a long ways downwind, but that search had come up empty. That thing didn't just turn into a butterfly and flutter away, so where the hell did it go? I was getting frustrated to say the least. I gave up looking further away. It wouldn't have gone so far unless it was actively chasing something. I decided to make a huge circle of the gas station and see it that would turn up anything. I was breathing hard. Running had never been my thing and I wasn't built for long distance trips. I paused as I took a deep breath and turned to face upwind. The zombie was somewhere upwind. I was further east than I had been before, so I hadn't noticed it until now. I could also smell rotting human remains that the zombie had undoubtedly gone to find. I went to investigate. My instincts flared and I snarled in alarm as I jumped sideways mid-run. I came to a stop and did a quick check around me before focusing on what I had just dodged. That had been a close one. A growl still rumbled through my chest as I bent down to carefully inspect the trap. Just the barest hint of steel poked through the long grasses. I picked up a rock and took a few steps back before throwing it at the grass. With a loud clang the steel jaws of the bear trap closed. That would have been nasty if I had stepped on it, but one tooth of the jaws had given it away. I was thankful for my lucky break, but pissed at whoever had left it out here. If I had been wearing my glasses, I might have missed it. I picked up the trap and took a sniff of it. It had been out here for so long that no trace of scent clung to it. I dropped it to the ground with a faint growl. My mind was in deep thought. Why would someone set up a bear trap in the middle of a field? This makes no sense. When someone took the time to do something that lacked any traces of logic, it made me suspicious. People like that didn't live long in this world, so it often meant that something was up. I exhaled in irritation, but continued in the same direction. This time I was going more slowly and watching where I stepped. My instincts were up in arms over my close call and were also helping me keep watch. I set off a few other traps as I traveled. Two more bear traps, half a dozen foot snares, and even a pitfall trap. The pitfall trap had been clearly marked with signs so humans could avoid it. I set it off anyways. I was uneasy. Someone had put a lot of effort into putting these traps up considering I had found so many when I was just traveling in a mostly straight line. The smell of rot was much stronger now and unpleasant. A normal zombie would be lured in like a bear to honey. I moved slowly and carefully as my glowing red eyes inspected everything around me. I came to the edge of a large pit that was the source of the smell. A dead human had been tied up to a stake on a platform. Considering he had been beheaded, it was clear that someone thought he had been infected. The pit was so deep that the platform was still below the ground I stood on. That was why I hadn't been able to see it at a distance.

The bottom of the pit caught my interest though. Someone had put a lot of thought into this. The bottom must have had a water spring in it since it was covered in a thick mud that almost certainly acted like quicksand. I could smell that a zombie had stumbled into this pit just before sunset, but it was buried so far beneath the mud that no trace of its scent escaped now. My instincts twisted in warning and I stepped back with narrowed eyes as I examined my surroundings. I was surrounded by long meadow grass that was waist high, but didn't see anything else. I took a deep breath, but didn't pick up much other than the rotting human and traces of the submerged zombie's passage. My instincts rose even higher and I inhaled with a faint growl. I wasn't picking up many of the smaller and fainter scents. They were missing. Cloaked. In a smooth and fluid movement I backed into the tall grass and ducked out of sight. Moving through long grass when I had been human without giving away my position would have been impossible. As a Nightstalker, it was a challenge, but manageable. I moved away from where I had ducked into cover. My head was tilted as I listened intently to the world around me. After a few minutes of silence I heard a faint rustle of cloth from the other side of the pit. If I hadn't been stationary and intently focused on the sounds around me, I would have missed the barely audible sound in the silent night. I turned towards the noise and started to silently stalk towards it. I was an ambush predator of the highest level. It took me some time to silently work my way behind the man and get close enough to figure out exactly where he was. He was facing the pit as I rose slightly out of the cover of the grass that prevented me from seeing him. I watched him with glowing red eyes. I took a deep breath, but it was as if he wasn't there. Whatever he was using to camouflage his scent worked astoundingly well. He wore a mask with some sort of filter that prevented me from even picking up his breath. He still hadn't noticed me standing behind him as he tried to peer through the long grass towards the pit with a pair of binoculars. I could see a bow and arrows to the side, so it was likely that he wasn't carrying a gun, but with my ability to pick up scents incapacitated, I wasn't about to trust an assumption. At the very least, I didn't see a gun. I crossed my arms in an irritated gesture as I stood there glaring down at the oblivious man who was lying down in the grass. My shoes were only feet from his boots. I made sure to be ready to move in case he pulled a gun. My speed should be sufficient at this range to disarm him if he turned violent. Considering the number of traps I had encountered, I wasn't about to trust this odd man any further than I could throw him. Even if he went further than that, I still wouldn't trust him. What kind of lunatic hides numerous traps in the middle of the countryside? Even Nicky isn't that crazy and I sure hope that this is not a distant cousin of hers. The world was just starting to get light. Soon, I would need my glasses, but at the moment I was a grey shadow with red eyes. He should be able to see me and my stance in this dim predawn light. I sighed heavily, "I hope you have one hell of a good explanation for the number of bear traps I found. If one of my companions had stumbled into them, I would not have been impressed." The man practically jumped out of his skin as my irritated voice came from behind him. He flipped over onto his back with a surprised gasp and stared at me. I watched him like a hawk as he grabbed a large dagger on his belt. His knuckles were white from his grip, but he hadn't drawn it yet. He saw me but started glancing around wildly. He faced me again as he got over his fright and gritted his teeth as he swiftly became quite upset. He tore off his mask and threw it to the side, "So, you are planning to torment me like you tortured my brother? Where are your companions?"

I tilted my head in partial curiosity while my instincts chafed against his tone, "Unless Daniel is your brother, then you have likely mistaken me for someone else. As to my companions, the humans are sleeping with Daniel keeping watch." Confusion entered his anger, "You think I am going to fall- wait, you are a girl..." He was now more confused than anything else as he trailed off. I growled lightly at his choice of words, "I am no child. If you insist on calling me girl, then I will call you boy. So, boy, why don't you sit up and tell what you are mumbling about?" I realized that my instincts were making me snarky and tried to rein them in somewhat. My words and tone made him clench his jaw in anger, but I would have been far more angry if I had not spotted that trap in the first place. He held his tongue as he regarded me more closely while getting to his feet. I saw him blink in surprise when he realized just how short I was. I huffed in agitation at his incredulous expression, "So what were you saying about a brother?" He blinked and refocused. I could smell grief from him now. "A couple of weeks ago three zombies came through. They wore sunglasses and spoke just like humans." He took a deep breath, "The one licked his fingernails before taking a swipe at my brother, drawing blood. They said he was infected now too, and they tied me up as they dragged him off. I heard his screams as they tortured him. I finally got loose and found him tied to that stake already beheaded." He shook his head and looked at me, "Those three hung around for days. They tormenting me with threats before disappearing for several hours, only to reappear later. That is why I put up those traps. They disappeared right around that time, but I know they won't stay gone for long." Three zombies with sunglasses... Needless to say, I had a pretty good idea of who he was referring to. I tilted my head slightly, "Two with brown hair and one blonde? All men?" He narrowed his eyes at me, "You know them?" I snorted, "No, but we ran into them a few days ago. They are as dead as the guy in that pit, they won't be coming back." He didn't believe me, "I highly doubt anything could kill those three." I held out my arms and twisted the one so he could see the scabs, "It wasn't an easy fight, but they weren't aware I was around when they tried to kill one of my companions." "I don't see how you could have killed three of those zombies even if you are a zombie yourself." He was stubbornly refusing to believe that the foes he had been waiting for were truly dead. I chuckled darkly, "It was those three Nightstalkers against myself and a Terror. I have a bad habit of playing dirty in a fight and they didn't expect that." He paled slightly, "You are traveling with a Terror?" I shrugged, "Unfortunately. He is a right pain in the ass some days. He gets along much better with humans. I tend to press just the right buttons and manage to piss him off unintentionally. Some people have heard of him, he is that sane zombie that resides at Ironwind Stronghold." He blinked in recognition, "I heard of that one... But what are you doing down here and what do you want from me?" I sighed gustily, "We heard rumors of a feral Nightstalker around here and came to investigate before it located a Stronghold, but it seems that those three were the ones responsible. As for why I came out here, I was trying to figure out where all of the local zombies had gone and was tracking one I had scented earlier. All I want from you, is for you to take down those wretched traps before a human steps in them." He furrowed his eyebrows in confusion, "That is it? The others made a ton of demands and threats..." I snorted, "Not all zombies are the same." The man had released his knife now that he knew I wasn't one of his stalkers. He didn't seem to feel threatened by me at this point and there was no aggression in his scent. I also saw no more reason to hang around. I turned to leave and put on my glasses since the world was starting to get uncomfortably bright for me. "Wait." I paused and looked back while huffing, "What?" I wanted to put more distance between myself and this strange man who had clearly gone for a few too many rounds on the merry-go-round. "Where are you going?" I didn't like that he was suddenly so curious. "Back to my companions. Why?" "What is your destination? If those three are really gone, then I can bury my brother and finally move on." "I am not entirely sure. Probably back to Ironwind Stronghold. If it helps, there is a Stronghold if you follow the main road straight in either direction about a day's drive out." He narrowed his eyes, "How did you know I had a working car?" "I didn't. But I highly doubted that you wanted to ride cross country while sitting beside two zombies." He relaxed again as my logic made sense and nodded slowly, "Thank you." I didn't reply and started heading back while keeping a close eye on the ground. It was getting light enough that my instincts didn't like being in the open. It wasn't inconspicuous enough. He watched me leave before turning back to the pit and looking at his brother's body. I grabbed one of the bear traps and a few ankle snares on my way back. Their presence should help me get our group on the road before the man potentially showed up.

 

Chapter 75


 Both Nina and Nicky were up by the time I walked through the door. I dropped my bundles of traps on the floor with a clatter and dryly commented, "I highly advise against anyone going more than a hundred meters from this building." Daniel growled lowly at the sight of them, "Where did you find those? I didn't come across anything and I went further than that last night." I took a seat in a chair while watching the humans eat breakfast. "They were mostly towards the east, but I don't feel like lingering in this place. How soon can we head out?" Nina shrugged, "If you feel like packing, we can leave as soon as we finish eating. We already washed the pot. The plates are paper, so we just have the cutlery to wash." She just seemed to think that there were just traps out there and was evidently not aware of the stranger. If she thought the idea of a bit of work was going to dissuade me, then she was wrong. The last thing I wanted was for that guy to show up with a rifle. I wasn't entirely too sure how far off his rocker he was, but he had hung around for a couple of weeks waiting for deadly zombies to return for revenge. I got up and started hauling bags out to the truck. Nicky watched me in slight surprise, "What's got you up in an antsy? I have never seen you volunteer to do all of the packing before." I glanced back at the far too perceptive woman, "Let's just say that I met the man who laid far more traps than what I packed back. I prefer to be gone before he decides to show up here." Nina look surprised, "I wasn't aware there was someone around here. Does he need a ride to a Stronghold?" What was it with people offering complete strangers a ride without even meeting them?! Did I just not finish saying that he had laid traps in the area? I shook my head, "He has his own car." Daniel tilted his head in slight suspicion, "And you didn't mention him earlier why..." I made a face, "He would not be someone that any of us would feel comfortable travelling with. I would prefer to avoid him if possible. I am not entirely sure that he fits into the sane category." Nicky chuckled, "That is what people say about me." I snorted, "Compared to him, you are normal." Nicky blinked in surprise and finished her last mouthful of food before standing up, "Okay, now you made me nervous. I will help you pack. Normal people scare me and there is no way anyone ever calls me normal." I raised an eyebrow in disbelief, "Normal people scare you, so you hang out with zombies?" She grinned at me, "Yep. Pissing off Daniel is an entertaining game with unlimited potential. It should be made an Olympic sport the way you and me compete to win the gold medal. You are just plain fun to hang out with." Oh boy... There is no intervention in the world strong enough to help her at this point. I could not come up with any response to that comment. I hadn't realized just how far gone Nicky was. She considered annoying a Terror a sport and found an irritable Nightstalker fun to be around. Nina looked surprised and alarmed while Daniel was clearly doubting Nicky's sanity. I shook my head and I glanced towards the open door. I went to the door and took a deep breath to confirm that the smell of smoke was not from our fire, "The sooner we get moving, the better." Nina swiftly finished off the last of her bread with that warning before tossing the paper plate in the fire. Nicky grabbed her sleeping bag and backpack. I jumped in the back of the truck to secure a bag of groceries. I was too short to do it easily from the ground in such a large truck. Nicky passed me her load and I swiftly secured it.

She turned around and whistled in amazement as she finally noticed the sight on the horizon, "Wow. You didn't say he was a pyromaniac. That must be quite the fire. I wonder what he is burning?" I glanced at the dark smoke in the distance, "He probably set fire to a pit with regular zombies in it." And his deceased brother's remains... Daniel narrowed his eyes at the thought of someone killing zombies. Zombie killing was rarely attempted nowadays. Zombie hunters often wound up as zombies, especially now that ammo was scarce. No archer or gunman in the world could take on dozens of zombies without one hell of a good escape plan and lots of ammo or arrows. Even then, they still had to cut off the head to truly kill the zombie or it would be back on its feet within a couple of weeks. Then they had to deal with the blood on the blade they had used to behead it... Blood splatter or unnoticed zombies were deadly dangers to such people and there was never a shortage of zombies, especially near any city. The last few people who were still determined to kill zombies were a rather demented and fanatic bunch. This one might not be as bad as some I had heard of since he was just after revenge against three particular ones who killed his brother, but I wasn't about to take any chances since a three minute conversation was not a true judge of someone's mental state. It took only minutes for us to pack up and start driving. Thankfully we were not driving on any road that went close to the source of that black smoke. 
 
 Daniel didn't stop driving until lunchtime. We were heading back north towards the distant place we called home. Oddly enough, even I was beginning to refer to it as home instead of Ironwind Stronghold. That place must have rubbed off on me far more than I had realized. Nina and Daniel also agreed that those three Nightstalkers had caused the rumors that we had heard. Nina already had the blood samples that Daniel had collected, so there was nothing further for us to check. They decided that they didn't feel like taking Nicky into another Stronghold, so we would be camping in buildings or on roofs while relying on Daniel and myself for protection. Nina started a fire while Nicky dug out some cans of soup. It was an easy and quick lunch for the two of them. I tested the air, "Couple of regular zombies close by, so don't wander too far." Nina nodded at the warning as she glanced at the nearby trees. Daniel went to collect firewood and ensure that the humans didn't have to risk themselves by entering the forest. I leaned against the truck as I watched the humans while keeping an eye on our surroundings. Daniel came back and stood beside Nina while she watched the soup cooking. He scanned the area slowly with a bored surveillance check. He blinked in confusion before focusing on me. I watched him from the corner of my eye, my dark glasses hiding the fact that I was watching him. He walked closer to me as he focused on my arms. Nina and Nicky both looked up as he approached me since something had obviously caught his attention. His approach was out of character since we tended to leave a fair amount of space between ourselves just out of habit. I turned my head so I was looking at him. I tilted my head in a silent inquiry as I pretended to be naïve as to what had caught his attention. Daniel glanced at his own arms before looking at mine again. He moved his gaze to stare at my sunglasses in confusion, "Half of your scabs already fell off. Your injuries are healing much faster than mine are. The feral Nightstalker in the barn didn't heal that fast either." Nina got to her feet and came over in curiosity and excitement. I played stupid and tilted my head as I looked at his arms, "Huh. You are right. Your scratches don't seem to be healing as fast as mine. This is about normal for me. I also healed swiftly from those bullets." 

Could I possibly convince him that he was the anomaly? It could be highly entertaining to watch Nina pester him for a change. Nina regarded me with bright eyes and glanced between Daniel and me. The difference was quite noticeable after about 40 hours. Nicky didn't look surprised and took the first bowl of soup while the other two were distracted. Nina sounded excited, "Look at the difference in the rate of healing. I thought you had healed unusually fast from those bullet wounds. Let me check your arm." I growled faintly in irritation at the overly inquisitive scientist. Daniel narrowed his eyes, but surprisingly didn't growl at my half-hearted protest. Nina also ignored it as I let her pick up my arm and gently peel back the bandage. She blinked in surprise at the wound, it had clearly been healing at an accelerated rate. Even the enhanced healing rate of a zombie wound shouldn't have done quite this much. I always had liked cheating though, in fights or during recovery. "This is definitely healing faster than that feral Nightstalker's scratches had healed." Nina moved her inquisitive gaze from my arm to my slightly irritated expression, "You said this was normal, do you have any idea why you are healing so much faster than other zombies?" How could I use this opportunity to drag Daniel through the mud on another self-learning trip with his instincts? I shrugged, "The other two sane Nightstalkers I met healed just as swiftly." Nicky had a perfect poker face and simply looked curious. Daniel furrowed his eyebrows in thought, he didn't seem quite convinced though. He was inspecting the deep cut on my arm, "You removed the polysporin. Why?" He was more observant than I thought. I shrugged again, "There was no real need for it and there was so much on the wound and skin that the bandaid fell off. I removed the excess and used a spare bandaid from my backpack." He nodded slowly, accepting my logic, although I had a feeling that he didn't quite buy my story. That was good. He would think about it and perhaps discover the secret on his own. Nina shook her head and pulled out the tube of polysporin, "Well, you didn't have to remove so much of it. Some will help." I exhaled gustily at her persistence as she put a small gob on the injury and put the bandaid back on. Nina went to grab a bowl of soup, but also pulled out her notebook and started writing in it. Daniel backed up and went back to the campfire by Nina while occasionally glancing at me. I suppressed a grin, he was definitely thinking. He didn't say anything though. That in itself was unusual. He didn't even start a conversation with Nina and those two often spoke about various things, although they may have spoken about every possible topic during our long trip. I would have expected him to talk with Nina about the possibilities. The two women quickly finished their soup and we started driving again. I leaned my back against the tailgate so I could see the scenery ahead of us. Nicky sprawled out on the mattress and gazed at the clouds overhead as she attempted a nap. I pretended to ignore Daniel's more frequent than average glances at me in the mirror as I examined the various scents that flowed past me. I remembered things much better if I associated it with something I had smelled. The same went for locations and roads. My mind was building a mental map that used scents as the main landmarks. My instincts also assisted with this task. If I ever passed this way again, it was almost certain that I would know where I was. Scent made up such a large part of my world that I trusted my nose above my eyes or ears. Sure, there were seasonal changes to scents, but the very odor of the dirt and the specific mix of tree to grass to water ratio was fairly unique. I didn't have to see the deep cave with thousands of bats by the river, I could smell it. I would also be able to smell it from quite some distance away, as opposed to having to follow the river to see if I could stumble across the unique landmark in the future. The enhanced sense of smell was one big perk of being a zombie. I hadn't realized just how nose dead humans were until I turned. Sure, I knew that my dog could smell his ball in the long grass and my horse could smell if a bear had passed by, but it was one thing to know it in abstract and quite another to have a keen sense of smell just dumped on you. Like a blind man suddenly seeing, it had taken me weeks after I turned to get accustomed to the sense that had suddenly strengthened beyond belief. I had accepted it and used it to my advantage, willingly learning everything I could about it. And my diligence had paid off. Now I didn't have to think about it. I knew the identity or source of almost every scent around me. I could even tell the different types of grasses apart by their scent. Examining the world around me by smell was more entertaining than simply watching the scenery. I could smell the animals just beyond the trees. The sharp smells of various flowers were present. I leaned back and continued to ignore Daniel's thoughtful glances in the rearview mirror as I investigated the world around me by smell.

 

Chapter 76

            After far too much driving, we pulled up to a small store with a flat roof as late afternoon passed into early evening. I tested the air as I hopped out, "Couple of zombies in the area, nothing close by though." Nicky nodded as she grabbed her backpack. I hefted the ladder and leaned it up against the building before climbing up to the roof.  By the time I got up to the top, Daniel was waiting to toss stuff to me. The first thing was the large tent for Nina and Nicky. The other stuff was lighter. I helped Nicky and Nina set up the tent as Daniel set up a safe firepit on the roof that wouldn't burn the place down around our ears. We finished just as Daniel set up the camping chairs. He took his favorite one and gazed at the fire with a meditative expression. He turned his measuring gaze to me. After a few second I turned my head so I faced him, "What?" My voice clearly told him that I didn't appreciate him staring at me. He blinked slowly, but didn't look away. He hummed lightly, "I think you know the answer to that." I rolled my eyes and responded in a dry voice, "If I had, I wouldn't have asked." He snorted lightly, but seemed faintly amused despite my tone. He focused on me once more with his keen eyes, "How did you do it?" "Setting up the tent or sitting in the chair?" Daniel wasn't letting himself be distracted and shook his head, "No, that tactic isn't going to work either. How did you get your wounds to heal so fast? What did you do?" Nina blinked in surprise and glanced between the two of us as she caught on to Daniel's deduction. I guess he isn't as dense as I thought he was. He knows that I know something, he just doesn't know how I did it. I snorted dryly, "What makes you think I did anything? You saw me sitting in the back of the truck all day." His eyes never left me, "I am not sure what you did, but I know that you must be doing something. Your previous wounds also spiked in healing at a certain point as well. Besides, you didn't react to me as I kept watching you in the mirror and that should have irritated you to no end, yet your scent was halfway amused, and not upset. You did this to me before with the wrestling thing and you found it amusing then too." I sat motionlessly as I debated my options. He clearly knew that I had knowledge he lacked and he also had a point with his observations. With a gusty sigh I dug into my backpack as it sat by my feet. Daniel and Nina were watching me intently. Nicky seemed a bit surprised I was letting this secret go so easily. He would have figured it out eventually, he was a zombie. I lobbed the small jar at him and he easily caught it with a look of confusion. A small jar of thick red liquid was not what he had been expecting to see. He gingerly opened it and took a small sniff. His expression grew even more confused as he picked up the scent of rabbit blood and my saliva. In theory, any zombie's saliva was just as effective so my saliva would work as well as his. Nina leaned forward, "What is it?" Daniel sent me a puzzled look, "It is rabbit blood." Now it was Nina's turn to be confused, "Why was she carrying that in a jar? I thought zombies disliked drinking cold blood." They both looked at me, waiting for an answer. I smirked at Daniel, "I just handed you a key clue, surely you can figure it out from here." Daniel narrowed his eyes, although he didn't seem truly upset. Just a bit annoyed that I wouldn't come right out and give him the answer. Nicky started snickering at his slight frustration as I was being my usual annoying self.

Daniel turned his focus to her, "You don't seem particularly surprised..." Nicky chuckled, "Nope. I know the secret." Nina was surprised, "Really?" Nicky rubbed her hands together, "Zombie secrets are the best. Blood, tomato juice, soap, rutabagas... The list goes on and on." Rutabagas? I am not even going to ask... Nina pulled out her notepad, "How do you know about them?" Nicky shrugged, "Trinity dropped some hints and I put them together. Took a few tries to get the correct answer, but I managed it. Take my advice and don't stick a mini firecracker inside a rutabaga. You get the wrong answer." Nina and Daniel glanced me and I simply smirked as a response. Nicky had a wild imagination, but for all I knew, she might have blown up a rutabaga at some point in her somewhat daunting past. Nina still dutifully started scribbling down the facts, warning, and her own speculations. Daniel looked at me with an appraising expression, "Care to expand on Nicky's comments?" I bared my teeth in a feral grin, "The answers lie within your own instincts. I have already given you far more hints than I originally intended." He sat up straighter in sudden realization, "You knew that I would notice that you were healing faster than me." Okay, maybe he isn't the sharpest crayon in the box... I gave him a look that plainly told him that I thought he was an idiot, "I thought that was kind of obvious..." He narrowed his eyes and growled faintly at the mild insult. I ignored the faint growl. Nicky started chuckling, "You didn't honestly think that she had worked so hard to get those wounds to disappear and it didn't cross her mind that you or Nina wouldn't notice the difference?" Daniel gritted his teeth and growled lowly at Nicky. Nicky just grinned at him before leaning over and digging through her backpack. She put a bottle of dish soap near her feet with a flourish. I chuckled. She is just evil... There is no way he would consider soap harmless after she lumped it together with her knowledge of my enhanced healing. It must make him wonder every time he washes his hands... I shook my head, "Why don't you go hunting and see if you can figure things out?" Daniel gave me a long look, but eventually sighed and nodded. He knew that I wanted him to figure it out for himself. I watched him as he got to his feet and walked to the edge of the roof. "Oh, Daniel?" He paused as he glanced back at me, "Yes?" I grinned evilly, "This trick is a two edge sword, don't hurt yourself too badly. Consider that as my final hint." He looked surprised and even more frustrated that he was basically flying blind. I wasn't sure if he wanted to thank me for that warning or strangle me for being such an ambiguous pain in the ass. He settled for responding gruffly, "Thanks." I sensed more than just a bit of sarcasm in his reply. I chuckled as he dropped off the edge of the building and out of sight. The warning was valid though, the heat that focused on a wound while it was being doctored could actually reach insanely painful levels if too much blood was applied at once. The heat took quite a bit of time to fade as well. He would be careful now and should avoid that error. It would also drive him to distraction wondering if any attempt was going to help or hurt... I leaned back in my chair and regarded the fire through my sunglasses. I loved seeing the yellow in the flames. Not being able to see it for so long had made me really appreciate the bright color. Nicky still looked amused, but was digging through her backpack after some sort of time passing object. Nina was scribbling down notes on a notepad.

My mind went back to Daniel. I wondered how long it would take him to realize that he actually had to put blood on the wound. It really wasn't that obvious considering that we normally drank the blood, but the second he saw the blood sink into the wound so swiftly, he would know he had found something noteworthy. I watched as Nina started cooking supper. Her meticulousness in the lab transferred over to her cooking. I had never seen someone manage to make bread dough without getting a single spot of flour on themselves. Admittedly it also took her much, much longer. The bread and meat were almost done cooking by the time I finally heard Daniel's footsteps approaching building. About time, I was beginning to wonder if he had gotten lost... I glanced at him and did a double take. My head tilted as I regarded him in faint disbelief. He hadn't figured it out. His scratches had not been doctored despite the fact that he had been gone for almost an hour. How is this even possible? I know his instincts are alive and kicking because I am constantly triggering them, how could he have not figured it out? He was in a sour mood and my disbelieving expression was not helping. Nina looked up expectantly, but frowned slightly when she saw his expression, "No luck?" He growled his frustration, "None. I am so full I couldn't even manage another drop. It did nothing and I made sure to target rabbits too." He turned to frown at me, "I am obviously missing something." He was clearly expecting me to explain everything to him. He also needed his head examined with thoughts like that. I had NEVER met a zombie so out of tune with his or her instincts before. Even after being around him for over a month, I still had a hard time wrapping my head around it. I was sorely tempted to make him walk back with rules in place that he had to act like a zombie whenever he encountered another zombie. I shook my head, "It took you a few weeks to figure out the wrestling thing, so you will manage it eventually. This time you just have incentive." My tone showed that I wasn't going to budge in my decision. He shook his head in frustration as a growl sounded through his voice, "I think you may have written the manual on how to be stubborn." I chuckled, but didn't contradict him. As a Nightstalker, I was as stubborn as a stick in the mud and I knew it. He exhaled gustily, "Why are you refusing to tell me?" I slowly tilted my head in a more serious mood. I studied the higher ranking zombie who had never resorted to violence to tear a strip out of my miserable hide regardless of how much I provoked him. "I think that even you unconsciously understand the necessity of figuring this out on your own. There are reasons, rather good ones in fact." Daniel frowned in confusion and frustration, but didn't reply. Nina looked disappointed, but didn't ask any questions either. That was good, he had to learn, and the sooner the better. Especially if I was going to continue remaining at Ironwind Stronghold. The tension that had disappeared after our wrestling match had not reappeared, so he was making progress. He still had a lot to learn though and considering that he was an original, he was so far behind that he could mistake himself for being ahead. Nicky yawned, "He may have to figure it out by himself, but if we are going to attempt any explosions, then I call the lighter." I made a face, "What is it with you and explosions lately? They never interested you before." She grinned at me, "But that guy this morning made a huge fire and I have to beat that. Nothing beats a huge explosion! Well, except a bigger explosion."

I was faintly alarmed by her new obsession. Simply giving Nicky coffee was dangerous. Explosives were to be avoided at all costs. I shook my head, "I do not like where your thoughts are going. I am beginning to think that your sole purpose in life is to simply serve as a warning to others." Nicky cackled, "No, that is what they invented warning labels for! No label can ever properly communicate my potential." Nina whispered to Daniel, "If you see anything like an explosive or firework in her hands, you need to act fast." Daniel nodded seriously. Nicky caught the whisper and grinned, "Ah, but I know what a few of those chemicals in the lab can do if they are mixed in the proper proportions." Nina fixed her with a stern glare, "You are not using my lab supplies for explosions." Nicky grinned, "That kind of sounds like a challenge to me." Both Daniel and I growled at her at the same time. Nicky gave us an odd look, "For being so different, sometimes you two are far too much alike." I snorted, "That comes with being zombies. If you try to make anything explode, then I will tie you up." Nicky eyed me up warily, "Why is it that I take your threats far more seriously than Daniel's at times like this?" "Because you know that I won't make the mistake of leaving you unsupervised." She shrugged, "That is probably it." She perked up and looked at me in excitement, "Can I blow up another rutabaga?!" I hadn't even seen a rutabaga since the zombies appeared, so I felt pretty safe in this one. "As long as everyone has 24 hours' notice, you use miniature firecrackers, and you do not do it inside of a Stronghold or near anyone." Nicky whooped, "Awesome! Do you have another rutabaga?" "Nope." She groaned, "You take all the fun out everything. Can I blow something else up?" Daniel suddenly replied, "How about that package of markers?" Nicky shook her head fiercely, "Not a chance. I ain't ever giving those up. Trinity gave me those and they are the first present she ever gave me. Besides, I haven't had a present in over five years if it wasn't my birthday. The person who steals my markers had better hide because I will be in hot pursuit." Sometimes loyalty met crazy and their combined momentum took things to another level. Nina and Daniel didn't know how to respond to that fierce declaration about a simple package of markers. I made a mental note to take care if I gave her anything in the future, even if it wasn't meant as an actual gift. I tilted my head in sudden suspicion, "Nicky, do you actually have more firecrackers?" She sighed dejectedly, "No..." I sighed in relief, although I was pretty sure that I would have smelt any explosives if she had been carrying them. "Good." She lifted her head in shock, "Hey!" I grinned darkly at her, "That means that Daniel can't steal them and use them to blow up your felts." Nicky relaxed, "Oh, I guess that is a good thing. Speaking of the felts, don't forget that you did promise to wear those socks for one day." I smirked, "I am ahead of you there." All three sent me an astonished look, before glancing at my black socks in confusion. Nicky scratched her head, "Unless I have suddenly become color blind, you might need to clean your sunglasses." I reached down and rolled down the black sock to reveal the tormented rainbow sock beneath it. "You said I had to wear it. You said nothing about it being visible." Daniel looked shocked. He had never considered thinking outside of the box, although, now that I thought about it, he never had agreed to wear the socks in the first place. I had stumbled into the bucket of water booby trap at that moment and the matter had been forgotten. To my surprise Nicky started laughing wildly. I sent her a weird look, I had expected her to protest, not find it so hilarious that she was close to falling out of her chair. She eventually managed to get herself under control and wiped away a laughter tear, "Oh... You can always tell who your friends are. I know that Daniel has no intention of wearing those socks and thinks I simply forgot about him. It didn't even cross my mind that you would wear them since Daniel never agreed to it." Daniel actually looked somewhat chagrined at being caught. Nina glanced at him with an 'I-told-you-so-look'. I rolled my eyes, "I always keep my promises, even if I don't like doing it." Nicky took a deep breath as she was still recovering from laughing so hard and looked at me, "You can take them off now, if you like. I know you don't like things that stand out." That was a startling concession from Nicky. However, my mind was one step ahead of her. I gazed at her intently, "How about I wear them like this for another couple of days and you promise to check with me before doing anything with explosives or fireworks? For safety's sake, of course." She grinned enthusiastically at me, "Deal." In my mind, the trade was well worth it. It would take us two days to get back. No one could see the colorful socks anyways and my feet didn't sweat since I was a zombie, so wearing two layers of socks wasn't that much of an inconvenience.

 

Chapter 77


 Nina checked the bread and figured it was done. The meat was also done by then too. They didn't even bothering offering me any and that was just fine by me. It smelt good, but I had no appetite for it. All three of them sat down with plates and started eating. A relaxing evening breeze picked up and brought smells from the forest behind us. I turned my head and took a deeper breath. This world was getting smaller and smaller all of the time. I silently got to my feet and walked towards the edge of the roof. The others watched me leaving with confused looks. Daniel spoke, "Is something wrong?" I shook my head, "No, I will be back shortly." I jumped off the roof before anyone had a chance to reply or ask another question. I was focused on the scent though. He had to know I was here. In fact, my presence was probably the only reason he was approaching. He was polite enough to approach from upwind where I could scent him. He had probably been quite the chivalrous gentleman in his previous life. He still attempted it, but the virus curtailed his actions and rational thoughts. I was out of sight in the trees by now and started running. He was quite a ways out, but that was a good thing. It meant that Daniel probably wouldn't pick up his scent even if he was trying to read the wind. It took me almost 15 minutes to get close. I let my footsteps make noise so he could hear me coming. I slowed down as I got closer so I didn't trigger his instincts too badly. A low growl greeted me just before I stepped out of the trees. I growled a welcome in reply, it was a lower tone with no force behind it. The blonde haired man looked like a track runner with his tall and thin build. My instincts stirred a bit at the sight of the Runner, but since he wasn't challenging me, my instincts subsided. His red eyes flashed as he grinned, "I thought it was your scent I picked up. Good to see you again." I bared my teeth in a grin, "I was just as surprised to catch your scent. What have you been up to?" He relaxed as his own instincts subsided. As a Runner, my Nightstalker rank would have put him somewhat on edge when I appeared in front of him. This was one of the few times zombie instincts made things easier for sane zombies. As long as he didn't challenge or provoke me, I wouldn't threaten or harm him and his instincts relied on that knowledge and assumed it was safe. We were both running on zombies rules at the moment, which was making things simpler. He leaned against a tree, "Traveled here and there. I didn't really stop for more than a few days even if I met another sane zombie. I did encounter another sane Runner who lives beside a massive lake. He had been a farmer before and still raises rabbits and chickens. It was a really interesting setup since he didn't want to stress the animals by going near them daily." Runners weren't fast enough to run down rabbits, so a farm setting was easier for a Runner if they didn't mind the labor involved. Most who managed to retain control usually relied on live traps or snares. I took a deep breath, but since there was no scent of blood I suspected that he had not had a successful hunt for several days. I tilted my head, "Feel like catching up over a deer?" His eyes brightened as he grinned ferally at me, "Now that sounds like one hell of an idea." I could smell some deer nearby. I bared my teeth in response, "Follow my scent." I turned and swiftly disappeared into the trees as my footsteps fell silent. It took me less than a minute to follow my nose to the nearest deer. It was grazing, unaware of me stalking it. My form was silent and invisible as I crept in closer. 

I tensed before launching at it. It saw me at the last second and its eyes widened as my fist hit its neck with all my strength. The deer didn't even have time to jump or react before its neck was shattered and it was lying dead on the ground. My Nightstalker strength was sufficient to allow me such a killing blow. A Runner was not strong enough to manage such a strike. I whistled softly. The high pitched noise would carry and Luke was close enough to hear it. He was trailing me slowly, cautious in case my instincts reared up and wanted to defend the kill. The whistle was a human noise and let him know that he was safe to approach since I was clearly in control. His footsteps jogged forward and I moved across the clearing to sit on a fallen tree. He entered the clearing and slowed to a walk glancing between the deer and me. I could see his bloodlust fighting against his caution and manners. "Go ahead, I hunted earlier." He wasted no time in going after the deer. I ignored his low growls as his instincts tried to claim the kill. Runners always had somewhat shaky control when it came to feeding and Luke was probably quite thirsty if he hadn't hunted for several days. In truth, he was in quite a dangerous situation as his bloodlust and instincts might push him to eat raw meat once he finally caught something with his control being so strained. I wouldn't have dared to take him anywhere near a human until he had hunted. I waited patiently while he finished. The sun was still above the horizon so I had no interest in the deer, even so, my stubborn headstrong instincts wanted to claim my kill simply because it was mine. I overruled my instincts easily. Several minutes later Luke sat up with a sated sigh, "Thank you for that." "No problem. Always feel free to ask. Sanity is too valuable to risk." I was more relaxed with Luke than I ever had been with Daniel. For one, he was a lower rank. The other major point was that his body language was easy for me to read, it was mostly zombie with just enough human to show his sanity. I knew exactly how he would react by his body language. My body language was similar to his and was mostly zombie. It probably would have unsettled Daniel since he was so out of touch with his own instincts. Daniel did better with humans, not zombies... Luke nodded and took a seat on a different log. He sniffed and tilted his head in curiosity, "I thought you avoided humans? Their scent clings to you." He knew I had been shot previously by humans. He was the first sane Runner I had ever encountered and I had been the first sane Nightstalker he had met. He had stayed at my cabin for about two weeks before he had continued his travels to locate his brother. Considering Luke was here with no one else, I could guess the fate his brother had encountered unless he hadn't located him yet. I sighed gustily, "To make a very long story very short, I started out by trying to help two kids and two adults get to a Stronghold. Now I am staying in a Stronghold with some humans, a Terror and a scientist. Interestingly enough, the scientist has managed to invent a cure that will reverse the virus as well as something that helps control the bloodlust towards humans." Luke looked surprised, "There is a cure?" "Yes." I had figured that such a comment would catch his interest. Runners usually felt like their thought processes were fogged and they had trouble focusing most of the time. "You also mentioned something about controlling the bloodlust?" He was clearly intrigued and curious. I made a face, "Yes, it is still considered to be in the testing phase, but due to sabotage I ended up being their first unintentional guinea pig for that one. My bloodlust for humans is almost entirely gone. Even feral Runners that get it prefer to go after rabbits."

He tilted his head in consideration, "Do you think they would offer it to me?" I shrugged, "Very likely, but you would be the first sane Runner to get it, so there is no guarantee as to how it will work." He silently considered that thought for some time. I felt kind of bad for bringing it up so quickly, but this was something that would interest any Runner. It used to be difficult enough for me to remain in control around humans and I knew it was much harder for a Runner. The drugs Nina had were as tempting to a Runner as chemotherapy was to a cancer patient. "Would you be able to introduce me to the scientist? I would like to talk with him." He was fixated on this detail now and once a Runner set their minds on something, they were hard to distract. Their minds may hinder their thoughts, but it also allowed them to focus on something to the point where they excluded other thoughts. I nodded slowly as I got to my feet, "Yes, I can introduce you to Nina. She will be more than delighted to speak with you. That lady has more questions than any human has a right to voice." He chuckled at my tone as he also got up. I shook myself off lightly as if dismissing the matter. I glanced at him although I wasn't too concerned at this point, "How is your control?" "About as good as it ever gets. I plan to keep some distance between myself and any human. Standard precautions." I nodded and started walking towards our camp. He would try his best and was relying on me to keep him from making a fatal mistake. I didn't bother mentioning that the Terror would probably overreact before there was truly a need. He would meet the confusing and irritating man soon enough. "I never thought you would ever stay with humans after what that last bunch did to you." I snorted, "It was not my original plan. This change of plans happened along the way." I sighed, "The Stronghold I am staying at actually isn't too bad. They also welcome zombies for some bizarre reason." "Interesting." Luke had likely been very smart before he was bitten and he still had most of his mind intact even with the virus playing havoc with his thought processes. He didn't say anything more as he mulled things over. We were getting close now. My footsteps were much louder than normal. I didn't want Daniel getting worked up at the sound of an unfamiliar set of approaching footsteps if he thought a lone stranger was approaching. I had a hard enough time dealing with him. I wasn't sure how the Runner was going to handle this unpredictable higher ranking zombie. We were approaching from an angle that meant those on the roof wouldn't be able to see our approach. I glanced at Luke before climbing up the ladder. Nicky was in her chair and I could hear Nina digging around in a bag inside the tent. Daniel was watching me in curiosity, clearly wondering who my still-unseen companion was. I had never liked strays, so the fact that I brought someone back had him perplexed. The wind wasn't in Daniel's favor so he hadn't caught Luke's scent yet. I kept an eye on the Terror as I turned to watch Luke climb up. Luke scaled the ladder gracefully enough, his humanity helped his zombie coordination. The virus had enhanced my abilities as a Nightstalker, but it treated Runners differently and slowed them a bit. Daniel blinked in complete surprise as he saw Luke's red eyes. Daniel's eyes were camouflaged as they usually were, but Luke didn't hide his eye color. He could change it if he chose, but it was a warning for humans to keep their distance. Nicky glanced up in curiosity, but remained sitting and silent as she simply watched. Luke looked at the two sitting by the fire before glancing at me. I gestured with my head towards fire, "You can have the green chair. I can sit on the cooler."

I led the way closer and he trailed more slowly behind me. I sat down on the large red cooler as Luke slowly took a seat in my usual chair. Our seats were upwind and that made things easier for Luke. He would have caught everyone's scent and would know that Daniel was the Terror. Luke blinked slowly as he examined the first Terror he had ever seen. Nina came out of the tent and looked surprised to see another red eyed person present. She walked forward in open curiosity and excitement. Luke had been watching Daniel, but turned his head to watch Nina's approach. I momentarily bared my teeth slightly at Luke and he lifted his lip to flash a canine at me in acknowledgement. Neither action was serious. If he had been having any problems with control, my teeth would have distracted his instincts and helped him with control. His reaction was partly due to his instincts, but also a silent thanks while letting me know that it wasn't really needed at this point. Daniel had tensed up as we had bared our teeth at each other, but he was starting to look more confused than anything since our body language remained relaxed. I had never acted so much like a zombie in his presence before. Nina had paused in her approach, but was watching our interactions with bright curious eyes, obviously taking mental notes. Nicky yawned and wasn't at all concerned as she watched the fire pop and crack. No one had spoken yet. Nina backed up to sit down in a chair by Daniel as she glanced between Luke and me. Guess I had better do the introductions... "Luke, the redhead is Nicky, keep out of her way in the mornings and run if she gets her hands on coffee. That is Daniel, he has never met a sane Runner yet. The lady beside him is Nina and she would be the one you would want to speak to about her research. For everyone else, this is Luke. He is a Runner that I met quite some time ago." Nina was overly excited at the prospect of talking with a new sane zombie, "It is very nice to meet you Luke." Luke inclined his head politely, "Likewise." Nina seemed ecstatic that he appeared to interested in speaking with her, "I assume that you know Trinity pretty well?" "I stayed at her place for a few weeks at one point. We get along pretty well." I failed to see how he managed to keep his charming tone and mannerisms despite rarely interacting with humans. Nina pulled out the inevitable notepad and pen, "I hope you don't mind questions, because I love learning. Can you tell me about your journey?" He shrugged, "Not much to tell. I was bitten in the first wave. I managed to remain in control, although it is far from easy. Been wandering over most of the country trying to locate my brother to see if he is human or zombie." Nina's fingers flew over the paper, "Have you encountered other sane zombies?" Luke wasn't bothered by Nina's bombardment of questions, "Met about eight or so other sane Runners. One Nightstalker after leaving Trinity's place. Never even seen a Terror before today though." "I heard that Runners often had more problems with control than most zombies, would you be able to elaborate on that?" Luke was more serious now, "It is true. The virus clouds our mind and makes control much more difficult." "If you don't mind me asking, how bad is the bloodlust right now?" Luke stilled, but responded, "Even with you downwind, it is bad enough that I can feel it burning along my veins. It wouldn't be wise for any human to get within arm's reach of me." Daniel growled as he sat up straighter at that news. Luke stiffened as he shifted into a more defensive stance in his chair, ready to try to run or defend himself from the high ranking zombie. I sighed gustily, "Daniel, cool it. He has managed this long without attacking a human." I turned to face Luke, "Sorry about that. He's humanized, just ignore him." I knew my order would stir up Daniel's instincts something fierce, but it was better that he focus on me rather than on Luke. It worked and Daniel narrowed his eyes at my words and tone. My instincts stirred in response to the Terror's focus on me, but I overruled it and put on a bored look. Luke glanced back at Daniel with my comment and realization crossed his face. Daniel saw that and gave me an odd look as he was distracted from his irritation. He had just realized that my comment about him being humanized meant a lot more to Luke and me than it did to him, but he was unsure of what it really meant. Nina was looking between all of us while rapidly writing down notes and observations. Luke slowly leaned back in his chair while keeping half an eye on Daniel. Most of his attention was on Nina, "Trinity mentioned that you were testing something with bloodlust control and actually had a cure for the zombie virus?" Nina nodded seriously, "Yes, the one for controlling bloodlust is still in the testing phase, although from what we have seen it is successful. We call it controlex. The cure is different and has been proven to remove the virus, although it has never been tested on a sane zombie. Ferals go comatose since the human mind is gone." Luke glanced at me, "You said that you ended up as an unwitting guinea pig for that controlex one? How did that go over?" I growled faintly, "Someone slipped the drug into my food. She better pray that I don't lay eyes on her again for that stunt. Not as bad as it could have been with an untested drug. Took about three days, but the bloodlust disappeared. It strengthened my Nightstalker characteristics though. I am not sure what it would do to a Runner." He thought for a bit, "It didn't affect your sanity, did it? You said the ferals lost interest in humans?" I shook my head, "The only thing it changed was to remove my bloodlust for humans, although I can't handle human food anymore. I am hunting more, although I have no interest in hunting during the day." Luke glanced at Nina, "What is your take on this?" Nina was more professional now and spoke slowly, "We tested on feral Runners and they had no interest in humans if any other warm blooded animal was around. That drug affects the virus itself, so if something did go wrong, we could always use the cure to remove the virus altogether once the drug broke down in three days' time." Luke nodded slowly, eyes distant as he forced his mind to think hard through the virus induced haze that plagued Runners so. I knew Luke well enough to know that he was very interested and would likely want to try one of the drugs. He was worried that he would find his brother still human and then possibly end up harming him. We all waited for his decision. In the end it was his choice, and his choice alone, to make.

 

Chapter 78


 I sat silently as Luke was deep in thought. I was surprised that he hadn't asked more questions. He must be more interested in it than I had originally thought. I was pretty sure I knew what his choice would be as well. It was obvious really. I had survived the controlex drug with no negative side effects and it would be a tantalizing option for him. Besides, the cure had not actually been tested on a sane zombie and the possibility of ending up in a comatose state wasn't exactly a comforting scenario. A Runner might be a bit slower than their human selves, but they were stronger and had much more endurance. He may have hated the virus for a long time, but the prospect of having the bloodlust disappear and being able to join a Stronghold that didn't mind zombies meant that being a Runner would be an advantage. Luke exhaled slowly before lifting his head. His red eyes slowly scanned the small crowd watching him. Luke eyes rested on Daniel for a few moments, before gazing at me, "I assume if something went wrong that you would stop me from doing something stupid that would cost me my sanity?" I suppressed a grin as I knew that he didn't really trust Daniel. I nodded, "Yes. I can manage to tie you up before dropping you in a jail cell with a bucket of blood to play with." He made a face at that mental image and shook his head, "Here I thought friends didn't let friends end up in jail." I smirked, "If jail is the only answer, then you can sit in there for a week to cool your heels while you think about your behavior." He snorted before laughing. I grinned and chuckled at our joke. Nina looked baffled as she saw how well the two of us got along. Daniel was watching with a perplexed expression, possibly noting that we were using a fair bit of zombie body language and yet were not getting riled up. Both Luke and myself had toned it down with Daniel's civilized inability to understand. Nicky also grinned at the joke, but didn't comment. She was being unusually quiet, although I had noticed that she didn't say much if strangers appeared when we were on the road. Luke turned to look at Nina, "If you are willing, I would like to try the controlex serum." Nina was slightly startled, "I am surprised that you would agree with so few questions. If you choose to accompany us back, I have the controlex drug in the Stronghold. You are more than welcome to stay there with us." I exhaled gustily in irritation at Nina's shortsightedness, "He will not do well inside the fence until his bloodlust is gone. It was bad enough for me. The forest where we had those live traps is a much better choice. No humans wander in that particular piece of forest except for Nicky, and even then she only does it when I am around." Nina blinked as realization crossed her face, "Oh, I didn't even think of how the smell might bother him." She turned to Luke, "Sorry about that. Sometimes I think I am just too accustomed to Daniel and Trinity. If I make a similar mistake in the future, please feel free to correct me." Luke nodded, "No worries. Trinity is correct though, unless the bloodlust disappears, I do not plan to set foot inside of any Stronghold or safe area." Nina nodded and scribbled down some notes. Daniel commented, "Living in a forest doesn't sound that appealing to me. What can we do to make your stay more comfortable?" Luke shrugged, "I really don't need anything." I tilted my head in consideration and chimed in, "I would dig up those live traps again. That cave I found would be a very good temporary place and it is better than any tent. If the slightly low ceiling bothers him, or if he gets bored, he can chisel the rock so he can stand up. He won't want to travel far for those three days as the controlex takes effect."

Nina nodded and made more notes, "How big is that cave? We can bring a bed and other stuff out." I replied, "It is big enough for a single bed, although ensure the bed is on raised legs that won't be bothered by moisture. The floor was quite flat, but there is a tiny creek running through it. A couple of solar lights wouldn't go amiss either since it is quite dark in that cave." "Easily done." Nina obviously had no problems ensuring Luke was comfortable. If a Nightstalker said it was dark, then any other person out there was going to want additional light. I just hoped that she didn't go overboard. Nina looked at Luke, "We have some supper left if you want some." Luke shook his head, "Thanks, but I will pass. I ate recently." I smirked at his polite wording. I had to agree though, using 'I ate recently' sure beat 'I just drained a deer'. Luke looked at Daniel and tilted his head in confusion before glancing at me. Luke spoke to me, "You are both sporting injuries. How did that happen?" It was clear that he had a hunch that we had gotten into a spat and he would doubtlessly blame Daniel for the fact that the fight had gone so far as to leave so many wounds. Daniel sighed as he realized the same thing, "I got ambushed by three Nightstalkers and Trinity came to help me. We won, but neither of us came away unscathed." "Three Nightstalkers? At once?" Luke was clearly in disbelief I made a face, "They were in control, but hated humans and even you noticed how heavily the scent of humans clings to us." Luke nodded slowly, accepting it as the truth despite how unlikely it seemed. That was my luck though, chances of finding a Nightstalker was low, finding a pair was even rarer, but to find three traveling together? You would have better luck locating a Terror. I managed to find both a Terror, a feral Terror, and a hostile trio of Nightstalkers. I think if we could bottle my luck, we could have a weapon of mass destruction. Provided we could keep it from targeting the one wielding it. Luke was looking at Daniel, but seemed confused as he examined the Terror. His gaze wasn't an insulting stare, so it didn't bother Daniel. Luke finally spoke in a perplexed voice, "Why haven't you tended your wounds? I apologize if my words offend." I started snickering as Daniel looked shocked that Luke could so easily tell that he hadn't 'tended his wounds', as if such tending was the most natural thing in the world. Luke looked at me in confusion and even Nicky started chuckling. I shook my head, "Luke, he hasn't figured it out yet. I gave him some hints earlier, but he simply isn't in tune enough with his instincts." Luke gave me an incredulous look, "That shouldn't be possible. No one gave me any hints and I knew how to tend my wounds less than an hour after getting my first decent scratch from a feral Runner. You figured it out by yourself as well." "That is why I haven't told him outright. He has to learn or he will never manage to understand his instincts properly." Luke sighed, "True." He took a better look at my scratches, "I can see that you are tending your injuries, but what is under that bandage?" I made a face, "A larger cut." Luke looked concerned, "And it still requires a bandage? How bad was it?" "It doesn't need a bandage, but it keeps it covered and out of sight. It was a knife slash that went almost to bone." Luke nodded slowly, relieved that it wasn't something as bad as he had been imagining. Nina was watching Luke intently, "How did you know that Daniel hadn't tended his wounds?"

Luke blinked slowly and took time to respond, likely editing his answer so he didn't give Daniel any hints. "There are slight differences. You can see them if you compare his injuries to Trinity's. I can also smell the slight difference." Nina tilted her head and tentatively inquired, "Would you be willing to tell us how wounds are tended?" Luke shook his head, "I think I am with Trinity on this one. Sorry." He looked at Daniel, "Have you ever lived wild or have you always suppressed your instincts so?" "I do not understand what you mean by 'lived wild', so I can assume that I have not. I have always been in close proximity to humans since I turned. Control over my bloodlust and instincts was something that I had learned within days." Luke was silent in thought for quite some time. He glanced at Daniel again, "I assume that you have never had too much trouble with your bloodlust, correct?" "It took me a bit to get accustomed to it when I first turned, but I have never really had any problem with humans being around me. It is just when they touch me or disrespect me that I have a tendency to growl." Daniel wasn't sure where this conversation was going, and truth be told, neither was I. Luke nodded slowly as he sat up straighter. He looked over at me, "I think all of this might be related to rank." I tilted my head in confusion, "Care to elaborate?" "As a Runner, my instincts are always quite high. This means I have more problems with control, but I am always aware of what my instincts are telling me. Other Runners I have spoken with were in the same boat. You had more control, but I remember a few conversations we had and sometimes it took you a bit to figure out what may have triggered your instincts. You are more in touch with yours because you lived wild for so long." Luke's eyes went to Daniel, "Daniel has apparently never had problems with control, or lived wild, and, from what I have heard, he is so far out of touch with his instincts that I am not entirely sure he is even truly aware of them." Luke's furrowed his eyebrows before looking at me, "After that drug removed your bloodlust, have you had any problems with your instincts? Or do they seem muted?" I shook my head, "No. In fact, at night they are elevated and I am aware of them as I always am." We were silent in thought. Nina was furiously scribbling all of this down. Daniel looked a bit confused and uncertain of what to make of the possibility that his own rank hampered him. Luke shrugged, "It is as if the higher ranks have more control and are not forced to deal with their instincts as much, so there may be a disconnect. It is just a theory though." Daniel tilted his head, "Can I use that theory as leverage to have the answer as to how to get these scratches to heal faster?" Nicky snorted, finally breaking her silence, "There is a line between intuition and just plain not thinking. Perhaps you should dig up Nina's notes on the healing rate of Trinity's shoulder." It took me a few seconds to realize what she meant. The healing in that wound on the back had spiked once I started going out for longer times with Nicky. That was when she had doctored it for me. If Daniel realized this, then he would figure out that one had to be able to reach a wound to tend it. Luke examined the redhead for a moment before commenting, "You know the secret, don't you?" Nicky grinned at him, "Yep." "How many zombies have you been around? You seem quite at ease." Nicky shrugged, "Just these two. I will take Trinity over Daniel though." He watched her with a thoughtful expression, "You count her as a friend, don't you?" Nicky's face and voice were dead serious, "Yes. She is the best friend I ever had. Anyone who messes with her had better watch their backs." Luke's expression became a bit more cautious as he took the warning to heart. "You are aware that she is stronger and faster than you are, correct?" Nicky smirked, "Ah, but I have friends. And when Me, Myself, and I actually manage to work together, we are a force to contend with." I kept my face studiously blank. I somehow doubted that it was just a figure of speech. I also wondered which individual in that list belonged to the crazy captain... Nina was glancing at Nicky while writing in the back of the notebook. She must have a separate set of notes for things Nicky related. I hated to break it to Nina, but if dozens of counsellors and psychologists weren't able to figure Nicky out, then her quest was a fruitless cause. Luke furrowed his eyebrows in confusion, "How long have you known Trinity? I honestly never thought she would leave those foothills and I didn't blame her." Nicky considered it for a moment, "I think it has been almost two months now. It took four days before our group even realized that she was a zombie." Luke chuckled, "That must have been an interesting trip..." Nicky grinned at him, "Oh, you have no idea..." Luke tilted his head in curiosity and Nicky started telling him about the horror story that I would forever label that trip as.

 

Chapter 79

            The sun was mostly set and I was finding it quite difficult to sit so close to the fire with the way my instincts were rousing. Nicky and Nina were yawning. I stood up and lightly shook myself as if it would remove the restlessness. I was not so fortunate. I looked at Luke, "I tend to patrol around the area a good chunk of the night. Feel free to sleep here. Give me a holler if anything nasty shows up." He glanced at Daniel as if uncertain what may show up that a Terror couldn't take on, but he nodded, "Will do. If you need any help, just call." I nodded and jumped off the roof. I circled the camp several times in the growing darkness as my instincts fully roused with the night. It would be interesting to have another zombie around, and at least I knew that Luke wasn't the kind to drive me crazy or piss me off. He was the most courteous zombie I had ever met. It would be much harder for him to travel with us though, mostly because of Nicky and Nina triggering his bloodlust. I slowed in thought and took a deep breath, was there anything around that might make our traveling easier? I bared my teeth in a grin and darted off into the undergrowth. It took me almost an hour to find all of the proper plants. It took me another fifteen minutes to squeeze all of their juices into a small jar. I was careful to breathe through my mouth in case the resulting concoction dulled my sense of smell for a short time. I continued searching the forest for anything else it might provide, but came up empty handed. With the lack of results in that pursuit, I turned my attention to the local wildlife. A rabbit allowed me to doctor my wounds and took the edge off my appetite. The blood was sweet, but I was once more tiring of rabbit considering I had it almost every day for weeks. I took a deep breath to locate something that wasn't a rabbit. I wasn't hungry enough for a deer. I exhaled slowly I annoyance. It irked me that there were so few mid-sized creatures out there. A faint earthier smell caught my interest. I didn't mind a bit of work if it meant that I got some variety in my meals. The night was silent as I followed my nose to the open fields that looked empty of life at the first glance. My nose told me otherwise though. I watched as one of the cat-sized rodents nibbled on grasses. Some called them gophers, others called them prairie dogs. I called them a welcome change from rabbits. Both may be rodents and have a veggie diet, but they tasted quite different. They rarely ventured far from their burrows and if one gave an alarm call, the others would hide for a very long time. They preferred to be active during the day, but they would also come out at night. The grass was very short from their incessant eating and there was no cover whatsoever on the open ground. That made it a challenge and my instincts rose higher as they tried to direct me. I didn't need my instincts for this hunt though, I already knew the best way to hunt these furry critters. Their noses were pretty good so I had to remain downwind as I slowly crept up on them. Slow and steady movements were key. Like a cat carefully creeping forward, I had to keep my movements slow enough that I wasn't noticeable in the dark. Two would be plenty for me. The hardest part would be catching the first one without it alerting the others. Any noise or scuffle would have any others within hearing distance crying an alarm and pulling a disappearing act. I put my sunglasses on to hide my eyes and slowly started working my way across the open grass to where a couple of the chubby critters were having their midnight snack. It was times like this that I was glad I was a Nightstalker. No human, Runner or Terror could replicate what I was doing.

My footsteps were silent as my eyes were locked onto my prey. My ears kept a vigil on my surroundings just in case of trouble. Just a bit closer... There! The sharp crack of the gopher's spine snapping caused the other animals to scatter. They would probably come out in fifteen minutes since none of their kin had sounded an alarm and there was no sound of a scuffle. It had been a very long time since I had enjoyed this blood. The controlex made all blood taste sweeter, but this had an almost nutty flavor to it which was normal for a prairie dog. I tilted my head as I noticed that some gophers were already coming out. I once more started my leisurely stalk towards my next unsuspecting victim. It didn't take me long to get the second one. I doctored my wounds once more and drank the rest. I took the one prairie dog with me. I could fry up some of the meat for breakfast. During my short stint in the kitchen, I had overheard more than a few conversations on how well cooked anything had to be to kill the zombie virus that may be on the meat. The night was more than half over now, so I started heading back. I paused by a creek to carve the meat off the gopher. I put the meat in a baggie and headed towards the building. My footsteps once more became louder as I approached. Runners had a tendency to snarl when surprised and I had accidently startled Luke a few times in the past. He had apologized for snarling, but I had told him not to bother since it was technically my fault. If I didn't pay attention, my footsteps were silent. It was something that was easy to forget if your mind was on something else. Luke was watching the ladder as I climbed up and he growled a low greeting. I growled my own greeting in return. Daniel had tensed up, but seemed to realize that the sounds were not aggressive. His eyes still tried to penetrate the darkness without success. I somehow doubted that Daniel had told Luke about his lack of sight at night. I think he had only told me because he had no other way of convincing me to remain with the group. I came forward to drag my chair further away from the fire before sitting down. Luke was able to see me but returned his gaze to the fire, trusting that I had done a thorough check of the area. He closed his eyes and I was pretty sure he planned to get some sleep. Runners usually slept about five hours every day. Runners could go several days without sleep if required, just like Nightstalkers could. Sleep felt a million miles away from me with my instincts being elevated with the night, despite the fact that I had barely managed to get any sleep the last few days. I was simply unable to sleep at night and sleeping in the back of the truck was almost as impossible. I had been managing to nap between suppertime and sunset as well as a few other quiet moments when I was not in the moving truck. It was enough to get me by without getting too grouchy. I watched as the sky slowly lightened and eventually got up to start breakfast. Luke watched me, "I thought you said you didn't eat human food anymore?" "I don't. This keeps Nicky halfway sane. We are still three days away from Ironwind Stronghold and having Nicky go off the deep end isn't something I want to endure." Luke looked perplexed, but being the gentleman he was, he didn't want to dig into someone's personal stuff even if that person wasn't around. Daniel clarified, "Nicky will occasionally go somewhat insane and practically bounces off the walls. This happens often enough that we have even named those episodes insanity blitzes." Luke scratched his head and shrugged, "Everyone has their own little quirks." Daniel snorted, "There is nothing little about this. Half of the population in the Stronghold can disappear within seconds if they realize she is loose."

Luke shrugged, unsure of what to make of the Terror's opinion. My instincts were finally starting to fade. I put the finished spaghetti to the side and took a seat on the cooler. I closed my eyes and tried to take a catnap. I would only have about half an hour before the women woke up. 
 
 I opened up my eyes as movement in the tent alerted me to our first riser. Luke also took a slightly deeper breath as he turned his head, the sound had likely woken him as well. Nina emerged from the tent and looked relieved to see Luke still here. Nina had barely taken a bowl of spaghetti when Nicky also exited the tent. Several days of no coffee finally had her back to being halfway civil in the morning. Luke watched the two humans and I knew that his bloodlust was bothering him since they were sitting upwind. Once Nicky had dished up, Daniel went to grab a bowlful and offered some to Luke, "Want some?" Luke nodded, "Thank you, it has been a long time since I had spaghetti." Daniel filled up another bowl and passed it to him. Luke was a bit leery about being so close to Daniel to take the bowl, but did remarkably well. I pulled a small jar out of my backpack, "Hey Nicky, catch." I gently lobbed the jar towards her and she caught it. She looked at the oily contents before raising an eyebrow at me, "I somehow doubt that this contains caffeine." I snorted lightly, "Unless I was trying to cause an entire army to run away in fear, I would never give you anything with caffeine in it. Once you are done eating, rub that over your skin. It will minimize your scent." Nicky looked at it in curiosity, "Cool. Does this mean I will win a game of hide and go seek with you?" I shook my head, "No, but if you apply it properly Daniel and Luke probably won't pick up your scent easily unless you are fairly close to them." Now that I thought about it, I should have asked that crazy guy how he had cloaked his scent so well. I had never seen something work so well before. It was one thing for a Nightstalker to be able to find something to cover up a scent we could smell, but the man had no way of knowing that his scent had been covered so thoroughly. He had also been perceptive enough to wear that mask to hide the smell of his breath. Only a handful of humans ever even considered that aspect of things. The smell of human breath dissipated quite quickly though, so it wasn't really a concern for situations. It was the sweat and body oils that really carried the scent. And blood. The scent of blood was insanely potent and carried far too well on the air. I seriously hoped that no one got a scratch or papercut close to Luke. Nicky finished her food and set the bowl down before opening up the jar. She tentatively dipped her fingers in the mixture and rubbed them together to get a feel of the slightly oily liquid. With a sigh she started rubbing it on her arms and legs. I murmured, "Do your armpits, neck and face as well." Daniel was watching Nicky in curiosity while sniffing the air. His expression slowly became one of disbelief as Nicky's scent disappeared with the oils, "What is that stuff? I can't even smell her anymore." I could still pick up Nicky's scent without overly trying, but it was much fainter now. I shrugged, "Certain plant oils that cut through any sweat or oils. I can still pick up her scent, but that should make our ride easier for Luke. It will only last several hours before it needs to be reapplied." Luke tilted his head and took a cautious sniff, "Well, I can't pick up her current scent, just her previous scent that stuck to objects around her. How is it that Trinity can smell it and you can't?" Nicky snickered as she rubbed the oils into the back of her neck, "Turns out that Nightstalkers have a better sense of smell than Terrors." Luke looked surprised, "Really? I wouldn't have thought that." I nodded, "My sense of smell is better than his, and I can move silently. All other aspects are what you would normally expect between different ranked zombies." "That is quite interesting. I suspect it is an adaptation thing and has something to do with you being a night owl, since most nocturnal creatures tend to rely more on scent in the dark." Some days Luke was far too rational, and at times like this, he reminded me of Nina the way he analyzed things. Nina had already pulled out her notepad and was writing things down. Luke turned back to his food and was managing to put away a surprising amount of pasta. I looked at Nina again, "You might want to put on more of that perfume. I am not sure where you found it, but it actually does quite a number on your scent." Nina nodded, "Yeah, Daniel helped me pick it out in hopes it would keep feral zombies from scenting me so easily when we travel. I will go put more on." She got up and went back to the tent. I heard more spritzing noises and suspected that she was also rubbing it across her skin like she had just seen Nicky do. I glanced towards the tent as I kept hearing the perfume bottle spraying. Did she intend to bathe in it? I wrinkled my nose as the smell started to reach me. It was a good thing that the perfume had a more mild scent or it would not have been pleasant. It smelled like she was opening up a flower shop in that tent. It was probably engraining itself into the tent and I doubted that it would wear off anytime soon. If nothing else, it would keep their scent down when they slept in there in the future. Eventually Nina came back out. I lifted my head and took a deeper breath, but her scent was almost completely obscured by the faintly floral perfume. Luke took a careful sniff, but relaxed a bit now that he couldn't pick up their fresh personal scent so easily. It wouldn't do anything to the smells that clung to all of our supplies, but scents that rubbed off didn't affect the bloodlust as strongly. This trip was still not going to be a walk in the park for Luke.

 

Chapter 80

            Luke sat across from me in the back of truck. He had chosen the furthest seat from Nicky. The way the air swirled around helped to dissipate the faint scent of the two humans. Luke seemed relaxed enough as we talked. He hadn't located his brother and his old home was in shambles with blood splatter. The scent in the blood had not been that of his brother though, and he had sniffed his brother's pillow to memorize his scent. He wasn't sure if he had gotten out unharmed or if he had been bitten in whatever big fight had occurred in the living room. Nina was sitting sideways in the front seat so she could look out the open back window and participate in the discussion, "Once we get back, we can send messages to other Strongholds asking if he has passed through." Luke looked grateful, "Thank you very much. I don't dare approach the Strongholds myself." Nina jotted down a reminder in her notebook and nodded. I was somewhat amused as I realized that Nina was trying to make staying at Ironwind Stronghold more tempting. If he left, he wouldn't know if word returned that his brother was at such and such a place. I also had a hunch that Nina would try to get the said brother to move to Ironwind Stronghold just so Luke wouldn't have a pressing reason to leave. Nina was being completely open with Luke since he already knew she was a scientist and was interested in the controlex. They would have learnt from me that trying to hide things was not a route they wanted to go down. If they attempted it, then I would be setting things straight, even if it involved a fight with Daniel. I still had a few tricks up my sleeves... Truth be told, I didn't think they would attempt it. They had been completely open with me since. Lies were fairly easy to scent and they had not lied to me. I was still of two minds about what they did. Did I still hold a grudge against their earlier deception? Yes, but the distrust was starting to fade without any other reasons for suspicion. I exhaled slowly as I realized that. I hadn't thought that it would ever be possible for me to trust Nina again and for the longest time I had not trusted her at all. That distrust was starting to fade though. I restrained a peeved growl as I continued watching the scenery go by. I hadn't realized that Nina's constant truthfulness and assistance when I was suffering the aftereffects of the controlex drug would have mollified my instincts. My instincts were one of the most suspicious, untrusting, and downright stubborn things in existence. Now I realized that my instincts didn't really hold onto the past if enough more recent evidence was provided. My instincts were starting to regard Nina's past behavior as something that she had corrected. They would still watch for suspicious activities as they always did, but they were no longer giving Nina's actions special attention. It was just completely baffling that my instincts were more forgiving than I was. Perhaps the phrase short term memory would be more accurate. A number of human phrases came to mind. Forgiveness is divine. Actions speak louder than words. Give someone the benefit of the doubt. I believe thou shalt not murder was another one, but I seem to recall breaking that rule last month... Being a Nightstalker made me testy and suspicious. It didn't necessarily make me an ass. That was my own actions. As much as I could be a jerk or prick at times, I actually did have morals and a heart hidden somewhere under my prickly exterior.  I shook my head and snorted lightly. Bah... Humbug. And now I am quoting Scrooge... I just can't win... I noticed from the corner of my eye that Luke glanced towards me at my snort, but realized that I was deep in thought and not reacting to a potential threat. He turned back to his discussion with Nina about the various lines of research that she had tried. That left me to chew on my thoughts once more.

My instincts were a lot like subconscious emotions, it really wasn't easy to change them if I didn't like them. Sometimes you just trusted people and sometimes you never liked someone even if they never did you any wrong. My instincts were, well, more instinctive. They also based things off facts and what they had seen. In some ways my instincts were more logical and perceptive than I was, which was probably why they often alerted me to things I didn't notice. I still had to keep in mind that these were the very same instincts that accepted Nicky long before I realized that I somewhat trusted her. Nicky. The very lady who put the 'C' in crazy. Perhaps my instincts aren't that great of a judge of character... 
 
 The drive was uneventful. Luke had been extremely talkative and had no problems answering Nina's endless questions while asking almost as many questions as she was. Our stop at lunch had made Daniel do a double take at my arms since the only scab left was the one hidden under the bandage. The rest had fallen off leaving faint pink scars. He hadn't commented aloud though. I glanced down at my arms as I set the ladder against a different store with a flat roof. Even those pink marks had completely disappeared since lunch. I waited on top of the roof to catch things Daniel was about to toss up. I caught the sleeping bags and put them down. Nicky packed them further away from me. Luke watched us in curiosity, "That is a handy trick." I nodded, "Yep. Beats carrying everything up the ladder." Shortly everything was on the roof and Daniel climbed up the ladder. I started to head to where Nicky and Nina were unrolling the massive tent, but paused and glanced towards Luke. He wouldn't want to be in close proximity with humans just in case an accident occurred, so helping set up a tent with them wasn't something that he would want to attempt. I tilted my head, "Feel like starting a fire and putting some water on to boil?" He nodded with faint relief, "Certainly. I will go gather some firewood." I had figured that those chores would be more up his alley. As a zombie, he had nothing to fear from ferals and could play by their rules with ease. I went to help set up the tent. To my surprise, Daniel joined the three of us and it was up in no time. Daniel glanced towards the forest, "I am going to go hunt while there is nothing pressing to do. I will bring back an armful of firewood." He headed off in the opposite direction that Luke had. Luke had already made a few trips with wood and Nina went to start the fire. Nicky entered the tent to unroll the sleeping bags and put them on the padded rollup cushions that reminded me more of a yoga mat than anything else. I wandered along the edge of the roof checking the air for scents. Luke packed another load of wood up the ladder and set it with the other wood. Nina had the chairs set up and took a seat in one. I tilted my head at Luke, "I am going to head inside the store and see what I might find. Feel like joining me?" He stood up and walked over, "Sure." I dropped right off the roof and he followed suit. He huffed as he hit the ground, such a drop wasn't easy for him. Runners were quite sturdy, although that came with being a zombie. We still had our own limits though. I carefully pushed the door open, wary of buckets of water or other booby traps. The coast was clear. We entered and started to snoop around the store.  I looked down one aisle, "There are collapsible camping chairs down this aisle. Feel free to pick one for yourself, as well as anything else you want. The bill is on me."

Luke chuckled from behind me, "Free is a good price. Is that the only time you offer to buy someone else something?" I grinned over my shoulder at him, "In general, yes." This store had seen travelers and anything edible was long gone. Most of the common stuff you needed or used daily was also absent. That left things like chairs, mug holders, and bumper stickers. I noticed that all of the zombie or survivor related stickers had been taken though. Why the hell would you want a bumper sticker after the apocalypse? To plaster it on a zombie's forehead? Perhaps they were using them for something fun, like making sure that everyone knew which broken down truck was theirs... I shook my head to refocus on finding something that I could at least pretend was useful. The pickings were slim, but Luke found a chair he liked and a small backpack. Daniel was relaxing on the roof with the women as we climbed back up. Luke set up his chair and plopped down into it. I reclaimed my own seat. I could have opted to pick a new chair for myself and let Luke keep this one, but he would feel better if he chose his own chair. Supper was almost ready. Nicky yawned and dug through her backpack. She put things on the ground as she dug for whatever she was after in the bowels of that apparently bottomless pit. I was amused to see four small cans of tomato juice and a decent sized bottle of liquid dish soap make their appearance. Luke stilled as he saw the soap. Nicky had colored the paper label in a blue and green swirl that read 'For use on zombies only.' He swung his head in my direction with an incredulous expression. His eyes were wide in disbelief, "You did not tell her that secret." Nina looked up from her cooking and Daniel was focused on us. He watched us intently, hoping to discover another secret. Nicky grinned at him mischievously, "The tomato juice secret or the soap secret?" Luke growled faintly as he narrowed his eyes at me, although I could sense his humor underneath. Luke glanced at Nicky as his eyes glowed red, "The soap one is just evil. I hope you managed to use it on Trinity." He turned back to me, "Speaking of soap, you still owe me a mountain lion for using it against me." I pulled back my lips in a dark grin, "No mountain lions in the area. You will have to take a raincheck. You have to admit that soap works quite well though." I had actually been the one to teach Luke about distracting a zombie by getting soap in its mouth. I grinned at the memory. I had asked him just why he was so polite. He had replied that his mother was overly fond of putting soap in her kids' mouths if they said anything bad, but he had been more scared of his dad with that big leather belt. I had told him that unless his father had zombie strength, that he would actually prefer the belt to soap now. He hadn't believed me and I had dared him to stick half a spoonful of soap in his mouth. He had declined the dare, but then I had said that I would catch him three bears and a mountain lion if he did it. That convinced him. A Runner wasn't able to take down larger predators and they were quite food motivated, so he had been tempted by the rare and otherwise unobtainable treat and had agreed. He completely regretted it. Getting a mouthful of soap as a human was bad enough, but as a zombie it was unimaginably disgusting. He had hung around the cabin long enough to claim his three bears, but the mountain lion must have had ESP and had vacated the entire area while he was visiting. Luke growled wordlessly at me, he still hadn't completely forgiven me for tricking him into that. That showed how bad it had been. The most polite person I had ever met still held a grudge months later when he had freely agreed to the bargain and I was willing to uphold my end of the deal. I bared my teeth at his growl. Luke shifted in his chair to take a swipe at my arm. His fingers were curved so they would do no damage even if they did connect. My reflexes were much faster than his. I dodged his half-hearted strike and landed a harmless swat on his arm. My knuckles skimmed his arm and he growled at me before leaning back in his chair with a gusty sigh. Our little display was pretty close to a couple of friends gently punching one another in the shoulder in jest. The other three had been watching us silently. Daniel was now eyeing up the soap with even more disfavor than before, if that was possible. Luke wasn't about to spill that secret either, which made it even better. Nicky raised an eyebrow at Luke, "Now why did Trinity go after you with soap?" He snorted in good humor, "I had no clue what it did at the time and I clearly lost that bet. It isn't something I plan to ever do again." Nicky sighed, "Trinity told me how to do it, but I would never do that to her. Besides, as you said, she is faster and stronger than me and I really don't want to see what she may do in the name of revenge. I pack it in case a feral zombie corners me." Luke shook his head, "Honest, it will distract them very well if you do it properly." I highly suspected that Luke knew that we were simply tormenting Daniel with our comments. He knew about the soap, but I doubted that he understood the tomato juice part. Considering that I had shown him the soap one, he may not dismiss the tomato juice one so readily if he thought I stumbled across another zombie quirk. Nicky was watching Luke in excitement, "Did Trinity tell you about rutabagas?" Luke blinked in obvious confusion before glancing at me, "No, she didn't." Nicky reclaimed his attention and was practically bouncing with hyper energy, "If you can find a rutabaga, I will show you." I eyed up Nicky, her current energy levels were a warning sign that we needed to get her under control quickly before it escalated into something that wasn't wise to let come to life. I exhaled gustily, "Luke, even if you find a rutabaga, do not give it to her. You could regret it." I turned to Nina, "By the way, that bread is starting to burn." Nina swiftly pulled the bread pan away from the fire, having been distracted by a conversation that she undoubtedly found fascinating. It hadn't quite burnt yet, but the first hints of black could be seen. Nina looked rueful at first bit of charcoal that had ever graced anything she made so far this trip, "Well, supper is ready..." They had just been waiting for the bread, so Nina cut the small loaf into slices while Daniel and Nicky dished up. Luke waited until the humans were sitting in the chairs before grabbing some food. The stuff I had given Nicky was wearing off again, enough though she had reapplied it a few times. It was really hard to mask scents and I had known that its effectiveness would be quite limited. I was going to have to collect more of those plants tonight if I could find them.

 

Chapter 81


 I tilted my head and looked to the east as a pack of coyotes started howling close by. Supper was long over and the sun was already halfway set. I turned towards Luke. He was already watching me with hope in his eyes. I bared my teeth in the parody of a grin, "I think that coyote pack was calling us to come over for a visit. Feel like accompanying me to meet a few of the locals?" Luke eagerly rose to his feet, "I was hoping you would offer." Luke had no chance of catching a coyote and he shamelessly, yet politely, accepted the invitation with anticipation. I chuckled and also got to my feet before heading towards the edge of the building, "Just don't let me forget that I need to dig up a rabbit before we return." Luke bared his teeth in silent humor. Any type of blood would work to heal wounds, but this was just another way to mess with Daniel's head. Besides, if he went after rabbits, that left more coyotes for us. Luke seemed to have sided with me when it came to keeping Daniel off balance. The Terror's presence often had my instincts on edge and it had to be much worse for Luke since he was a Runner. Luke followed me as I dropped off the roof and headed towards the trees. He took a deep breath of the air and winced since the smell of humans was still quite strong. I flashed a canine at him and he refocused on me as his instincts were distracted by my presence. The light was rapidly fading as I kept to a pace he could keep up with. It was closer to a jog, but he would be able to manage it for half an hour or so. The coyotes were closer than that. The sky was nearly dark and I took another sniff before growling faintly. Luke dropped his pace to a slow walk as he watched me disappear into the trees. We had done this before. He would follow my scent slowly to give me plenty of time to catch something off guard. I picked up speed and went into stealth mode. Very few animals would linger in an area if they realized a zombie was near, so I had to manage to get two coyotes before the pack was aware that I was near. Otherwise I would be relegated to rabbits. I came within sight of the pack. It was one of the larger packs I had encountered and I could see at least fifteen of the canines and smell more that were in trees nearby. Most were lounging or wrestling alongside the stream. I swiftly circled to the other side of the clearing to see if I could sneak up on some of the hidden ones. There was no wind, so my scent would not spread easily and unless one walked across my trail, they would remain unaware until it was too late. One was trying to dig a mouse out from under a tree root and was oblivious to its surroundings. That was its loss. I had to kill this one without a sound, otherwise the others could take off. I may have been a Nightstalker, but I didn't have a chance of keeping up with a running coyote. Those things were fast when they were spooked. Even Daniel wouldn't be able to catch one unless it tired and slowed down. My stamina wasn't sufficient to run down prey and I wasn't entirely certain how long Daniel could maintain his top speed. His speed and stamina outstripped mine by far more than I cared to think about. I was a much better ambush predator though... This coyote wouldn't even have time to realize it. I crouched down and tensed before silently leaping out at it. I managed to snap its neck before it realized the danger it was in. It didn't even have time to manage a bark of surprise or a yelp. That was how I liked it. I preferred to keep my kills clean and humane. Now for the second one... My instincts wanted to stay and claim my kill, but I overruled them as I shifted back into the trees. My instincts easily went back into hunting mode with the strong smell of the numerous coyotes. 

Another coyote was napping in the long grass at the base of a tree. I easily snuck up behind it and eyed up its neck from a nearby bush. A long howl of alarm nearby caused the coyote to wake with a jump. It swiftly got to its feet. I narrowed my eyes and sprang out of my hiding place. The coyote went down with a broken neck. Several more coyotes started yipping an alarm before running off. They had found my first kill and knew that the hunter was still around. I exhaled gustily and shook myself off while looking at the dead coyote at my feet. I lifted my face to the now-dark sky and gave a soft low cry that had a very eerie tone to it. It reminded me more of a creepy owl call as opposed to the loud and very distinctive cougar-like Nightstalker scream. It wasn't a sound that one would hear a feral Nightstalker make. It was actually a friendly proximity call that sane Nightstalkers could make when attempting to locate those nearby. Had another sane Nightstalker been in the area, he or she would have likely returned the call even if they had never met me before. Each individual's call was just a bit different, allowing us to identify individuals by their call. Runners could not produce a noise like that, but Luke knew what it meant and I knew that he would hear it since it carried quite well. I didn't have to wait more than a couple of minutes for Luke to come crashing through the bush at a jog. I moved away from the coyote and went towards where I had left the first one. Luke politely waited until I was out of sight before going after the coyote so it wouldn't rile up my instincts in case they wanted to claim that kill as my own. Regular zombies may be able to share a kill without a qualm, but no other rank had that luxury. Our instincts detested sharing a kill and only my humanity allowed me to give a kill up to another. My control was more than adequate to allow Luke to go ahead and avoid waiting, but he was unfailingly courteous. Especially when I had let him have a kill that he had no chance of making. The coyote was right where I had left it. A few tracks were nearby, but the surviving pack members had swiftly cleared the area. They would not return any time soon. I wasted no time in using my belt knife to trim the fur and thoroughly enjoyed the warm blood. I wondered how Daniel managed to hunt various creatures. I recalled the deer he had chased towards me when we had first gotten to Ironwind Stronghold. The deer had been exhausted, so he had likely run it down as he herded it in my direction. The time he cleared a path in the trees in a rage, he had probably startled the one deer and it must have frozen in surprise. I really wasn't sure and it wasn't something that I really wanted to inquire into. It could be touchy topic for Daniel considering that he didn't seem to like revealing any of his abilities or limitations. I finished and shook myself while automatically checking for any blood spots. My clothing was spotless as they almost always were, but the inspection was habit. I wandered back to where Luke was. He had just finished. His dull red eyes turned at the sound of my approach. Between supper and the hunt, he must be stuffed if his eyes were that color when he wasn't trying to control it. It also meant that his instincts were quite low. He grinned at me, "I can't remember the last time I had coyote." I leaned against a tree, "I had one earlier this week, but I haven't seen many around the Stronghold." "What is plentiful around the Stronghold?" I chuckled, "Rabbits. Lots and lots of rabbits. Some pheasants and quail. Enough deer that we can hunt them once a week or so without impacting the population. Some bigger predators occasionally make the mistake of wandering through." He tilted his head, "And the humans don't mind us taking out creatures that they may very well need?" "We actually bring the carcass back and they turn it into jerky or thoroughly cook it. Drying out or high heat kills the virus." He must not have known that detail any more than I had before arriving here.

He blinked in surprise, "I wasn't aware of that. Well, that removed the guilt I was feeling for planning to put a dent into the rabbit population." I chuckled, "Indeed. The only thing we take is the blood and that is the one thing that they don't really want, so it works out quite well." He nodded thoughtfully before refocusing on me, "Just what was Nicky saying about a rutabaga?" I burst out laughing, "I honestly have no idea. I haven't even seen one since the zombies arrived. She uses the cans of tomato juice as airborne missiles, but she did that before we crossed paths with Daniel, so he is clueless." Luke chuckled and shook his head, "I think you are getting far too much amusement from torturing that man. I have never seen a zombie that humanized before though." I sighed as I was once more reminded of that fact, "Yeah, it was just the other day that he finally figured out the body language for a wrestling match." Luke frowned in concern, "Does he understand passive body language? I don't feel like ending up wounded if he gets mad or his instincts push him." I growled at that thought before shaking my head, "No, he doesn't understand as far as I can tell, but his control is sufficient that I don't think he will harm you. We got into one spat and he merely pinned me despite the fact that I was pissed and trying to inflict damage." Luke looked up in surprise, "How badly did you injure him?" Luke knew about my sickle and belt knife. I made a face, "I didn't have my weapons on me, so I didn't manage more than a few minor scratches." Luke scratched his head, obviously perplexed, "What made you so mad?" I huffed my annoyance, "When I first came to this Stronghold, I had some pretty nasty bullet wounds from highway bandits. I didn't realize that Nina was actually a scientist at that time. She had been taking blood from a wound on my back when she cleaned it without letting me know-" Luke growled in anger as his eyes started glowing. He shook his head to try and collect himself. I waited a few seconds before continuing, "I found out when I overheard a conversation. Nicky and I had a plan to escape on the quiet side during the night, but they had bugged her room and overheard it. They gave her hot chocolate with a sedative in it that night." I took a deep breath as my own irritation flared at the memories, "When she didn't show up, I climbed up to her window and snuck in. Daniel had been waiting outside the door of her room and entered when he heard me. When he said that Nicky had been drugged, I was furious. Needless to say that I lost that match." Luke narrowed his eyes, "Did he harm you at all?" I shook my head, "My old wounds reopened a bit during the scuffle, but he just pinned me." Luke exhaled slowly and shook himself, "I suppose they finally came clean at that point?" I nodded, "Yes. And as far as I can tell, there are no other secrets there." "And when a Nightstalker doesn't get suspicious it says a lot. I find it surprising that you stayed after they took your blood without your permission." I was silent for a few moments before I spoke quietly, "If it had been taken for anything besides research for a cure, I would have been long gone." Luke also spoke softly, "You wished that the cure had been around in time to save your sister." I clenched my jaw and growled lowly while turning my head away in admission of the truth. My sister had been with me on that train. By the time I had returned, she had been missing from the train. When I had finally located her, she was already a mindless zombie. As a normal zombie, she hadn't stood a chance at remaining in control. She may have been 23 and five years my junior, but we had always been close since a car crash had stolen our parents from us. We had always had each other and we had never been apart since we shared the same apartment. That was my other reason for hanging around Ironwind Stronghold, although it was one that I had never voiced. There was a chance, a slim chance that was so slight that it may not even exist, but there was always a chance that the human mind was actually buried deep and able to recover. If Nina ever figured it out, I would be heading north to find my sister. Luke sighed softly, "Sorry. If it is any consolation, I know how you feel." I knew Luke had it worse than I did. He had a larger family and, other than his missing brother, all of them were mindless zombies. I shook myself off to shake the heavy emotions from my mind, "Don't worry about it." "Changing the topic back to the Stronghold. How have they been aside from taking your blood by stealth?" I shrugged, "They never really did anything to annoy me besides that. Most are honestly happy to have me there. They will attempt almost anything if they think it makes staying easier. They even pushed one table into a corner and always leave it open." He tilted his head, "I thought you didn't eat food anymore?" "I don't, but that is a fairly recent occurrence and they don't yet realize what sabotage that one lady did. I still sit and visit through breakfast and lunch, but the crowd at supper is too much for me." "Do you think they will try anything underhanded like that again?" I thought about it, but eventually shook my head, "I don't think so. I caught them before and they know my instincts are sharp. I am pretty sure that they were certain that I would have disappeared the moment they mentioned tests and were hoping to have everything they needed from a Nightstalker before I healed." Luke looked amused, "I suspect that if they had not mentioned the cure first, that they would have been correct, regardless of how bad your injuries were." I shrugged, "Probably." Luke shook his head, "Suspicious old bat..." I looked at him in disbelief, "What did you just call me?" He shifted his body language and bared his teeth in jest at me, "An old bat. You are older than me, so I can call you old. Considering how much blood you drank tonight, you could very well pass for a vampire bat." I took a step away from the tree and dropped into a crouch as I started circling him, "One, I am only older by two weeks. Two, you did not just compare me to a flying mouse..." He growled playfully, "18 days actually. I guess I can't really call you a flying mouse, you aren't fluffy enough." I snorted and charged. He was slower than me, but I held back as I tackled him and we snarled at each other with our wrestling match. The ending was predictable, but I let him have a good round before I managed to pin his arms against his sides. He stilled and gave a light growl and I released him as I got to my feet. Runners were more coordinated than their lesser cousins and Luke had no difficulty getting to his feet before I could offer him my hand. I started brushing myself off, although I tended to pick clothing that dirt and leaves didn't cling to. Luke bared his teeth at me in a grin, "Now, how about those rabbits..." I raised an eyebrow, "Rabbits?" After that coyote, I had no idea where he planned to put any more food, let alone more than one rabbit. He chuckled, "As if I would ever pass up the chance of a meal. I am not about to forget about that mountain lion either." I shook my head before testing the air, "Rabbits first. The next time I scent a mountain lion, I will let you know." He followed me into the forest as I tracked the numerous rabbits.

 

Chapter 82


 We took a detour away from the main roads to reach the small rabbit forest outside of Ironwind Stronghold and arrived without any fanfare. Luke was looking at the forest in curiosity as we came to a stop. I hopped out of the truck and Luke also got out. Nicky remained seated. Nina looked back through the open window, "We will be right back." I nodded and pointed over my shoulder, "We will be checking out the cave." Daniel slowly started driving the truck over the tire ruts as branches scraped along the rusted truck's sides. I looked at Luke, "Well, feel like seeing if the cave will work?" He nodded and I started walking towards it. He walked beside me while looking at the forest around us, committing the path to memory. I came to a stop and pointed to the dark opening that was just barely visible through some bushes. Luke sniffed the air to ensure that no feral was inside before walking up to the entrance.  I trailed behind him. He ducked his head as he went past the entrance. I could see everything clearly, but I knew Luke's sight wasn't much better than a human's was. He paused at the corner and flicked a flashlight on before going deeper. I followed him inside. He came to the larger cave at the end and looked around. He gave me a rueful look, "It is absolutely no fair that you don't even have to duck in here." I smirked as the tall lanky man had to stoop over and bend his knees to avoid hitting his head on the hard rock cave ceiling. Luke looked around, "As far as caves go, this one isn't bad at all. I think I will be chipping the rock so I can stand up, unless you have any issues with that." I shook my head, "Don't let me spoil your fun. I don't have any attachment to this cave." He took one last look around, "Well, I think I have seen enough for now. I wouldn't mind checking out the forest." I headed back to the outside world and he followed me. 
 
 I accompanied Luke as he explored the forest. About an hour later I heard the sound of the truck once more. We headed back to where we had last seen them. Luke blinked as he saw the truck and murmured, "They really do go overboard, don't they?" I examined the heavily loaded truck and was in full agreement with him, "That is one way of putting it." The back was so full that Nicky was sitting on top of a small three drawer dresser. We were silent as the truck pulled up. Daniel turned it off and got out, "This is about as close as I think I can get the truck to that cave. We will be carrying everything the rest of the way." Nicky jumped down, "We already decided that Daniel gets to carry the bed frame and heavy stuff." I smirked as Nicky once more nominated Daniel for the hardest work, although for him it wouldn't be that hard. Nina held up a blue spray bottle, "Daniel says that this disinfectant tends to remove the lingering human smells. I did spray it on everything before we left and it should have aired out by now, but I will leave it with you in case you want to use more of it." Luke nodded, "Thank you." He didn't move any closer to her though. She also held up a small blue bag, "I have the controlex as well. It is up to you when you want it." That caught Luke's attention and he looked at the bag, "I would prefer to do it sooner rather than later, especially if it takes about three days to take full effect."

Nina nodded and opened up the truck tailgate to create an impromptu table. Luke took a few steps closer as he watched her unpacking the bag intently. Daniel leaned on the side of the truck beside of Nina and I followed not far behind Luke. Luke stopped and crossed his arms in front of him as he leaned against the other side of the truck just beside the tire. He was barely three armlengths away from Nina and I had never seen him so close to a human before. Nina pulled out some supplies and it didn't take her long to have her gloves on. She held an alcohol wipe and a tiny syringe quarter way filled with some odd green fluid. She looked at Luke, "How would you like to do this? I can administer it if you are comfortable having me that close or if you are okay with using needles, you can give it to yourself. Daniel can also do it if that is easier for you." Luke was silent in thought for a while, "I think it may be best if you did it. Do you have to inject it in a certain area?" Nina shook her head, "Not really, although I prefer to inject it into a vein if I have a choice." Luke took a deep breath, "In that case, I will stand here. I will give warning if my control gets shaky, although I am quite certain that Trinity and Daniel are more than swift enough to intervene if something goes wrong." Luke put both of his hands on top of the side of the truck box and used it as a handhold. Nina slowly moved closer. I spoke quietly, "Nina, go to the other side. You will be downwind then. It won't help much at that range though." Nina nodded before circling around to the other side of Luke. I remained standing not that far behind him. I was just close enough to distract his instincts without presenting a threat. It didn't escape my notice that Nina had put a lot of that perfume on. I didn't think that Luke's control was as shaky as he feared, but his caution could very well be warranted. Control was always a struggle for Runners. I seriously hoped that the controlex would affect his bloodlust as it did mine. Nina used the alcohol wipe to give the inside of his elbow a quick clean. I wrinkled my nose at the sharp smell. She kept one eye on him and one eye on what she was doing. Daniel was watching Luke like a hawk, but Luke was looking the other way and breathing through his mouth. Nina spoke quietly, "I am going to inject it." With that warning, she inserted the needle and slowly depressed the plunger without her gloves touching his skin. Luke took a deeper breath as the needle pierced his skin, but didn't move. Nina backed away, "I'm done." Luke exhaled slowly in relief, "Thank you. I am also grateful that you covered your scent so well. It wasn't as bad as I thought it might be." Nina nodded, "I am glad that it helped." Luke turned his attention to the stuff in the truck and pulled out a live trap before grinning, "I think I can make good use of this..." Nicky chuckled from the far side of the truck, "Well, supposedly all of this is going to fit into that cave somehow. I hope it is a big cave. I will drop things outside the entrance so you can arrange them how you like, but I have no plans on going inside." Luke glanced at the piles of stuff with a startled expression, "This is all for me? Surely there must be some mistake, I don't need this much..." Nina grinned, "Well, it is yours now. It was just sitting in storage, so you might as well have it. If you do decide to move into the Stronghold at some point, we can get you new stuff and leave this here for any other zombies who might pass through and not want to go inside." "Oh... Thank you..." Luke seemed to be at a loss for words. Daniel reached over and somehow lifted the bed frame out of the truck by himself without any apparent effort. The bed frame was one of those solid wooden affairs that probably weighed 200 pounds. I could have lifted it, but not like it was a handful of paper. Luke blinked at the Terror's unintentional display of strength. I shook my head and grabbed the dresser since it looked like the second heaviest object. It took us a few trips to pile everything at the cave entrance. Nina looked curiously at the barely visible entrance that was well hidden behind the shrubs, but she didn't make any move to approach it. Luke scratched his head, "I think I will have to clear some of this brush and plants away first, but I can manage that by myself easily enough. Thank you so much for everything." Nina nodded, "No problem at all. If you need anything, or even just want something, simply let us know. We are going to head back, but we will bring you supper later on." She glanced at me, "I assume you are going to keep him company for the rest of the day?" I shrugged, "Unless someone wants me to do something, I can hang out here and help Luke get settled in." Nina shook her head, "I can't think of anything, so I will see you later tonight." Nicky went with Daniel and Nina. I wondered what those in the Stronghold had thought when they had seen Nicky, but not me. Luke watched them walk away through the trees before glancing at the pile behind us, "That was unexpected..." I rolled my eyes, "This entire Stronghold isn't exactly something you can expect." He chuckled, "True, I doubt there is another place with a lab, several drugs, a Terror, and a Nightstalker." I shook my head, halfway amused, "And now we get to add a Runner to the mix. All we need now is a couple of horses that can tolerate zombies and we will have a full circus." And I would still be sneaking out of the back of that circus tent... Luke looked back at the cave with interest, "This could be fun. I always wanted to try tree sculpting. I can clear out the stuff in the way and trim those taller ones to form an arch that we can walk through." "Good thing you spoke up, or I was just going to yank them out by the roots." Luke shook his head, "If I have to kill time for three days, then I might as well do it artistically. You can clear a nice path to the road if you want." I shrugged, "Good enough for me. We trampled it down somewhat, but it can definitely be improved." I went to clear a decent sized path through the trees.

 

Chapter 83

            Nina, Daniel, and Nicky looked surprised as they entered the clearing that we had created just in front of the cave. Two bored zombies could do a lot in five hours. Well, Luke had been quite enthusiastic, but this resembled gardening far too much for my tastes. There was a nice path wide enough for two humans to walk side by side. It led to the clearing that now held a wooden picnic table and a few stump seats. It really was remarkable what our hard and razor sharp nails could do to wood. The cave entrance was now visible and framed by the recently trimmed bushes. It would take a while for the grass to grow in and cover areas where small trees and shrubs had previously grown. Nina looked around, "Wow. I can't believe how much you two managed to do." We had also managed to haul everything inside and make sure that it was set up so that the tiny creek wouldn't damage anything. Luke grinned, "Thank you. Credit for the picnic table goes to Trinity though. I still can't figure out how she managed to split those logs so straight." "How are you feeling?" Nina had asked earlier if he could track the symptoms and Luke had agreed. He shrugged, "My muscles have a slight ache, but I am not sure if it is the controlex or the fact that I have been hauling heavy things around for a few hours. I haven't noticed any muscle tremors or anything with my vision." Nina nodded and held up an insulated cooler, "I brought us some supper." She proceeded to lay out the bowls on the table and set some plates beside it so we could dish up our own food. The two men let the women go first and Luke motioned for Daniel to go ahead of him. Part of it was courtesy, part of it was that his instincts didn't want the more powerful zombie behind his back. I took a seat on one of the stumps, although calling it a stump at this point was an understatement. I had broken off the top of the tree and used my nails to carve a seat with a back out of the soft wood. I glanced at the ground, "I think we have to build a proper firepit next since the ground here isn't something you want to build a fire on." I looked at Daniel, "Think you can dig up one of those large standing firepits? I think I saw a few spares behind the one garage." Daniel nodded as he made a sandwich from the stuff he had taken. Luke took a seat on one of the stumps. The other three were at the picnic table. Nicky grinned at me and held up a massive turkey drumstick, "Look at what I got! Can you guess which foul-tempered bird this came from?" "I guess you did manage to get your revenge on it, huh?" Nicky grinned, "Oh, yeah. The cooks promised to BBQ the other drumstick for me tomorrow if they could have the white meat. There is no way I can eat that much turkey, so I agreed." Luke suddenly growled in surprise and shook his head. We all looked at him, but he remained sitting. He quickly blinked several times and glanced at me, "Sorry for the growl. My sight blacked out for a second and it caught me off guard. That is creepy as hell." I nodded in understanding, "Been there, done that. The first two times I snarled and it was probably a good thing that no one was near me." Luke shook his head again and pulled out the small notebook Nina had provided. He noted down the time before turning back to his food. I noticed that his plate barely had anything on it. He had eaten breakfast and nibbled a bit at lunch though, so he probably wasn't that hungry. The drug might also be responsible for some of it. Six live traps were set up in various parts of the forest. Considering that three traps had been more than sufficient for me in the past, Luke would not have to worry about trapping an animal. I remembered how impressed Luke had been when telling me about the guy raising rabbits. He had gone into a lot of detail with the setup. I made a mental note to inquire about someone building such a hutch for him.

Luke was the type of person who preferred to stay in one place and help improve it. He was the ideal homeowner who was always doing renovations and keeping up the yardwork. Even if he left to continue searching for his brother, the hutch could still be used by humans or if another sane Runner passed through. I knew he didn't plan to leave if Nina sent out word by letters to other Strongholds though. We had spoken a fair bit while working earlier. He was quite certain that if his brother was alive, that he would be in a Stronghold. Strongholds were a place where he previously couldn't go and some of those places weren't exactly trustworthy. He still wasn't sure if he would move into the Stronghold yet, he was waiting to see how much his bloodlust disappeared. I took a drink of water as the others worked on their meal in silence. I commented to Luke, "I do patrol a good chunk of the night, so don't be surprised to catch my scent on the wind. If you need some company, just give me a shout." "I wouldn't want to take you away from your duties." I chuckled darkly, "All I do is basically wander in circles around the Stronghold. Daniel is inside if anything does show up. You smelled Daniel's scent wall earlier, do you honestly think that a feral Terror or a Nightstalker is going to cross that unless they can smell the humans in the Stronghold?" I hadn't mentioned Daniel's weakness yet, so Luke was unaware that feral Terrors would not travel at night. Luke snorted and shook his head. Even though Daniel had been gone for eight days, that boundary wall was still quite apparent when we first drove past it and I knew he had run a few laps since returning. I noticed both Nina and Daniel were giving me funny looks at the mention of the scent wall. I guess they had never thought of it like an actual wall before. I shrugged, "There you have it. If a Nightstalker shows up, chances are it will scream long before it attacks and there are lights above the main gates to keep them at bay. If a Terror shows up, chances of me stopping it are slim to none. So that leaves Runners, and considering Daniel runs a lap not long before sunset, he would know if one is in the area. If it passes through later, then it won't show up until well into the night." Why Runners weren't that bothered by the scent wall was beyond my understanding. Luke had definitely noticed the boundary, but Runners didn't seem to be territorial in the way that Nightstalkers and Terrors often were. It was just more proof that Daniel and myself were doomed to clash. The fact that I occasionally annoyed him on purpose had nothing to do with it of course. The meal wrapped up and Luke glanced towards the cave, "I don't mean to chase you off, but I know you are quite busy and I don't want to hold you here." Nina quickly took the hint, "It was a pleasure to visit and I am sure that you want to finish settling in. We can bring you some breakfast tomorrow in case you are hungry. Oh, I almost forgot, here is a walkie talkie in case you want to contact us. Feel free to use it whenever you want, Daniel and myself have the matching ones. We have one for Trinity as well." I looked over as Nina gently tossed the small black object over. I easily caught it, although I wasn't entirely sure that I wanted it. Daniel spoke, "The 'ALL' setting will transit to all four radios. If you direct it to A, you will get me; Nina is B. We set Trinity's to C and Luke's to D. That way you can have private conversations or get in touch with the first person available." Great. Now we have a party line... At least we were able to contact just one person. It was pretty easy to remember as well. 'A' could possibly even stand for Avoid Daniel. Daniel pulled out a solar charging panel so Luke could charge his radio out here. I got to my feet and went with Nina, Daniel, and Nicky lest I get roped into playing with more plants. I was pretty sure that Luke wanted some time to relax and chill. The first hint of a muscle tremor had hit him a short while ago as well and he may not want company while he was feeling vulnerable. Daniel had been talking with Nina and I doubted that either of them had noticed it. I climbed into the back of the truck with Nicky. As we started driving I asked, "So I assume that everyone knows that there is a sane Runner in this forest?" No human in this place was crazy enough to approach a Runner without Daniel nearby, but my luck had taught me that if anything could possibly go wrong, then that thing was going to grow dreadlocks before creeping up behind you and biting you in the butt. Nina turned so she was sitting sideways and could speak easily, "Yes, they know his name is Luke and that he is just a bit cautious about his control. They also know that Nicky rode in the back of the truck with him for three days, so it is just more of a precaution than anything else. I did give them a good rundown on the controlex drug as well as the fact that he is trying it. Do you mind if we tell them that you also took the controlex drug?" "Only if I get a piece of Louise if she ever shows her face." My tone was clipped, I still wanted to shred that woman. My nails could carve into wood with effort, they would make short work of human flesh. I had somehow managed to forgive Nina and Daniel for taking my blood without my permission, but I doubted I would ever forgive Louise. Nina's expression turned grim, "Just make sure that you leave enough of her so she has to answer to us as well." I bared my teeth in silent agreement. By this time we were pulling through the gates of the Stronghold. Several people were looking to see if I had actually returned and many smiled when they saw me. It was official. Humans were insane. How else could they be happy that a growly zombie returned? Perhaps Nicky spiked the water source before we left...

 

Chapter 84

            We pulled the truck into the garage. Nina got out and looked at me, "Mind accompanying me to the lab? I would love another blood sample and I want to check that cut. You haven't let me near it since I first cleaned it." To my surprise, my amusement momentarily trumped my irritation. I smirked as Nina was obviously trying to use that as an excuse to get a look under the bandage. My other scabs were long gone, but Daniel still sported a few scabs from his deepest scratches. I exhaled gustily as my irritation won, but still followed her to the lab. Nicky tagged along to avoid being put to work. Nina pulled out cleaning supplies as I sat on a tall stool. Nicky chose an office chair on wheels and slowly started spinning herself around in it. Daniel had taken a seat in a chair by the counter while watching Nina as she started working the bandage loose. Nina carefully peeled back the bandage and blinked in surprise. I kept a straight face even though I felt like gloating. The scab had come loose this afternoon and I had removed it. I had kept the bandage on just to mess with Daniel's head. He would have no clue as to when the scab had come off. My deep cut was healed, yet his larger scratches were still scabbed over. Nina shook her head, but looked amused, "I should have known. You are doing this just to get under Daniel's skin, aren't you?" I bared my teeth in a grin, "I bet it is working." Daniel snorted lightly, "Not as much as you are likely hoping." "Drat." Daniel found my reaction amusing, "I may have to bribe Nicky into the spilling the secret somehow..." I raised an eyebrow and cocked my head as I pretended to consider the odds, "I bet if you let her color your jacket and wore it for three days along with the rainbow socks and shoes that she might agree." Nicky perked up, "I like that idea, but make it a week and he can't cover it up like you did." "Not a chance." Daniel clearly was not that desperate to learn the secret. I shrugged, "Well, it would be one way to wear out her felts." Nicky shook her head with a grin, "Those things will never die." Daniel declined a response. I narrowed my eyes as Nina picked up a blood collection needle in her hands, but I let her take two vials of blood. Nina capped the vials, "Thanks. Are you ever going to tell Daniel, even if he doesn't figure it out in a month?" I made a face, "If he doesn't figure it out in a month, then he needs to go back to zombie school." Daniel tilted his head, "I missed the enrolment deadline for that and I haven't found a tutor willing to enlighten me. Perhaps you can take pity on me?" "Since when did you become an eloquent poet?" Nicky interrupted Daniel's response as she launched into a wildly off-key song, "Hold back the river, let me look in your eyes, Hold back the river, so I.., Can stop for a minute and see where you hide-" She cut off suddenly and we just stared at her, trying to figure out what the hell she was going on about. If her mind ever short circuited, we were in for a ride. Nicky blinked in surprise, "Whoops, wrong song... That was supposed to be Cry Me A River, not Hold Back The River..." She shrugged, "Easily fixed. The bridges were burned, now it's your turn, to cry... Cry me a river..." I was about ready to plug my ears when Nina interrupted her, "That actually gives me a really good idea!" Nicky looked at her like she had lost her mind, "You might need your head checked. No one has ever liked my singing."

I agreed with Nicky. Nicky's voice was something that made you cringe at the first few words before trying to plug your ears in such a way that would allow you to block out any trace of that racket. I failed to see how Nicky's singing could bring about any good idea other than duct tape. Nina shook her head at Nicky, "No. Sorry, your singing is terrible and completely off-key, but it gave me another idea for research." Nina turned to look at Daniel with growing excitement, "I have always used blood or saliva in my testing and both help in different areas, but I never considered tears. It opens up a completely new area we can look at." Daniel blinked slowly, "The idea has its merits. Collecting tears is harder than saliva or blood though. I am actually not sure how I would react to anything near my eyes." Nina shrugged, "A small collection vial to collect a tear as it rolls down would be much more effective." Daniel nodded slowly, "That would work, but I have never been the type to shed tears and I don't recall shedding a tear since I turned. Even if I stick my head out of the truck while driving my eyes don't water from the wind. My pain tolerance is also extremely high, so that won't work either." Nicky tilted her head while regarding Daniel before turning to me, "I say we tickle him until he cries for mercy." I snorted in amusement. How she planned to win that match was beyond me. Nicky shook her head as she dismissed the idea, "Nah, he might just kill me if I attempted that." Nicky eyed me up instead, "I don't suppose you are ticklish..." Oh no you don't... I shook my head and lied, "No, I lost that when I turned. Don't even bother coming after me, all I need is a glimpse of light for my eyes to water." One glance at Nina showed that my attempt to dissuade Nicky had leaked some rather unfortunate information that Nina found very interesting. Crap. Me and my big mouth. Nina took a few steps closer, "Would you possibly consider doing it? It could very well be quite important in our research." She was tentative, but her hope and curiosity came through plainly in her scent. I looked at her with misgivings and spoke reluctantly, "The problem isn't getting my eyes to water. They are quite sensitive to light. The biggest problem is that if the light is bright enough to make my eyes water, then it is bright enough to partially blind me due to pain. Between the pain and inability to see, there is quite a high chance of me striking out at anyone who comes near me until my eyes recover. You saw how that feral reacted to light." Daniel growled lightly and Nina winced at the memory. Nicky leaned back in her chair and seemed oddly serious, "If you are serious about trying, I can guard you. I can even use the vial to catch the tears as they roll from under your sunglasses since you won't be able to see them in a mirror. I am not sure if you trust me enough to attempt that though." I was not in favor of her potential plan. This kind of chore was the one I would rather push onto Daniel, although chances of Daniel managing to shed a tear were slim to none. Even grief often did not allow tears to come as a zombie. He might find a way. If it wasn't for bright lights, my eyes had never watered since I turned. Light that bright hurt like hell too. I did not want to do this and did not intend to even attempt it. I opened my mouth to decline when a memory of my sister came to mind and I closed my mouth with a headshake and a low growl as I suddenly became conflicted. The memory of her sitting beside our parent's graves afflicted my decision and undermined my resolution. She had been silently crying as she put new flowers by their tombstones. I had hugged her and we had sat in silence before she had whispered, "Tears are the price we pay for love. You cannot cry over something you do not care about."

I gritted my teeth, why did I have to remember this now of all times? My grief hadn't really faded much in eight months and it roused my instincts. They made me more agitated and unpredictable. I had always been the more fierce one, the one always getting into fights with bullies. She had been the one who was all smiles, the one who helped anyone she could. I beat up the ones who tried to take unfair advantage of her generosity. I knew that she would have urged me to try if she had been here. I exhaled gustily as I tried to rein in my conflicted emotions. The others were watching me, they didn't seem that surprised that I seemed divided on the subject, although they had no clue just what debate was raging in my mind. They most likely thought that I was trying to work though my lack of trust with them if I was blinded. If I was blinded, I was vulnerable. Zombies did not like being vulnerable, for that matter, most humans hated being vulnerable as well. Even when Luke had lost his sight for that slight second, it had put him off balance. Allowing someone near, and touching me yet, was a completely different level. Even when Kelly's sunglasses had come loose during our wrestling match, I had simply handed her the sunglasses. I would not have attempted to put them on her face. I doubted I could let someone near my face if I was blinded. Nicky was right about one thing though, if I tried to use the vial myself, chances were that I would miss more tears than would go into that little glass tube. Daniel and Nina were completely out of the question. Luke wasn't an option either, I got along well enough with him, but my instincts would not tolerate the Runner so close to my face while I was blinded. Now I just realized that I am debating the how instead of if I should. How the hell did that happen? I shook my head to recollect my whirling thoughts. The person that no one in this entire place trusted was the one that actually had the best chance of approaching me without getting slashed. Nicky. For as crazy as she could get sometimes, she was loyal to the core. My instincts had not considered her a threat for quite some time now. The controlex had rendered humans a non-entity, which should make things easier, at least in theory. The biggest thing was that I trusted her. I had trusted her enough weeks ago to let her put that stupid dandelion crown on my head. Would I be able to tolerate her proximity if I was blinded? I honestly wasn't sure. Light blinded Nightstalkers were not exactly rational, even if they were sane. There was a chance I could lash out at her as an automatic reaction, like when people jump when someone sneaks up on them and yells 'boo'. I finally looked at Nicky and spoke quietly, "I am not entirely sure you will be able to get close to me if I get light blinded. I will be reacting more than I will be thinking." Nicky nodded slowly, "I am pretty sure I will be able to tell if I can touch you safely. Just give a good snarl and I will back up." I gave her a level look, "You do realize that you could get slashed, right? You aren't fast enough to dodge such a strike either." Nicky shrugged, "I am willing to take the chance. I doubt you will actually kill me." Nina started digging around in a drawer and pulled out a handful of small vials that were individually sealed in sterile packets. She started to open one and I spoke, "Let Nicky open them, otherwise your scent will be on them." Nina looked startled, but nodded in sudden understanding and passed three packets to Nicky. Nicky glanced at me, "Anything I need to do or should know before we attempt this?" I moved my gaze to Nina and Daniel, "It would be easier if you left the room for a while." Nina looked sad, but nodded as she got up to leave. Daniel wasn't surprised, he knew that his presence was always an irritant to my instincts. He left the room with Nina and closed the door behind him. That left me with Nicky.

She looked at me, "Are you sure you want to do this? You don't have to let them pressure you into if you don't want to." I exhaled gustily, "Part of me doesn't want to, but another part of me has its reasons." Nicky nodded in understanding, but didn't pry. I got up and moved to a bench in the far corner. My instincts would be less worked up if they knew that my back was protected. "You might be better off sitting beside me. It might be easier for me than if you approached afterwards." Nicky took a seat beside me and finished unwrapping the vials. The extra bright fluorescent lights above provided plenty of light for working with microscope slides. This was going to be hell. I rolled my shoulders, I was not looking forward to this. I looked up at the lights as I reached up towards my welding glasses and my muscles tensed at the expected pain. Here goes nothing... Light lanced painfully through my half closed eyes. I snarled and closed my eyes tightly as my fists clenched. My instincts flared and heat rolled through my blood as my heartbeat surged. Light was the worst method of torture ever invented for a Nightstalker. Even the deep cut on my arm had been less painful. I swiftly put my sunglasses back on as a growl continued to rumble through my chest as a warning to anything that might be within earshot. This was far worse than my tiny glimpse in the very dim light of the boarded up gas station when the bandits took my sunglasses. My eyes watered fiercely and a few tentative blinks only revealed dancing black spots across my vision. I was blinded. My senses swiftly focused on scent and sound. I knew something was beside me and my instincts clamored to land a preemptive strike and take whatever it was by surprise. The rational side of my mind, the human one, remembered who sat beside me even as my nose told me the identity of the potential threat. Anything that could possibly move was a potential threat at this point as far as my instincts were concerned. This was the reason that the feral had attacked even a rolling rock or remote toy car. I fought with my instincts to remain in control and not lash out in reaction. It was like trying to control yourself in the middle of the worst fit of rage you ever had while you were still furious. Being light blinded was far worse than when Nina had torn that scab off of my shoulder. A Nightstalker was built to be able to clearly see during the darkest night and in the deepest caves, the pain that the bright fluorescent lights caused simply had no comparison unless you counted the pain caused by sunlight. I was breathing heavily, but slowly sat up straighter as I got the upper hand on my instincts. Now for the hard part. Nicky somehow intuitively recognized me sitting up as her chance to catch the tears that were leaking below my sunglasses. "Easy... I am going to touch your face. It is just me, honest I won't hurt you." Her voice was very soft and soothing, although it did little in my current state. She must have taken notes from her own counselling sessions. My growl deepened as I heard the rustle of her clothing as she leaned towards me. It was all I could do to not lash out at her. The smell of her breath was easy to pick up and allowed me to ensure that it was indeed Nicky and not someone else who was so close to me. My eyes blinked furiously and were starting to clear, but everything around me was just fuzzy outlines. I tensed as something came into my view, close to my face. I grabbed my knees with each hand to avoid striking out at the one reaching towards me. A touch of cold against my cheek made me jerk my face away in an automatic reaction, like when someone puts a snowball down the back of your shirt. I snarled lightly as I fought for control. My head slowly turned back to where Nicky could see it. I could see better now, although my eyes were still watering. I felt the glass once more touch my cheek, but managed to hold still. My low growling still resonated around the room. My instincts were still extremely high and I felt like striking out at something just to vent. A few moments later something approached the other side of my vision. My muscles tensed as a second vial touched my other cheek. I was still blinking rapidly to try to bring the world around me back into focus. My sight slowly recovered over several minutes and my eyes stopped watering. My growls had faded into silence as well. I exhaled gustily and Nicky was perceptive enough to know that I was done with this. She slowly pulled her hands back and carefully capped the vials. She leaned back against the wall and simply relaxed while waiting for me. I closed my eyes tightly before lifting my sunglasses up to wipe away the lingering moisture away from my eyes. I ensured that my sunglasses were snug against my face before carefully reopening my eyes. Nicky spoke quietly with a faint grin, "Well, I am alive and even unharmed." I snorted quietly, "You probably just used up your allotment of luck for the year." "Yeah, I know." There was no trace of jest in her voice. At least she knew just how thin the ice had been where she was treading. I shook myself hard as I got to my feet. I could see fairly well now although I was still blinking much more than usual. My irritation was quite pronounced, but I was back in full control at this point. Nicky also got up and followed me as I headed towards the door. I took a quick sniff in the hallway and headed to the room closest to the stairs. Nina and Daniel were watching the door as I entered it, Daniel had obviously heard Nicky's footsteps. I wasn't feeling generous enough at this exact moment to let him hear my footsteps. Nicky went over to Nina to hand her the two small glass vials with the clear liquid inside. Nina looked over at me in concern, "Are you okay?" My snarls would have been easily heard from here and Daniel's hearing was far too sensitive to have missed my growling. I exhaled heavily in irritation, "I'm fine, but I do not want to repeat that again." Blood and saliva were easy and nearly painless to part with. As far as tears went, what I had just done was my contribution limit. If she wanted more, she could torment Daniel. I turned and went out the door, "I am heading to my room for a while." I wasn't in a mood for company and my temper was still on the wrong side of the intent to harm. Nicky also dismissed herself from the lab, "I think I am going to find something safer to do, like juggle butcher knives." I smirked for a split second as I climbed the stairs. Nicky's pace was much slower than mine as she gave me the space that she knew I needed at the moment. For the first time ever, I was grateful that it was such a short distance between the lab and my room. I climbed up the staircase and walked down the hallway without meeting anyone. From the smell, no one had even opened up my bedroom door since I was last here. I locked the door behind me as soon as I closed it. I really did not want anyone to enter. I lowered the blinds and stretched out on my bed as I tried to take a nap. Hopefully it would cool my temper. I still didn't plan to stir from this room until the sun had set.

 

Chapter 85

            Nicky was waiting for me in the hallway before we headed down to breakfast. The night had been quiet and nothing had disturbed my patrol. My mood was back to normal and my eyes had fully recovered. Nicky chattered about the game of archery she had won. "I managed to hit the bull's eye ten times in a row!" I sensed more than a bit of exaggeration in her story and my instincts also doubted her tall tale since she had never hit the bull's eyes twice in a row before, let alone ten times. The round and even number was also suspicious. I took a sniff and declared, "Liar." She looked at me with wide eyes, "What do you mean?" I smirked, "When you lie, it shows in your scent. Especially with such an unbelievable story." Her jaw dropped, "You don't believe me?!" I gave her an ironic look, "Have you ever hit the bull's eye even ten times in one night? Or three times in a row when I was around?" She chuckled and shook her head, "You just had to bring logic into it, didn't you? The real story is far less exciting. Oh, and don't believe Ben if he tells you that I almost ended up shooting him." "Why on earth did Ben come between you and your target?" Nicky ducked her head, "Ummm... My arrow kind of ricocheted off the edge of the target and almost hit him four lanes away as he was pulling his own arrows out of the target." That sounded like something that was only possible with my luck. A second sniff told me that this tale was the truth. I shook my head, "Ben is going to be convinced that you are out to get him, although even he can't claim that you were skilled enough to purposely make that shot." Nicky sighed, "Yeah, that was what the immediate consensus came out to." I went to sit at my usual place while Nicky grabbed her breakfast. We must be a bit later than usual because Nina and Daniel were already at the table. I wasn't sure whom they had sat with before I came along, but if they came into the dining area, they were guaranteed to sit at what had become my table. Nina nibbled on some toast, "How are you doing this morning?" She still reminded me of a mother hen on some levels. I shrugged, "About average." "I assume you plan on taking Luke some breakfast? I can't see not offering him something even though I am pretty sure he isn't going to want to eat." I nodded, "I plan to grab a few things before heading out to see him." Nina nodded, "When you come back, can you come find me? Apparently that cold has spread quite a bit while we were gone and some are worried that they are infected. We are pretty sure it is just a cold and I would prefer to conserve the chemicals since your nose works better than my tests do. Daniel did take a quick sniff, but didn't detect anything. We want to play it safe since we are just weeks away from when the third wave should start appearing." That sounded easy enough. I did recall several people starting to sneeze just before we left. It made me glad that I could no longer catch a cold. "Can do." "Thanks." Nina went back to eating as Nicky sat down with a yawn. Breakfast included a fair bit of gossip, but it sounded like nothing had really changed while we were gone. During our absence someone had the audacity to say that he kind of missed Nicky's off the wall craziness and apparently he had been dunked in the horse's water trough for that comment. I pitied the horses that had to drink that water. I took a paper plate and wrapped it up before heading out the gate on foot. Luke's scent crossed the trail here and there in several spots. He must have been exploring at night. My footsteps were fairly loud as I approached the clearing. I wasn't entirely sure he was there at the moment, but it was a good place to check.

Two dead rabbits lay on the table, probably waiting for me to take them back to the Stronghold. The noise of a hammer and chisel told me that Luke had not heard my approach above his attempts to literally raise the roof. That was one perk of being short, I rarely had to duck. I paused outside the entrance and waited. It wasn't long before Luke picked up my scent and the pounding stopped. I moved away from the entrance to sit at the picnic table where I had left the plate. Luke came out of the cave covered in rock chips and dust. I greeted him, "So, how are the renovations going?" He shrugged, "It will keep me occupied for quite some time at this rate. If I can move into the Stronghold, then it should be just about done for the next occupant." "So you have decided that you want to move in if it is safe for the humans?" Luke nodded, "Your instincts tend to make you a loner, but Runners prefer to congregate with others. I was quite social when I was human and I miss having company. It will take a bit to get used to crowds once again, but I am sure I will manage one way or another." As a Runner, he actually had a better chance of tolerating crowds than I ever would. Feral Runners often hung around other Runners or mindless zombies, so the idea of having others around them wasn't troublesome to their instincts. They just had an obsession of knowing where they were in the local hierarchy. I gestured towards the plate, "I doubt you want it, but I brought some food in case you were hungry." Luke came forward and took a few sniffs before shaking his head, "You would be correct. I don't really want to eat it. It does smell good, but I have no desire to put it in my mouth." I nodded, "If the controlex hits you like it did me, you aren't going to want anything to do with actual food again. You will be hunting more though." Luke looked at the two rabbits, "I did notice that part already." He sat across from me to visit, "Nina gave me notes on how the controlex affected you and my symptoms are almost exactly the same. Mine are somewhat milder though." "How are you doing?" He sighed, "It isn't fun, but it isn't as bad as I was fearing. The headache is the most annoying part." We visited for a while before parting ways. I could tell that Luke didn't particularly want company at the moment and with me being a Nightstalker, my presence would make him uneasy while he was experiencing these symptoms. I dropped the rabbits off with the butchers and went off to find Nina. Predictably, she was in the lab. Daniel was absent, which was a noteworthy occasion. She smiled, "Ready to go reassure some paranoid people?" Not really. I shrugged, "Sure." If they were paranoid about being infected, I failed to see how the presence of another zombie was going to make them feel better. I followed Nina back outside. I heard someone sneezing in the garage long before we saw him. The man saw us and looked relieved. He was wearing a face mask as a precaution. Nina and I stopped when we were about ten feet from him. I took a deep breath and the smell of the garage, gasoline, and oil was revolting. The man's scent only held the scent of the cold that was going around. "It is just a cold." The man looked surprised, "You can smell it from there?" I shrugged, "As easily as I can smell the deer jerky you are carrying." He grinned in relief, "Thank you so much. That is a relief. I will keep the mask on just to prevent spreading this nasty thing around." Nina nodded, "Good plan. We will go check on the others."

I turned to follow Nina, "If the others are in a garage or other smelly place, let's have them come outside into fresh air. If you can smell it, then imagine how much more I pick it up." "Oh, sorry. I didn't even think of that. Most of the others should be outside though." It took us almost an hour to find every person. All of them simply had the cold and nowhere did I detect the tang of the zombie virus, apart from Daniel's scent. I could faintly smell Luke from here as well so the wind must be coming from that direction. Nina may have called them paranoid, they were mostly worried about being infected. Not one of them had any problem with my presence, and most were glad to see me. Probably because I told them that it was just a cold. When we were alone I commented to Nina, "They did not seem at all concerned that I could somehow infect them." I was a zombie and the virus ran through my blood by default. Nina shook her head, "Once someone turns, it really takes direct saliva or blood contact to a wound, eyes, or mouth to infect someone. Zombies rarely sweat, but the virus is not present in your sweat or in the oils on your skin. Your tears also do not carry the virus, which is really interesting. Besides, they all know that zombies aren't much for contact to start with, so there isn't anything to really worry about." Their rationality, mentality, and general happiness to see me still baffled me. Who in their right mind was happy to see a zombie? I was seriously beginning to wonder if the water in this place was drugged with something. Perhaps Valium, Xanax, or some other happy drug. Nicky would probably know more about them than I would. Nina continued talking, interrupting my pessimistic thoughts, "I am glad that no one was infected, although I didn't think they would be since they weren't sneezing often enough. I am very glad that the zombie virus cannot survive air contact for more than a few seconds, so we don't have to worry about residues or something on the fruits and vegetables. The sneezing is just worrisome since we are only about two weeks away from when the first cases of the third wave should start appearing. It is very bad timing." "I assume the other locations are well prepared for this from your previous comments?" Nina nodded, "Yes, we expect that the wave will last about a week or two. Many places are having people wear face masks for that entire duration. It is only a few weeks after all, and it will hopefully end the airborne strain of the virus. People are more than willing to wear the masks before and after that timeframe just to ensure both their safety and the safety of those around them. The airborne strain can last up to a minute in the air before it dies." I played the devil's advocate, "All it takes is a few people to not cover their sneezes." "Yes, but they are only contagious for a few days and those around them simply need to cover their own mouth and nose with a cloth or mask for about a minute if someone sneezes. We are aware of the danger a sneeze can pose now, so we are well ahead of it. Unless the infected person sneezes directly in someone's face, they have several seconds to hold their breath and cover their mouth with a cloth. A few minutes later, the air is safe again. At least until they sneeze again. How is Luke doing?" I shrugged at the sudden topic change, "He said the symptoms were in line with what I went through, just not quite as severe." Nina nodded thoughtfully, "I suspect that is because he is a Runner. I would like to ask for a blood sample, but it has been less than 24 hours and I don't think he would do well with me that close to him." "You would very likely be correct." At least she was being thoughtful despite her drive to learn and observe. I didn't know how to take blood and I somehow doubted that Daniel did either. He simply pinned the ferals if Nina needed blood from them. Nina looked disappointed, but didn't seem surprised. "I am going to head to the lab and keep working. The last set of blood samples should be ready for analysis." I tilted my head in consideration, "If I happened to know the design of a particular rabbit housing setup that allowed zombies to maintain it without scaring the animals, what would be the odds of convincing a small group to build it outside of the fence?" Nina looked confused, "I thought that there was a rather large surplus of wild rabbits in the surrounding area?" "There are, but Runners are not fast enough to catch a rabbit without traps and some really like the idea of a hobby farm. Luke went into so much detail that I know that this is something he wants to build one day." I knew it was somewhat underhanded and evil since it would tempt him to remain, but I also knew that it was something that Luke had dreamed of from the single-minded way he had gone on and on about every little freaking detail right down to proper angle to hammer in nails while we were working. A slow grin spread over Nina's face as she caught on, "Speak with Josh in the carpentry group and give him the plans. We don't have any meat rabbits here since there are so many wild ones, but I will put word in with our traders to get us some. How many would be good to start with?" Luke had gone over this detail four times, so I knew the answer, "Two bucks and four does of different bloodlines." Nina nodded and headed off. I decided to delay my nap to go in search of this Josh person. It didn't take me long to find him. In the end it took us an hour to draw up the blueprints with all of the tiny details that Luke had managed to unintentionally lodge in my mind. I hadn't realized just how much Luke had told me until Josh started asking questions. Josh seemed amused to be building a shed designed for rabbits that accommodated a zombie caretaker. He planned to use a few of the ideas for some of the other animals since it reduced the workload. He sat across the table so as not to crowd me while we sketched and made careful notes on a diagram. Josh nodded in satisfaction, "A bit complicated, but the fact that we know exactly what we want actually makes it easier since we aren't guessing about personal preference. I hear that Runner might try to move into the Stronghold in about two days' time, so I will round up the lads and lasses who have too much time on their hands and we will make him the best house warming or welcome gift he has ever had." "Thank you." Josh grinned at me, "No, thank you. We like to make you sane zombies feel at home. Between you zombies keeping them ferals at bay and helping Nina with her research, it is the least we can do. If you ever want anything built, just let us know." And right on cue, here was another person who thought that sane zombies were the best thing since sliced bread. Their hospitality couldn't be beat, but I still found it a bit weird. "I will keep that in mind. Thank you." He nodded and started tallying up how much wood, mesh, and supplies they would need. I left the room and made my escape. I had enough time to nap for a few hours before supper so I headed for my room.

 

Chapter 86


 The chain lock on my door twanged and I snorted as Nicky bumped her head on the suddenly stationary door. I had heard her pop the doorknob lock, so I wasn't exactly surprised when the door opened. "Hey! When did you install a lock?!" "This morning." "Why?" "Guess..." "Oh! I bet it is to keep the cleaning staff out! Yeah, they bother me too since they always move my pillows. I don't care about the blankets, but I carefully rumple those pillows. The cleaning staff remind me far too much of the nurses in the psychiatric ward when I was in there for a few weeks. Can you unlock the door?" With a heavy sigh I got up off the bed to unlock the chain. The cleaning staff had asked once if they wanted me to let them clean my room and I had told them no. They said to let them know if I changed my mind and had never inquired since. They had certainly never picked the lock on my door. Only one person ever did that. Nicky bounded into my room and took her usual seat on the corner of my bed. She reached out and wiped some dust off of the corner of my dresser, "No wonder you have to lock the door to keep the cleaning staff out. Maybe you should consider doing a bit of dusting in here..." I snorted, "Dust is what gives a home that warm and fuzzy feeling." The smell of cleaning chemicals had been potent as a human and they were far worse as a zombie. A water dampened rag was about all I would ever use to dust, besides, dusting was at the very bottom of the fun chores list. If I couldn't write my name in it, then it was fine. A light brown dresser just let me put off that dreaded task that much longer. Nicky chuckled and shook her head, "It is almost time for supper, so I thought I would come find you. Did you hear about Nina's breakthrough." "No, I didn't. Did she turn Daniel into a frog?" "I think the frog thing is more along the line of witches, not scientists... So no. He is still running around on two feet with black socks. I haven't forgotten about those shoes or socks either... Oh, if I kissed a frog, do you think it would turn into a prince?!" Oh boy... What kind of sugar did she get into this time? "For all you know it was a frog prince and you would turn into a frog instead. Then the two of you could rule over the swampy pond together." "Eww! I don't wanna kiss no frog lips!" "If you kissed him to turn him into a human prince, then you would still have to kiss his lips while he was a frog the first time..." "Well I changed my mind. I don't want to be known as the princess who was so desperate for a date that she kissed an amphibian." "So why exactly are you in my room anyways?" "Nina is amazed that you let me in here without killing me. Supposedly Nightstalkers are supposed to be quite territorial about their dens. The one that Daniel first met couldn't even stand him coming near the cave entrance. That is why neither of them have ever come to your door." That explained why they had never bothered me in my room before. "There is a reason for the lock on the door. But that still does not answer my question." I did wonder which cave that Nightstalker had stayed in. Daniel hadn't known about the one that Luke was currently residing in until I found it, so it must have been a different one. Possibly that really narrow one closer to the border. I could see a Nightstalker preferring to put more space between herself and Daniel if she was a bit on the wilder side.

"Oh yeah. Nina is grabbing me a plate and will meet us on the roof. She thinks she made a vaccine, it doesn't always work though." I looked at Nicky in surprise, "Seriously?" She nodded, "Yes, she says she has a lot more testing and tweaking to do though. So those tears you shed certainly did not go to waste. This vaccine prototype did prevent the zombie virus from taking hold in most of the blood samples she tested." Shit. That is the biggest breakthrough since the zombies first appeared... Impressive, but if this place turns into a roaring hub of activity as people flock here for the vaccine I will not be impressed. I might be joining Luke in that cave. I leaned against the wall and crossed my arms, "And what other news might be kicking around this place that I may have not heard?" Curiosity may have killed the cat, but I tended to find that a healthy curiosity only managed to kill ignorance. Well, I called it curiosity, everyone else told me that I was just suspicious. They wouldn't even lower their opinion to simply categorize it as being snoopy. Nicky sighed, "Not much really. Luke is the biggest conversation starter at the moment. None of them have seen a sane Runner before, even though they are supposed to be more common. They are excited. So excited, that I heard someone was looking for help building some sort of special rabbit hutch for Luke and he got over fifty volunteers within half an hour." I smirked, "I might be guilty for starting that project. I will have to find out when they decided to start building it tomorrow and go lend a hand." Nicky shook her head, "Nope. Change of plans. They decided to start early and they already have most of the stuff piled up to start it after supper. It was also decided that there will likely be too many people in that tiny area for you. If you want to help keep ferals at bay, go for it or you can go keep Luke company." I huffed as she dismissively tossed my original plan right out the window, but she was probably correct. I wasn't sure how that many people could build a small shed without tripping over one another or whacking one another with a hammer by accident. Nicky continued talking, "Rumor about Louise slipping you that controlex drug is starting to circulate. Let's just say they are right pissed at her right now. If she returns, she is not going to have a warm welcome unless it involves fire. I honestly don't think she is stupid enough to return. If she has any working brain cells, then she will keep running and not stop." I didn't reply to that since I was pretty sure that she wouldn't get out of this place alive if she made the mistake of returning. Nicky stretched and yawned, "Nina sent out letters to quite a few places looking for Luke's brother. Those places are going to push it further afield as well. There can only be so many John McComfry's out there who have a brother called Luke." "That will be something that Luke will be happy to hear." I glanced out my window and saw Nina and Daniel approaching the building with plates, "And there is Nina and Daniel." Nicky tilted her head, "Well, we should head to the roof then. I'm hungry. Besides, I have no idea which idiot designed those staircases, but having to go down to the main floor before we can go to the roof is just plain stupid. Even kids can design treehouses better than that! If we ever meet that guy, I can suggest a few prescription drugs that will probably help him more than they ever helped me." At least someone had the same opinion of how the stairs were arranged. Nicky got to her feet and headed for the door, "If we hurry, we can beat them to the top and grab the best chairs." I raised an eyebrow as I started to follow her, "We have sat in the exact same chairs ever since we arrived." "That is completely beside the point. Daniel might do it just to get revenge."

My eyes narrowed in suspicion, "Why would Daniel want revenge?" "No reason." Her response was far too fast and her tone was too falsely innocent for me to even contemplate the possibility of her innocence. I snorted as I closed the door behind me, "I am sure I will find out soon enough." Nicky chuckled as she descended the stairs, "If I was scared for my life I would have locked myself in your room and raided your backpack for munchies. I know you pack them just for me anyways." I shook my head as I followed her. It didn't surprise me that she had noticed that, but she liked to snack and when she was hungry she tended to get grouchy. We reached the main floor before Nina and Daniel did. Nicky didn't bother to wait for them as she headed for the stairs that led to the roof. I commented, "One day you are going to underestimate him. He is a zombie and sometimes the strangest things can make us snap at someone. You really do have to be careful about how far you push a zombie." Nicky sent an incredulous look over her shoulder, "We are referring to Daniel, right? In theory he is a Terror, but he sure doesn't act like it around humans. You don't have to worry though, I wouldn't pester any other zombie like this. I avoid him if he starts getting worked up since he gets more unpredictable then." We reached the roof and Nicky flopped into her favorite blue chair. I rolled my eyes before taking my customary green chair. I glanced over as the door opened, but as I expected, it was only Nina and Daniel. Daniel didn't look overly upset, so he either had not stumbled across whatever Nicky had done or it hadn't annoyed him too much. Daniel's eyes skipped over me as he focused on Nicky, "So why exactly do you say that I don't act like a zombie?" Shit, I hadn't realized that his hearing was quite that good.  We had been near the top of the three flights of stairs and they had been in the main hallway as the approached the door that led to the staircase when Nicky had said that. Nicky hadn't been whispering though, and noise did tend to carry down staircases, so I really shouldn't be too surprised. Nicky smirked at him, "Tell me, which of your actions are things that a zombie would do? What makes a zombie different from a human?" Daniel blinked in confusion at Nicky's counter question, "I have yet to hear a human growl or snarl." He didn't seem like he knew exactly how to answer Nicky's question. Nina was listening with rapt attention. Nicky rolled her eyes, "I can give you credit for some of those snarls, but you obviously haven't gone to enough anger management sessions if you have never heard someone growl before." Daniel narrowed his eyes slightly, but didn't comment. I watched with growing amusement as he didn't seem to have an answer to her question. Nina realized it too and joined their conversation, "So what makes you consider Trinity as a zombie?" Nicky sent an incredulous look towards me as Nina asked her question, "Am I blind? Why do people not see the things that I see?" I tilted my head as I pretended to consider it, "Well, Daniel still hasn't figured out the soap thing yet and Nina hangs around him most of the time. People here are accustomed to Daniel. Perhaps it is just because you are quite observant and you met me first." Nicky sighed and shook her head, "That must be it. By the way, you sound far too much like my one counselor with that answer that didn't really answer my question." I simply smirked at her response and she snickered, "And that look is one that none of my counselors or therapists ever gave me." Nicky turned to Daniel with a slight frown, "You don't seem as annoyed as I expected you to be. I may not have the suspicious instincts that Trinity has, but it still has some alarm bells ringing." Nina grinned silently as Daniel bared his teeth in mild amusement. I raised an eyebrow in surprise at that expression, I had never seen Daniel do that before. It was more of a zombie action than anything else. Daniel didn't notice my reaction since he was focused on Nicky, "I was at first, but I already got my revenge. You just haven't realized it yet." Nicky looked shocked, "Huh? What did you do?" Daniel simply responded, "You will find out." Considering that subterfuge and subtlety was not Daniel's style, I suspected that Nina had a hand in this one. She must have noticed that the unknown got under Nicky's skin far more than snarling at her ever did. Nicky whined, "That is not fair! You can't leave me hanging like that! What did you do?" Daniel snorted, "You painted my door neon yellow and put a big pink bow on it. So letting you ponder on what I did seems more than fair." "Why are you blaming me for it?!" He gave her a disbelieving look, "My nose may not be as good as Trinity's, but I can still easily pick a scent off of an object and you were the only one to handle that pink bow recently." Nicky lifted her chin, "Did you ever consider that someone might have worn gloves?" "Four people saw you doing it." "Drat." I shook my head. We hadn't even been back for an entire day yet and they were getting on one another's nerves. Leave it to Nicky to annoy Daniel before I managed it. That was quite an achievement considering that I had the upper hand in that department. I decided to change the topic before it got too out of hand and focused on Nina, "What is this I hear about a potential vaccine?" Nina perked up, "We came across a very good lead for a vaccine. We manufactured it from some of the enzymes we found in your tears. I have more tests that should finish tonight and I expect to have more results by tomorrow morning, but we have managed to get it to work in over half of the samples. It is a huge breakthrough." "Any idea why it only works half of the time?" "The most effective variant so far is working in about 70% of the cases. Blood type does seem to be playing a hand in rendering the vaccine ineffective. I hope we can alter it so it is more reliable, but this is still a huge milestone." I was curious, "Can the vaccine also reverse the zombie virus if someone is infected with that three month airborne virus? I have been keeping tabs on the scents, but I still haven't picked up the smell of someone infected and the next wave should start in two weeks. The odds of no one here being infected are quite low, so the fact that I haven't found anyone is making me uneasy." Nina shook her head, "Actually I will be surprised if anyone here is infected. We were here during the second wave and took proper precautions. The only two who started sneezing were wearing face masks and were promptly isolated." I tentatively inquired, "What happened to them?" Her expression turned sad, "They turned into mindless zombies because we hadn't developed anything yet. Their presence saddened everyone so we eventually tied them up in a canoe and sent them downstream." I was silent. Nina shook her head, "But that is in the past, now we at least have a fighting chance." The three started eating their supper silently, lost in thought. Nina and Daniel were probably contemplating the upcoming wave and the research at hand. Nicky kept glancing at Daniel and was likely trying to imagine what he might have done in the name of revenge. Considering Nina had clearly helped Daniel, I suspected that it would be something out of the ordinary.

 

Chapter 87


 Nicky barged into my room for the second time today, "Do you see what he did?!" I slowly blinked at the objects in Nicky's hands as I remained sitting on the edge of my bed, "Well... I hope you like the color pink." Nicky glared at me for my lack of concern as she held up her jacket, shoes, pants, and shirt. All were a very bright shade of hot pink that matched almost perfectly. "Pink is a very fine color, but not in this shade! Why would anyone wear this shade of pink?!" It was a good thing that no one had gone to bed yet or else they surely would have been woken up by Nicky's loud voice. Daniel was probably grinning in his room as he would be able to hear her even from the main floor. I managed to keep a straight face, "At the very least, if you get lost in the forest I will have an easy time finding you." "Me getting lost in the forest with three bloodhound zombies in the area is the least of my concerns." I pretended to not understand, "So what is your concern? You have a matching outfit which is quite unique. I fail to understand why you are so upset over a gift. Imagine all of the work someone had to go through to fix up your clothes so they look brand new." That did it. Nicky dropped her armful of pink belongings and charged towards me, "Oh, you!" I rolled my eyes and suppressed my instincts, although they had seen that she wasn't serious. I didn't even bother getting to my feet, which in the zombie world meant that I didn't even register her as a potential threat. It was also a bit of an insult saying that I didn't think she could harm me if she tried. Nicky jumped in an attempt to tackle me, her fearlessness surprised me. My reflexes were as sharp as ever and I grabbed her wrists before redirecting her flight to land on the bed beside me. I rolled onto my side as she landed on her stomach and pressed my arm across her shoulders to pin her to the mattress. I growled lightly as I put some weight on her shoulders. Nicky understood the faint challenge, "Okay, okay. Uncle, Auntie, I give up, however you want me to word it." I snorted faintly before sitting back up. Nicky rolled over and sat up before leaning against the wall and grinning at me, "Well, that was fun." Perhaps I needed to look up the definition of fun again, but I was pretty sure that jumping at someone and having them pin you in three seconds did not fall into that category. "I fail to see how you found that fun." Nicky just chuckled, "Most people would have given me a death threat or attempted to kick my ass for that. The fact that you tolerate me is fun." Perhaps I needed to pass Nicky the dictionary and make her read the definition of fun... Nicky sighed and regarded the big pile of eye-watering pink things that were desecrating my doorway with their very presence, "What am I going to do with them?" This question I did take seriously since I didn't want her wearing those things while hanging around with me. I contemplated a few options, "Well... You could soak them in bleach water until they came out closer to white or you could see if some of the laundry people have a darker dye available. I can burn them in forest if need be and you can just get new replacements." Nicky grinned, "I say we take them over to Luke's place and burn them in his firepit. If nothing else, it will be one hell of a conversation starter. Those shoes were almost worn out anyways." I glanced out the window, "We have a couple of hours until sunset, so we can go now if you want." The sooner those things were no longer in existence, the better. The color was unfortunately vivid. It was practically fluorescent, it very likely glowed in the dark, and it might even be radioactive. That pile was probably visible from outer space. Last thing we needed to do was to lure in curious aliens who didn't know that such a color was even feasibly possible.

Nicky scooted off my bed and got to her feet, "Sounds like a plan. If Nina were the same size as me, I would sneak them into her closet, but she isn't, so that plan is out." "She would also know exactly who to blame." "True." We left my room and headed down the stairs. A quick sniff told me that Nina was still in the lab while Daniel was in his room. Well, no sense interrupting her progress and concentration. It was a good enough excuse to not invite Nina along on this trip. She would probably tag along tomorrow to check on Luke. 
 
 Luke came out of the cave from where he had still been chipping the ceiling to a height he didn't have to duck. He paused and blinked in surprise as he watched Nicky pile the offending pink objects in his firepit, "Can I ask what you are doing to that poor firepit?" Nicky chuckled and glanced at me, "I told you that he would be more concerned about the firepit than trying to save these things." Luke shook his head and took a seat on another stump. I watched as a tremor ran through his body. He exhaled heavily as it passed and wrote it down in a notebook. He noticed me watching him, "30 hours done, 42 more to go..." "Not that you're counting or anything." He chuckled and shook his head, "Keeping track of it makes me far too aware of exactly how much time has passed. So what brings you out here besides a casual visit?" I glanced pointedly at the pink objects, "You really have to ask?" Nicky looked over her shoulder at us, "The fact that these things have not spontaneously combusted by themselves is a miracle. Now we are going to set them on fire to correct that oversight." Luke shook his head at us, "Feel free to burn them. That color is just making my headache worse." Nicky grinned as she lit a match, "Roger that." Luke watched the flames slowly start to consume the unfortunate pile of cloth. He seemed perplexed about something as Nicky stirred the fire to ensure that every piece had flames touching it. "Where did you manage to find such a color? And why did you even bring it back to the Stronghold?" I looked at Nicky, "I think that you had better explain this one." Nicky continued to stir up the fire, "Well, it all started when I saw a can of paint that was labelled canary yellow and I wondered exactly what kind of shade that was..." 
 The two hours of visiting was fairly relaxing, although Luke was plagued with muscle tremors and times when his sight faded out. He tensed up whenever those hit him. Nicky's scent bothered him as much as ever, so there was no change in that area. Luke was very intrigued by the news of a potential vaccine and asked dozens of questions. I answered the ones I could before shaking my head, "How about I bring Nina out tomorrow morning and you can bombard her with questions?" Luke chuckled at my slightly exasperated tone, "Sounds good." He knew that I didn't know the answers, so I had no clue why he was asking. Nicky looked curious, "Considering that Nina's curiosity drives Trinity crazy, how come you don't seem to mind all of her questions?" Luke turned to Nicky, "I had a degree in chemistry, so I understand a fair bit of what is being said. I also have a scientist's curiosity. I did notice that Nightstalkers don't seem to like being pelted with questions either, it tends to rile them up."

Nicky grinned, "Oh, we noticed that too. Trinity occasionally went out of her way to dodge Nina." Luke shrugged, "I am pretty sure that it is a Nightstalker thing." I rolled my eyes, "How about we pick a different subject?" The sun was currently dipping below the horizon and I knew my slightly higher irritability was due to my strengthening instincts. The fire was burning the green wood well enough. The pink atrocities were long gone, having been reduced to mere ashes and black smoke. The only remnants were the memories which I hoped would soon be forgotten. Nicky swatted another mosquito, "Why can't Nina make a vaccine that makes mosquitoes avoid humans?" Luke shrugged, "That may not even be in the boundaries of science since there are hundreds of species of mosquitoes." She rolled her eyes, "That wasn't what I wanted to hear..." Luke tilted his head, "Well, you could always become a zombie and then the mosquitoes won't bite you." Nicky shook her head at Luke's joke, "I'll pass, the last thing I need is for my mere smile to annoy Daniel even more. My presence already irritates him." Luke looked intrigued, "How does your presence irritate him?" Nicky snickered, "Because I am me. Honest, you will understand one day... If you were really curious, you could even give me a cup of strong coffee." I growled faintly at Nicky, "Don't you dare." I turned to look at Luke, "If you ever give her coffee, you get to deal with her the rest of the day." Luke looked mystified, "You say that like it is almost a threat. I don't see what is so bad about coffee." I snorted, "It is a threat that most in that Stronghold have heard and understand. It isn't the coffee itself that is the problem, it is what it does to Nicky." Luke looked confused, but he was too polite to inquire further. Nicky grinned at him, "Daniel tried to tie me up several times as well as lock me in my room on a few of those occasions. Then I got loose and that really pissed him off." Luke eyed up Nicky in sudden unease, "You intentionally angered a Terror and you seem happy about it?" It looked like Luke was finally beginning to catch on... I wasn't sure how he missed that on our drive up. Perhaps it had been because Daniel was driving and Nicky had been exiled to the truck box. Nicky grinned at his discomfort, "Yep." Luke didn't know how to respond to her enthusiasm for living life on the line. I shook my head before glancing towards the sky as it was rapidly darkening, "Nicky, we should be getting back. I may be able to see where I am walking in the dark, but you may have issues with that." Nicky sighed, "Yeah, I suppose so. I don't fancy meeting a feral in the dark and the guards don't lure them away from the fence at night." I nodded at Luke, "Have a good evening. Feel free to give me a shout if you want some company." Luke waved a farewell, "Will do. Walk safe." "Thanks." The walk to the gate was thankfully uneventful. The quads must have come by recently and lured the zombies away since the gate was clear. I left Nicky there and the guard dropped the usual radio down to me. I turned and went back out into the growing darkness to begin my patrol. I passed by the clearing with the cave, but Luke was inside and from the lack of hammering I suspected that he had gone to bed. My footsteps were silent as I continued on. My footsteps stopped as I noticed something new. I altered my course to approach the new building that was now standing just outside of the fence. The smell of freshly cut wood reassured me that I had not been so blind as to miss this last night. Even though I had never seen it before, I knew exactly what it was and how it would look inside. I approached the small building and undid the sliding bolt on the door as I opened it to check it out. A grin slowly spread across my face as I looked over the gigantic rabbit setup. Every detail I had recalled Luke telling me was present. All that was missing was the rabbits. Luke was going to be in for a shock. For that matter, I was surprised as well. The plans that I had sketched up were the size of a small shed, this building was much larger, but held all of the required details. Food and water could be funneled in from outside through special gravity chutes so the rabbits wouldn't realize he was there. He could even clean the trays without going inside. Rabbits didn't seem to realize that sane zombies were actually zombies until we were within reach of them. They didn't even seem able to pick up our scent for some reason. The rabbits we had released in the barn with the feral Nightstalker hadn't realized that she or I were present and that feral had been in there for days. I left the building and continued with my patrol. Nothing else seemed to have changed since last night, or even since we had left for our eight day trip. I stopped in one of the small abandoned towns near the border and snooped through a few stores. Every place here had been picked over hundreds of times since it was so close to the Stronghold. I doubted that anyone would have taken what I was after though. I found what I was after in a hardware store of all places. It took me five trips, but I left over twenty live animal traps just inside the clearing by Luke's cave. From small ones meant for squirrels to large ones that could trap a coyote. It would allow Luke some variety in what he caught. He was very good at setting snares, but snares didn't allow someone to release the critter for another day if it wasn't wanted. I would just have to remember to occasionally offer to take down a deer or other large animal for him. The air brought me a whiff of a big cat in the distance, which reminded me that I still owed Luke that mountain lion. I would have to ask him when he wanted to collect on it, although I doubted that he would want it this week.

 

Chapter 88


 Daniel drove the truck as close as he could to Luke's cave. He stopped in front of the path Luke and I had cleared the other day. It wasn't wide enough for a vehicle, but it wasn't much of a walk. Nina and Nicky had already eaten so we didn't have to drag food out here. It was a given that Luke wouldn't want anything from the breakfast table. Nina had been excited when I mentioned that Luke was curious about her latest research. She loved discussing it with people. I knew she was hoping to take a peek at Luke's chart of symptoms and hoped to possibly get a blood sample. I was surprised that she had managed to rein in her scientific curiosity this long without asking. The clearing was empty. The sound of hammering gave away Luke's location though. I called out, "Hey Luke, you have company." The hammering stopped, "I will be right out, please make yourselves comfortable." Luke came out a few minutes later with a clean shirt and pair of shorts. He took a seat on a stump close to the picnic table where we sat. Luke looked at me, "I assume I have you to thank for those gifts that mysteriously appeared last night?" "Possibly." He chuckled, "Well thanks, they will come in handy and I will make good use of them." The other three looked confused. Luke noticed and explained, "There were several live traps of various sizes at the edge of the clearing this morning." Nina blinked in surprise, "Oh, well if you need any more just let us know. Some people occasionally go into abandoned towns to raid and we can add it to their list of things to look for." Luke shook his head, "Thank you for the offer, but I have more than enough live traps at the moment. I only have about quarter of them set up. There seems to be plenty of rabbits around for some reason. One even hopped into the cave last night." I suspected that the rabbit hanging from the tree branch by the path might have been that one. Luke took a deep breath as he tested the air and examined us thoughtfully, "Interesting, the bloodlust is greatly reduced. I thought it was a bit less apparent last night, but this is much more noticeable." Nina's eyes lit up, "Really? Mind if I see your notes?" Luke pulled out the notebook and gently tossed it to her. Nina started leafing through the pages before pulling out another notebook. She started cross comparing them and I realized that the second notebook had been from my experience. Nina nodded thoughtfully, "The trend is nearly identical. The symptoms should completely clear up by this evening. Have you noticed anything with your instincts?" Luke shook his head, "Not really. I can see a bit better at night as well as during the day, but nothing like Trinity had noted when she had lost the tint in her vision. I have never seen that tint unless I was quite angry. There is still no desire for human food, although I am hunting more. The haziness in my mind is less bothersome than it usually is. Not sure if it is just a good day or if the drug is impacting it. Now it looks like the bloodlust is disappearing." Nina hesitated before carefully asking, "Would it be possible for me to get a blood sample from you?" Luke stilled at the question. He was likely not sure how far he could trust his control with this newly reduced level of bloodlust. He closed his eyes and took another deep breath as he tested his control. His eyes moved to me, "I am pretty sure I can let her get that close, but would you mind standing near? My instincts are still as aware of you as ever." In other words, my proximity still distracted his instincts since I was potentially a threat. The reason he didn't ask Daniel was because he knew me better and trusted me. The Terror was also so much higher ranking that it would probably put Luke's instincts on the defensive.

I nodded and got up to stand near him. Luke looked back at Nina, "I am willing to try, but if I give a warning, drop everything and back up." Nina nodded and dug through her backpack for the supplies she needed. It didn't escape my notice that Daniel had tensed up and his eyes were now red. I openly eyed up the Terror. Daniel's only real experience with Runners was pinning aggressive ferals, so having Nina approach a sane one while a mostly untested drug was reducing the bloodlust was going to be a learning curve for him. I recalled the original ferals had still reached for humans, but were easily distracted by a rabbit. Luke had hunted last night, so even though he would feel the temptation, his humanity should be able to override it much like I had been able to in the past. I suspected that Luke was just being overly cautious, but considering his previous struggles, I couldn't exactly blame him. Nina slowly approached Luke. He watched her approach as he remained sitting on the stump that had been carved into a chair. Nina readied her needle and Luke turned his head away from her to face me. My stance was relaxed, but watchful. I was close enough and fast enough to intervene if something happened. Luke exhaled slowly as he felt the needle bite into his skin, but otherwise gave no reaction. He didn't even really tense up, although he was breathing through his mouth as a precaution. Nina kept half an eye on him as she took three vials of blood. Once she finished, she backed up, "Thank you so much." Luke turned to look at her, "You are welcome. I would be curious to hear what you find in it." Luke seemed more relaxed now, having managed with fewer problems than he anticipated. Nina nodded, "Certainly. If you ever want to visit the lab and see the equipment, you are free to swing by." Luke watched Nina with a thoughtful expression, "I actually worked in the science field before the first wave, so I do know my way around most of the common lab equipment." Nina perked up, "Really? Can I ask what you did?" "I worked in the vet's office and checked all of the blood samples." The two started listing different types of lab equipment and procedures as they tried to figure out how similar their backgrounds and knowledge were. That fact that they both understood that gibberish was unnerving. I hadn't realized that Luke knew so much about science, but if that had been part of his job, it shouldn't surprise me. I sat back and simply listened to their chattering. Eventually the conversation came back to our current situation. "If you need any help in the lab, I can probably do most of what you went over. The only problem is that I do need space and most labs are often pretty crowded." He sounded as if he actually wanted to volunteer his skills. Nina dismissed his concern with a shrug, "The lab is quite spacious and normally I am the only one in there. Daniel often stops by. Trinity and Nicky pop in occasionally, but other than them, no one has gone down there since Louise left." Luke was cautious once more, "Enclosed spaces trap scent, so I think that this may be best attempted quite cautiously. Especially since we don't know how well this controlex works on Runners." Nina nodded, "Whenever you feel like trying, just let me know. The lab does have a few fans that channel a lot of air out, although we tend to rely on the wind blowing into specially designed ventilation shafts." I broke my silence as I spoke to Luke, "If the controlex is supposed to settle down tonight, then I suggest that we test your control tomorrow so we aren't caught off guard. Then if you are up for it, we can give you a tour of the Stronghold."

I knew he didn't like testing the exact edge of his control because he was scared of harming someone. He would feel terrible if he injured someone, but he really did need to learn exactly how much his control had changed. The offer of going into a Stronghold should be quite tempting. He hadn't dared go into one since he turned and the self-exclusion he imposed upon himself saddened him. I hadn't been too badly bothered by loneliness since I tended to have company appear every month or so, but that was mostly because Nightstalkers preferred to be loners. Runners were more social, especially if they remained sane. Both their instincts and their human mind craved being in groups. Luke hesitated before nodding reluctantly, "As much as I don't want to chance losing control, you have a valid point. I assume you are taking it upon yourself to act as referee?" I nodded, "I can do that. Considering how little trouble you seemed to have letting Nina that close, by the time tomorrow rolls around I don't think you will have any problems unless someone actually touches you. I do advise avoiding the supper hall though." "If I am not eating, then I fail to see why I would go into the supper hall, but I will keep your warning in mind." Talk rolled around our plans for the day. Luke planned to keep working on the ceiling. Apparently he had the end room and most of the hallway done. The rock chips had been collected and used as a base around the firepit just in case a stray ember jumped out. We eventually took our leave. Nina was itching to get back into the lab to work on the vaccine some more. I headed off to do a short patrol just to avoid Nicky in case she decided to tag along with me all day. 
 
 Luke sighed heavily, "Alright, whenever you are ready." He wasn't looking forward to this, but had acknowledged that it was necessary. Luke had agreed far more easily than Nicky had. Nicky glanced at me before walking closer to him. She stopped about three arm lengths away, "How is this? This is about what Trinity was comfortable with before, even with people she didn't know." Luke visibly braced himself and took a deep breath. He relaxed, "Nowhere near as bad as it used to be." "Am I safe to come closer?" Luke nodded and Nicky took slow steps towards the Runner as she tested his control. Nina and Daniel were watching in curiosity. I was closer as I stood guard. I had never seen my bloodlust for humans ever resurface, but if Luke's did, then I would keep both parties safe. Thankfully both trusted me enough in this role. Nicky stopped just a bit too far away to shake hands with him, "And now?" Luke had been breathing normally as she approached and hadn't shown any problems with control. He took a deep breath and tilted his head as he examined Nicky, "Once more it isn't anything serious, but I think that there may be another reason for that." Nicky looked confused, "What reason is that? I didn't put on any perfume or anything." Luke nodded slowly, "I noticed it before, but didn't think much of it. Trinity's scent has partially rubbed off on you. It is slightly off-putting for myself and probably any Runner or regular zombie out there since a Nightstalker outranks us." Nicky thought hard, "I didn't realize that. Could that be why I can piss Daniel off so easily?" Luke chuckled, "It likely has a hand in it. It is just an afterscent, so it isn't overly noticeable unless I get close, but it may cause Runners or regular zombies to hesitate for a second or two if they get this close to you."

"I really don't want to get this close to a feral." "That is a wise decision." Nicky nodded, but got back to our task, "Am I good to try touching your shoulder? Or is this afterscent thing going to cause unexpected reactions?" Luke considered it for a moment, "The afterscent isn't going to affect things and my control isn't giving me any problems. I am pretty sure you are safe to try." Nicky took a deep breath before closing the handful of steps. Luke was watching her as she slowly reached out. I watched Luke's body language intently, ready to intervene with a moment's notice. Nicky's hand was almost touching Luke when the faintest trace of growl escaped Luke. Nicky paused, but Luke shook his head, "Sorry, it is an instinctive reaction against contact. I am not close to lashing out, please keep going. I need to know what will happen if someone comes into contact with me." I took a step closer and both of their eyes flickered to me before focusing on each other. Luke's scent was nervous. He just didn't know what was going to happen and his own emotions were making things harder for him, although he didn't seem to be having any problems with control. It was just the aversion to being touched that all zombies had. Nicky continued on and her hand touched his shoulder. The muscles in Luke's shoulder twitched at the contact, but nothing more happened. Luke exhaled slowly before inhaling. A grin spread across his face, "Well, the last three days were worth it. I can feel the bloodlust, but it is faint. I am fighting more with the fact that you are in my personal space rather than with the bloodlust." I glanced over as Nina approached. Daniel growled faintly at her, but Nina shook her head, "Relax Daniel, I want to see how Luke can handle two humans near him. I won't try to touch him." Daniel gritted his teeth as he remained where he was. He was not impressed with Nina's decision since it put her in possible danger, but he knew that his proximity was not something we wanted at the moment. Nina slowly walked towards Luke. Nicky kept her hand on Luke's shoulder as they watched her approach. Nina stopped right in front of him, "How is this?" Luke took another deep breath, "My control is not in question, although I can feel the bloodlust a bit more." Nina was curious, "Is that due to how Daniel's scent rubbed off on me?" Luke blinked as he considered the scientist in front of him, "Daniel's scent is barely noticeable on you. Trinity's afterscent on Nicky is much more prominent." Daniel came forward a few steps in curiosity, "Why would that be? I am around Nina more often than Nicky is around Trinity." Luke spoke slowly, "A zombie's scent is quite potent and hard to wash off even if you use soap. This includes the afterscent. That is why it is harder for us to mask our scents. Scent rubs off best with contact. Nina's afterscent is probably just from your close proximity over long periods of time, but Nicky's is stronger. She likely comes into contact a lot more with Trinity." Nina nodded in understanding. She thought for a few moments before holding out her hand for a handshake. Daniel tensed up at Nina's change of plans. Luke looked at her hand for a moment before slowly reaching out to gently shake her hand. I watched the interaction carefully. Often if people got mad or had trouble with control their hands clenched into fists. Luke's razor sharp nails would mean that such an action would have painful consequences for Nina if such a thing were to occur. Nina grinned as she took a step back to give him some room. Nicky removed her hand from Luke's shoulder and took a few steps back as well. Nina looked at Luke, "Are you up for a second test?" She was holding a diabetes lance in her hand. I growled a faint warning, "You would be wise to back up before you even consider that." Luke was uneasy, "I think I am in favor of Trinity's idea. I do not believe you realize just how potent the smell of blood is." Nina took one step back and looked at me, "Even if he lunged at me, would you be able to catch him in time?" Daniel snarled lowly and started coming forward. Luke and I watched the agitated Terror uneasily. Nina turned towards him and held up her hand. He stopped with a reluctant growl as he stared at her. She blinked slowly, "I will be safe. This will allow me to know how he will react if someone gets a paper cut when he is nearby." Daniel shook his head as he growled in frustration, but he backed up. He was clearly not happy with this, but was letting Nina continue. Nina turned back to me, "Well?" I was now certain that Nina, and not Nicky, was the insane one here. Playing with fresh human blood just out of arm's reach from a Runner was not a wise thing to do, even if it was a carefully arranged test. I sighed heavily as I realized that Nina wasn't about to be dissuaded, "Yes." Nina held up the lance and pricked her finger. A small drop of blood beaded up. Luke watched and took a careful breath before relaxing marginally, "It isn't even as bad as having you across the fire from me when I was downwind that first evening." Nina grinned, "I was pretty sure that Trinity wouldn't need to intervene. Feel like a tour of the Stronghold?" That caught Luke's interest and he smiled, "I would really like that." We headed towards the truck.

 

Chapter 89

            Luke was looking everywhere in interest as we ended the tour. Others also watched him in curiosity, but they were mindful to give him space. Luke hadn't shown any signs of discomfort or tension, which was surprising considering that he hadn't been around groups of people since he turned. Nina asked, "There are several rooms in the secondary building open if you like. Each of the three floors has an empty room or two. The rooms are all the same. Daniel and I are on the main floor and Trinity is on the second floor. Do you have a preference as to which floor you wish to be on? You can always move later as well." I smirked slightly. I knew that the main floor was not even on Luke's radar with Daniel down there. Luke scratched his head as he looked at me, "Mind if I stay on the same floor as you?" We had managed to share my cabin for several weeks without snarling at one another, so I didn't see any issue with it. Both rooms beside mine were occupied, so I knew he wouldn't be right next door. That would make things easier on my instincts as well as on his. I shrugged, "Fine by me, just keep in mind that Nicky is also on that floor and some mornings are louder than others." Luke turned back to Nina, "If I could get a room on the second floor, I would appreciate it. If there is more than one empty room, then I would prefer whichever one is further from hers. The stuff in the cave can remain there for anyone else who wants to stay there." Nina nodded happily, "Certainly. Let's just go drop word with a few bored people. I am sure we will have several volunteers if we ask for help moving things into your new room." "I wouldn't want to impose on them. I can move things myself if I am shown where they are stored." Nina nodded, but didn't reply. I knew that she or Daniel would manage it without Luke realizing it. We rounded a corner as we headed towards the main area. I now saw why we hadn't seen that many people for a while. They were all waiting here. Luke looked at the large crowd and for the first time seemed a bit uneasy, probably since they were clearly waiting for him. Josh came forward with a friendly grin for Luke, "I hope you enjoyed your tour." Luke slowly blinked his red eyes at the relaxed human and courteously responded, "I did, thank you. It seems very well set up from what I have seen." "May I ask if you plan to stay? Things tend to be safer when there are sane zombies around if a feral shows up." Luke nodded slowly, "I am hoping to stay here." He was just as taken aback with their welcoming demeanor as I had been. He also wasn't sure why such a crowd had gathered as if expecting some sort of showdown to occur. Perhaps he was guessing that they were about to kick him out. The old carpenter grinned, "Glad to hear it. If you encounter any difficulties or need anything, just come find me. I am usually in the wood shop. Oh, did any of these friends of yours mention your house warming gift?" Luke was caught off guard, "Uh... No they didn't. You didn't have to go to the trouble of getting me anything..." Josh chuckled, "Everyone deserves a home warming gift of some sort. It is this way." Josh started ambling toward the one gate. Luke was still somewhat in shock as he watched him go. I chuckled and walked up beside Luke, "I am pretty sure that he intended you to follow him." My proximity and my words brought him out of his stunned trance. He shook his head to clear it and started heading after Josh. The rest of us followed them in anticipation. Luke was a bit confused as we went past the gate, but continued to walk beside Josh at a comfortable - for Luke - distance.

He didn't seem to realize that there was anything out of the ordinary with the shed until we got closer. He froze in stunned disbelief. Josh chuckled at his reaction, "Perhaps my eyes are just old, but one can appreciate it much better if they get closer." Luke shook himself out of his daze and walked forward swiftly with eyes that were glowing slightly in his building excitement. He walked around the shed with wide eyes before opening up the door. He stood there silently in shock before slowly walking inside. It looked like almost everyone in the Stronghold had followed us out here. Many were grinning at Luke's astonishment. Luke appeared in the doorway again with a huge grin on his face. To say that he was thrilled was an understatement. He was completely ecstatic.  I had never seen someone get so excited over a shed before. He came back over and looked at Josh, "Thank you so much!" Josh chuckled, "Now there is a reaction I can appreciate. I don't think I have seen anyone so happy in a very long time. There may be hope for this world yet." Luke transferred his gaze to me, "Now why do I suspect that you had a hand in this?" I smirked, "Well, you either had a mindreading stalker, talked in your sleep, or I might have commented that this place lacked a rabbitry." He grinned at me, "And mysteriously a rabbitry gets set up when it was plainly built with zombies in mind? I may be a Runner, but I am not that slow of wit." "Okay, I may have mentioned a detail or two..." Luke snorted and shook his head, but he was still over the moon. I had kind of thought that he would react like this. Nina added, "The rabbits are due here later this week." Luke was clearly once more shocked. The poor guy just kept getting blindsided with surprises. "Thank you so much. This really means a lot to me." Nina smiled, "We just want you to feel at home. This Stronghold can be your home for as long as you want. There will always be a place here for you." Luke was speechless. If he hadn't been a zombie, he might have even shed a few tears. For a friendly and outgoing person like Luke, to be openly accepted and welcomed even though he was a red eyed zombie meant more than most people could have possibly imagined. His voice was soft, "Thank you." Some people started cheering and it soon spread as others began clapping or cheering a welcome. Luke gazed around in astonishment. The observing crowd slowly broke up and headed back to whatever they had been doing. It left just the five of us standing there. I sniffed the air, "It is just about time for lunch. Feel like hanging out with us as they eat?" Luke nodded slowly, "Sure." We all headed back inside the fence, although Luke kept glancing back at this rabbit shed as if to make sure that it hadn't just been a mirage. I wasn't about to tell Nina, but chances were that he would not leave at this point unless something really infuriated him. They were looking for his brother in places that Luke could not easily go and he was welcomed here. That acceptance was a huge thing for him. Besides, Luke wasn't really the kind of person who liked unceasing traveling. The word 'home' was an important one to him and it wasn't something he had since he turned. This was a huge game changer for him. 
 
 Nicky moved a chair to the end of the table and let Luke sit beside me. She somehow defied the laws of logic, common sense, and self-preservation as she looked completely relaxed as she sat between Daniel and Luke. I clearly recalled that Louise had been quite uneasy just sitting between Daniel and Nicky.

The two women ate while the rest of us just took a water. Luke and Nina were jabbering about sciency stuff and I didn't even know what some of the words were. Parts of their conversation were like listening to someone read off everything on an ingredients label. We looked up as two men came to stand tentatively near our table while they waited for a break in the conversation. I recognized the one man as one of the people on the main council that helped run this place. He spoke, "Sorry to interrupt your lunch. Nina, Daniel, when you are done, could you swing by the main office. There is quite an important meeting about to start and I apologize for the late notice." Nina nodded, "Certainly. What time do you want to start? I can leave now if need be." He shook his head, "Don't rush, we will start once we are all present." The two of them turned and headed towards another person that was also supposed to attend. Considering how the man had glanced at Daniel, he was not about to suggest that Nina interrupt her meal for a hastily arranged meeting. Such a suggestion probably would have annoyed Daniel and an annoyed Terror was not something you wanted in a meeting room. Nina glanced between Luke, Nicky and I, "I hate to just disappear on you, but it has to be a pretty important meeting for us to drop everything." I shrugged, "Things happen." Nicky grinned, "I bet we can make things happen too. Especially when we know that Nina and Daniel are preoccupied in a meeting for some time." Daniel growled a warning as his eyes flashed red, "You cause any trouble or get into any mischief and every speck of clothing in your wardrobe will become bright pink." Nicky wasn't bothered by Daniel's growl and simply grinned at him, "You really need to come up with better threats, you know that right?" A second growl from Daniel was her answer. I decided to intervene, "Nicky you can't tell him when you plan these things. You have to attempt it when they don't expect it. We should probably help Luke move into his new room anyways. Maybe he will let you paint his door." Nicky perked up, "I saw a can of Persian green on the shelf that the yellow came from. Can I use that?" "That is Luke's call." Luke glanced at me in confusion, "I don't even know how bad of a color it is..." I tilted my head, "If I recall correctly, it is a cross between green, cyan and seafoam. It can come in darker or lighter shades as well." Luke still looked confused, apparently painting had never been a hobby for him, "Is it going to give me a headache or remind me of puke?" "No and no." Luke sighed, "Fine, Nicky can paint my door. I don't even know what color it currently is, so it isn't any loss on my part." Nicky chuckled, "Unless I am mistaken, it is currently a dirty white." I prayed that Nicky didn't try to paint my door. Wherever she was finding these cans, they had obviously been put there due to their rather uncommon coloration. We left the dining hall. Nina and Daniel headed to wherever the meeting was usually held while I accompanied Nicky and Luke as we went to locate his room to see what it currently held. Luke was quite taken with the small room. It was about as big as mine, so it barely held a single bed and a dresser. The bed and dresser were already present and from the lack of dust they had been hauled up here sometime during the last day or so. The faint traces of that scent killing sanitizer meant that someone, likely Nina, had been thoughtful enough to ensure that there were not many lingering traces of human scent on the items they had packed up here. I suspected that each empty room had been similarly prepped in case Luke chose that one. "Well, it looks like we don't have to bring anything up." Luke had a valid point. There was even a new toothbrush and toothpaste still in the package on the dresser. Nicky hadn't entered the room and simply stood outside the doorway, "Well, I still call dibs on painting the door." The white door had seen better days, so a coat of paint might actually be a good idea. I nodded, "Go find that green color and you can get started. I will show Luke around the building." Nicky disappeared without a word, eager to get her hands on coloring implements. That lady really should have been a painter or an artist. I showed Luke the three floors, the showers and washrooms, as well as the three different staircases. Luke looked perplexed, "Just why are there three separate staircases?" "Not a clue." We passed Nicky in the hallway. She had a sad face, "Houston, we have a problem." We stopped and I cautiously inquired, "What kind of problem?" Nicky sighed as she turned the can of paint upside down and some green specks floated gently down, "This paint is drier than a popcorn fart. It was the only can in that color too. I will have to go find another can that won't cause my imminent death. I think I saw a blue in there somewhere." Luke inquired, "Do you need help?" Nicky thought for a moment before nodding, "Yeah, you better tag along since it is your door. Some of those paint names left me clueless. What freaking color is Endorsement Deal supposed to be? Or Happy Ending? Or Fairy Bell? Honestly, who named these colors?! I think they must have been the ones who stole my medication." Luke was starting to look kind of worried. I shook my head, "How about we open the cans up and take a look?" Nicky led us to a rather rickety looking shed that sported shelf upon shelf of dented and mismatched cans. I had no idea what half of the colors were by simply reading the names. Nicky passed me a can and my strong nails allowed me to peel the lid off. Nicky peered in and shook her head, "Even I wouldn't use that color." A dozen cans later we found a turquoise color that Luke liked and Nicky headed off with that instead.

 

Chapter 90


 I took a deep breath, "Nicky... I thought you were only going to paint Luke's door?" Nicky was unrepentant, "I never said that. Besides, when I took that can of paint back, this one literally fell off the shelf and into my hands. I couldn't pass it up. Then a smaller can hit me in the head so I had to take that one too. Then I grabbed a few more." "And you just had to pick my door?" Nicky was far too happy about her accomplishment, "Of course! It just suited you perfectly! Inspiration struck!" Inspiration struck indeed. How she had managed to pull this one off in so little time had me baffled. Luke looked amused, "Well, she does have a point. It suits you perfectly." I crossed my arms as I regarded the new paintjob on my door. She had managed a rather detailed sun and moon scene. Half of my door was yellow sunbeams with an orange and red sun while the other half was a star spangled dark blue with a full moon. The tiny specks of yellow were actually tiny stars that she had painted and not just dots of paints. To be honest, it actually looked really good. My apparent irritation had just been my instincts talking since she had touched something that belonged to me. I was far better at covering up my happier emotions with a gruff exterior though. It was habit at this point. With a heavy sigh I walked towards Nicky. I looked directly at her as I approached and she ducked her head, "Ummm.... Can I ask for forgiveness? Or perhaps repaint your door with a color you choose as an apology?" I hid a smirk, she thought that the direct eye contact combined with doing something she wasn't supposed meant that she had crossed a line. I was within reach of her now, "No." Before she had a chance to respond I wrapped my arm around her shoulders in a one-armed hug. "Thank you. I really like it." Her jaw dropped, "And you made me worry like that for no reason?!" I chuckled at her dumbfounded expression. Luke looked surprised that I came into contact with her, but still grinned at the two of us. Nicky attempted a growl, "Grrr... I should have known that you weren't actually upset. You didn't growl or snarl and those are usually dead giveaways unless you are about ready to kill someone, but even then you usually give some sort of warning." I was amused that she had picked up so much considering that she had only seen me mad a handful of times. She started to laugh as she hooked one arm around me in a hug. "If you had attempted to paint my door that bright pink, then you would have been running for the hills." Nicky snickered, "Hey, I actually found a similar shade of pink. I am saving it for Nina's door. No one will ever take her seriously after that." I rolled my eyes and responded dryly, "You are aware that she does work with zombie blood and chemicals all day long, right? For all you know, she will turn you into a zombie for that stunt." Nicky just laughed harder as she dropped her arm and took a step back to give me some room, "No she wouldn't! If I turned into a Terror, it would be her worst nightmare come true! Even if I ended up a Nightstalker the two of us could tag team Daniel. Wouldn't that knock him off of his high horse?!" I don't even want to contemplate that scenario. She is hard enough to manage when she is human. As much as I want to see Daniel taken down a peg or two, having Nicky turn into a zombie is so not worth it. That would be a nightmare... I was able to fend her off with my greater abilities during her insanity blitzes and I was capable of packing her around by force if I had to. The thought of her being just as strong as me or even stronger was not something I ever wanted to see.

I shook my head, "Let's not and pretend we never considered it." "Awww... Where is the fun in that?" "It is called keeping my sanity. Let's head outside and go do something while we let this paint dry." "Okay." Luke followed with an amused expression. I growled faintly at him, "Keep your comments to yourself." It was too quiet for Nicky to hear, but just loud enough for Luke to pick it up. His hearing was a bit better than a human's hearing was, although not by much so I really had to watch the volume if I didn't want others to overhear. Luke just grinned, "Wouldn't dream of saying a thing." Luke had stumbled across my cabin not too long after I had been shot the first time. He had seen some of the scars and had likely never dreamed that I would even go near a human. Yet, here I was with one for a friend. A zombie allowing a human to touch them was not a common thing with our aversion to contact. Something like a hug spoke of a strong friendship and trust. Others had noted my friendship with Nicky before, but none of them knew just how rare it actually was since they were accustomed to the civilized Daniel who was far more human tolerant than me. Luke knew though. The last two days were actually the first times a human had touched him, although I doubted that Nina or Nicky were aware of that little detail. Luke found my current situation and friendship entertaining. Then again, it mystified me as well. A solitary Nightstalker ending up in a Stronghold packed with humans and having a human for a best friend was not something I would have ever predicted. Nicky looked up and down the road, "Okay, so what type of torturous chore do you feel like tackling?" "I normally split wood at this time and I know that Luke is no stranger to using an axe." Nicky nodded, "Good enough for me." It didn't occur to me that she would join us since she had never helped split wood before. I had my misgivings about letting her get her hands on an axe. There had to be reason that the people who organized the chores had removed that from her possible list of duties. I kept a close eye on her as we all grabbed an axe and started working. Nicky had clearly used an axe before, although I didn't let my guard down. It didn't escape my attention that Luke was also keeping an eye on her. Half an hour later Nicky sat down for a break. Zombie stamina meant that Luke and I were still fresh. I glanced over my shoulder as I started to pick up Daniel's scent even though there was no wind. It did not surprise me to see Daniel and Nina coming down the street towards us. I split a few more pieces while waiting for them to arrive. Nicky yawned, "So, what was so important that they actually held a meeting instead of just touching base like they usually do?" Nina sighed, "That is because some people from another Stronghold arrived while we were at lunch." Nicky looked perplexed, "So? That never meant much at any other Stronghold I stayed at. The only time they held last second meetings was when I was debating about transferring out. The travel agents in those places either lied or they needed to get out more since their version of paradise did not match mine. The places I ended up transferring to were definitely not a tropical beach or majestic metropolis." Nina blinked slowly before replying, "The third wave is coming and that sneezing cold has spread to several places. The two who came also carried letters from other locations. Apparently word of Trinity's ability to sniff out the infected has spread. Over a dozen Strongholds sent word with this group. They want us to come, ensure that no one is infected, as well as leave a few vials of the cure behind." Luke looked surprised, "Do you even have that much made up?" Nina nodded, "It keeps pretty well as long as sunlight doesn't hit it and I have been stockpiling for the third wave. You are the only person here with any kind of lab experience, could I possibly talk you into making more while we are gone?" Luke nodded slowly, "You will have to show me what to do, but I was trying to think of a way to remain here. I am not much for road trips." Nina nodded, "Certainly. I will show you everything after supper, but I have some other stuff to organize first." She turned towards Nicky and me, "We are leaving for another road trip tomorrow morning and this one will probably last two weeks so pack your things and get your ducks in a row." Nicky made a face, "I do not have ducks and I certainly do not have an orderly row. I have squirrels. And they are at a rave." I knew it. Luke had a stunned look on his face. Nicky noticed his dumbfounded expression and grinned at him, "Come on, all I have heard from you so far is polite gentlemanly shit. Say something sarcastic. I dare you." Luke blinked before slowly responding, "I do not understand your particular kind of crazy, but I admire your complete commitment to it." And that was the meanest thing I had ever heard Luke say. Nicky burst out laughing, "Not quite what I was after, but I will take it!" I muttered, "Oh boy, it is going to be one of those trips. Do I have to come?" Daniel easily heard my pessimistic mumbling, "If you don't go with us, then they will all come here and hang out for three weeks." "Bloody hell... Are you serious?" Nina sighed, "Unfortunately. Most places are terrified of the infection. The people here are much more relaxed since you have been here and haven't come across anyone who is infected. That is another reason for having Luke staying in the Stronghold as opposed to in the cave. If anyone is infected, chances are he will catch it early enough to administer the cure." I rolled my eyes, "You really want to drag me into a bunch of Strongholds with strangers? I thought we decided on the way up that it wasn't a good idea." "People have requested us to come, which means that they will be more accommodating. It wasn't a good idea previously mostly because of Nicky, although we didn't consider it after picking up Luke just because we didn't want to put him in that sort of situation. They specifically asked for the Nightstalker to come and you have to admit that you do have the best nose." I grumbled faintly at her attempt at flattery. Nicky leaned on her axe, "So I am staying here then?" Daniel sighed, "As much as I would rather leave you here, you are coming. If someone riles Trinity up, then you are our best chance at keeping it from turning into a bloodbath if I am not around. We will just have to keep you under control while we are there." Nicky started snickering, "You couldn't handle me even if I came with instructions and I made sure to burn those things." Daniel growled lowly as his eyes flashed red. Luke shifted uneasily, he was more affected by Daniel's presence than I was. Nicky simply grinned at the Terror without fear. I shook my head as I turned to leave, "And people wonder why I need quiet time on a daily basis..." "Hey! Don't leave me here with him!" Nicky scrambled to catch up with me. Lucky me... Nicky looked at me as we kept walking, "You don't seem to be in favor of this trip." I snorted, "The last time I took a two week trip with people, I ended up getting shot and dying." "Well, look at the bright side. We will still drag your miserable hide back with us while you heal." I growled faintly at her. Nicky looked up at the clouds in contemplation, "Should I pack that blue jacket or the brown one? Perhaps I should slip a neon orange pair of lacy underwear into Nina's bag as we travel just to make thing interesting..." I began to wonder if Nicky would actually survive this trip.

 

Chapter 91

I halfway glared at the Stronghold in the distance. Daniel was once more driving the truck while Nicky and I were in the back. Nina had a travel plan drawn up that would allow us to visit two or three Strongholds a day. She hoped to get to all of the closest ones within two weeks. The wave should have started by then, but even with travelling almost all day, we could only cover so much ground even if Daniel used those bright headlights to drive most of the night.
 Nina glanced back, "How are you holding up?" She knew that I really didn't want to go into strange Strongholds considering my past experiences with them. I sighed, "I seriously hope that this doesn't turn out to be a mistake." Nicky was gazing at the sky and idly commented, "I never make the same mistake twice. I make it at least five or six times just to be sure that it is actually a mistake." She turned her head to look at me, "If five places try to kill you, then I will help you burn them to the ground." I blinked slowly, "Thank you, I think..." We fell silent as we got closer to the Stronghold. Nicky sat up, "Well, I have never been here before." I took that comment as a good thing. People were waiting for us at the gate, so it looked like our arrival had been expected. Lovely. I had a feeling that this trip was going to bring out my sarcasm in a rather unfortunate way. "Daniel, Nina, glad you could make it. You can park right over there since I know you won't stay long. Can we offer you some lunch?" Nina nodded, "Thank you Rick, lunch sounds good." I sniffed the air as Daniel drove to the indicated spot, "You smell that?" I heard Daniel take a deep breath and a faint growl sounded from inside the truck, "Yeah." "Huh. Well it looks like both of us can smell it even though we have at least a week before the first case can possibly arise." Nina looked startled, "Someone here is infected?" Daniel parked the truck and got out, "Yes." I jumped out of the truck and took a second sniff, "There are at least two that I am picking up." Nina nodded as she pulled a small backpack out. It held the cure and other drugs she had brought along. Rick walked over, "Would you like lunch now or do you want to do an inspection first?" His eyes glanced over Nicky and me as he noted the two unfamiliar faces. Nina tilted her head, "How about lunch first?" "Certainly. This way please." He was quite polite, but considering he knew that two zombies were present, that was a wise move on his part. Lunch was venison, bread, and soup. The dining area was fairly empty, although anyone we passed stared at us. Much to my annoyance. I had forgotten how quickly the people at Ironwind had gotten accustomed to my presence and knew I didn't like being stared at. This is going to be a long two weeks... The two women grabbed some food. My instincts were not enjoying being inside of a strange Stronghold. They analyzed everything in suspicion. As much as I liked their assistance in case of an ambush or trap, having my instincts so active was a pain in the ass and quite distracting since they also affected my temper. I didn't find anything amiss though, so that was good. The guy tagged along with us as he mainly spoke to Nina, who was quite talkative. "We took care during the last wave, so we hope this wave won't give us any trouble." A bit late for that bud. I hope the other places were more successful otherwise some people are in for a rude awakening. Nina made a face before replying, "Unfortunately, we know that at least two here are infected although we don't know who they are yet."

The man gazed at her with a devastated expression, "Are you sure?" He had likely forgotten that Nina had a cure with her, or perhaps he doubted its effectiveness. In the past, knowing that someone was infected was more or less a guarantee that death was looming close for that person. Nina nodded, "Both Daniel and Trinity could smell them, so we will track them down after eating and see if they want the cure or if they want to try out life as a sane zombie." Rick was surprised, so I assumed that he had indeed forgotten that there were options for those infected. He was silent for the rest of the meal. I was beginning to wonder exactly why I had agreed to come along. Daniel's nose was sufficient to pick up the scent of those infected. There was little wonder that my horse had started acting up weeks before I had turned. It was more surprising that I had not smelled it on myself in the days before the event. Eventually the women finished eating and Rick escorted us around the Stronghold. Daniel sniffed the air before shaking his head in frustration, "Whoever is infected has made miles in this place. I can't seem to determine which trail is most recent." He glanced at me, "Can you track it?" Now I saw why I was along. Daniel could smell it, but the person had wandered around so much that it was tough for him to pick up the most recent scent trail. Daniel relied more on sight, while my world tended to revolve around scent. If it had just been Daniel, he would have had to check out each person here just to be sure. I nodded slowly, "What exactly do you want me to do?" Daniel stood up straighter, "Take us to anyone who is infected. Nina and I can handle it from there." Easy enough. I took a deep breath of the air before heading in one direction. My sense of smell was a huge time saver in a Stronghold with a few hundred people all crowded into one rather small area. We rounded a few corners as I tracked the most recent scent on the air itself, ignoring where the person had walked. Three women were grinding grain into flour. I slowed to a stop as I approached the group. They fell silent as they watched us approach. Nina walked up beside me, "Is it one of them?" I nodded silently and the women paled. Nina turned to them with a gentle expression, "Could you please come up one at a time so we can determine who is infected? I have both a cure and a drug that would allow you to remain sane if you decided to become a zombie. The choice is up to you." One thinner lady got to her feet first, "I don't like suspense, so I just have to know." She walked forward slowly. I took another breath as she approached Nina and shook my head, "It isn't you." She sighed in relief, before turning to her friends in worry. The two looked at one another before a brunette came forward. I didn't even need a deep breath. I glanced at Nina and jerked my head towards the woman approaching. The woman paled as she understood the silent gesture. Nina walked towards her in sympathy, "I am sorry, but at least we caught it in time." The woman looked devastated, "You said you had the cure, right?" Nina nodded, "Yes. I have a cure. I also have something that will allow you to remain in control if you want to become a zombie." She shook her head rapidly, "I don't want to be a zombie. Please give me the cure." Nina reached into her bag to pull out a syringe and load it with liquid from a vial. "If you are ready, please hold out your arm. This will completely cure you within six hours." The woman wordlessly held out both arms to let Nina take her pick. Nina injected the cure with ease of practice that came from years of handling needles, "There you go." "Thank you." She turned to her friend, "I think I am going to go lie down for a bit." Her friend nodded sympathetically. Such news wasn't really something you could easily break to someone, even if you did have the cure. Nina turned towards me, "Next one?" I exhaled gustily before checking the air and leading the way once more. We found the man in the garden and Nina gave him the same options. He also picked the cure without even a thought for the other drug. It didn't surprise me. Most here would be scared of zombies or the downsides of being one outweighed the possible advantages. Most humans could not stand the thought of catching, killing, and drinking the blood of an animal several times a week. They would also be unable to kiss loved ones without risk of them also getting infected. Another fear was that of not fitting in. No one wanted to be different, or to be an outcast. Fear of the unknown was also daunting. The seizures were scary and the thought of wanting to kill your friends was not easy to bear. They had been so scared of being infected and turning into a zombie in the past, that it simply wasn't even something they could consider at this point. For them, it was like being told that it was safe to grab the blade of a running chainsaw. They just couldn't fathom attempting it. Rick took us on a quick tour afterwards to ensure that we hadn't missed any areas or people. At the end I shook my head, "Nothing, just those two." Nina sighed in relief, "That is good news." She turned to Rick, "Thank you for taking time out of your day to help us. We appreciate it and are glad we could help, but we are going to keep going and see how many more Strongholds we can visit before the sun sets. I did leave three vials of the cure with Elizabeth, so if we did miss someone and they start sneezing, you do have something to turn to." Rick nodded, "Thank you very much for coming out. Always feel free to come by for a visit or for a guestroom. Our gates are always open for you. Travel safe." "Thank you." We hadn't unpacked the truck, so we simply got into it and headed towards the gate that was opening up for us. One place down, a few dozen to go... 
 Nina looked out the open window of the truck at me as we approached the third Stronghold, "How are you holding up Trinity?" I huffed, "This is going to be the longest trip ever invented." My instincts did not like visiting strange Strongholds filled with numerous strangers who rudely stared and whispered amongst themselves. I had known this in theory, but it was really sinking in. And we have barely even started... At the last place I had growled at a teenager who had attempted to touch my elbow on a dare. He had gotten into a boatload of trouble with the three adults who were guiding us on a tour. My mood had only gone downhill since. We had not found any infected people at the second place, but Nina was planning on leaving the cure at each location, just in case. She had also informed me that we were going to try to visit every Stronghold that we could until the wave was over, even if they had not expressly invited us. Our travel plan was to slow spiral away from Ironwind while going further with each circuit. Nina sighed, "Sorry. Wish I could help. We can stay the night at this place and leave early in the morning. This group won't mind you going outside the fence at night. Daniel and I have stopped here before." I didn't respond. I was once more reminded of how tempting a remote cabin in the foothills sounded. Nina glanced pointedly at Nicky. Nicky raised an eyebrow in self-defense, "Hey, don't look at me like that. I can help defuse an actual incident, but there isn't much I can do if she is just feeling crowded and peeved. She is a Nightstalker." I growled faintly, "You can stop talking about me like I am not here at any time..." Nicky apologized, "Sorry." I was in an unnecessarily grouchy mood and I knew it. I just didn't care enough to attempt to correct it. The Stronghold was now in sight and that didn't encourage an uplifting of my attitude any. I would try to remain civil and not insult anyone without provocation, but that was about as much effort as I planned to put in.

 

Chapter 92

            This place had seen Daniel quite a few times and most didn't blatantly stare, even though many watched us in curiosity. My instincts still detested going into another den filled with a gaggle of strangers. Daniel and Nina knew quite a few by name and happily chatted over supper. Nina had been smart enough to request a less crowded location to eat and we now sat on an outside deck with about a dozen locals. The one lady looked at me, "Are you sure you don't want anything to eat?" I shook my head as I once more declined their hospitality, "Thanks, but I will pass. I am not hungry at the moment." She nodded and turned her attention back to Nina and Daniel. Daniel was speaking with someone about the roads further east. Nina was talking to a young man, "I heard a rumor that you are getting married?" The man grinned, "Yep. Giselle just makes my day. Her smile is breathtaking and her cooking is phenomenal. She has a great sense of humor and has that deep throaty laugh." Nicky tilted her head, "Like the sound a dog makes before throwing up?" The young man gaped at her, unable to come up with a response. I smirked despite myself. Leave it to Nicky... Nina halfway hid her face behind her hand in embarrassment at traveling with such an uncouth person, "No Nicky, he means that she just had a deeper voice." "Oh." Nina swiftly steered the conversation into a different area in hopes that Nicky wouldn't try to join the conversation again. "Jim, I assume you will join us on our tour this evening as we check if anyone is infected?" A grey haired man nodded, "Yes. Is there anything you need us to do?" Nina shook her head, "Not really, we will just take a quick tour and if anyone is infected, Daniel or Trinity will pick up their scents and then we can locate them." He nodded before glancing at me. I had been almost entirely silent during the meal and some may have not been certain if it was Nicky or I who was the Nightstalker. None had inquired as they probably didn't want to offend the Nightstalker. Once the meal was over Jim and a few others stood up as they prepared to begin the tour. I shook myself lightly before starting to walk along the side of the balcony railing. Most were watching me in confusion since I was not heading towards the door. I paused beside a brown haired man and took a quick sniff, "Before we start, I think you had best see Nina." I turned and headed towards where Nina was. She looked startled, "Damien is infected? Why didn't you mention something earlier?" I shook my head as I dismissed her concern, "Yes, he is infected. I wasn't sure exactly who it was and it didn't make sense to interrupt the meal when a half an hour delay would not harm anyone." I glanced at Daniel, "And just how did you miss that one?" He took a deeper breath as he tested the air and shrugged, "I think it might be how I was sitting on the end. The air was swirling there. I knew someone nearby was infected, but I had no clue whether it was someone up on the deck or on the ground below the balcony. It doesn't seem as strong as the other two we found at our first stop." Nina wasted no time giving the man his two options. Predictably he chose the cure. Once everything was settled, Jim offered, "Shall we see if anyone else is in need of assistance?" Nina nodded, "Please." Jim started leading the way and Nina followed him. I fell in behind Daniel while Nicky followed me. Nicky ignored my personal space as per usual, but having her behind me was far preferable to some stranger. She also ensured that no one else came up behind me.

I gave the Terror a fair bit of space as I followed him down the narrow hallway, but he didn't seem to care about my proximity lately. That was his humanity speaking, since his zombie instincts would never be entirely happy with another zombie following closely behind him. I wondered if he even noticed his instincts in a situation like this, but I doubted it. He probably overrode the suggestions as blindly as he did his bloodlust. The extreme annoyance and irritation I was feeling were somewhat unfamiliar. Apparently I had become far more laidback in Ironwind than I had realized. I was getting seriously tired of long boring drives in the back of a truck. I had never handled being cooped up very well and it tended to slowly irritate and frustrate me. I had thought that the previous four day trip was too long and this was still the first day of this trip. If I get any growlier, I may see if Daniel is up for a round of wrestling to just wear some of this energy off. Being irritated made a trip seem longer and more difficult, so if I could blow off some steam it may help. I wasn't quite in a bad enough mood to go decapitate trees and I knew full well that a wrestling match would allow my instincts to vent, which would settle my mood. I exhaled in relief as we finally came back outside into fresher air. Small spaces didn't bother me. Small spaces with strangers in them put my instincts on edge. Nicky wandered up to walk beside me now that there was room. I took a deep breath. At least one other person needed the medicine that Nina was packing. I followed along with the others as we were given a quick tour. Fifteen minutes later Jim came to a stop, "Is there any place else you want to go?" Daniel glanced at me, "I was picking up a second scent on the air towards the west, what about you?" I nodded, "That is all I am detecting too. I am pretty sure that the person is inside that big building." Jim nodded and we backtracked towards a large five story building that had originally been a small hotel. I had never been inside the main sleeping building in Ironwind, but now I had even less desire to go inside. Like the one at Ironwind, this one had been renovated so that there were large shower areas with stalls since running water was a luxury that could not be piped into each room. Had Nina tried to stick me into such a place when I had first arrived, I wouldn't have even stayed the day. Even without my bloodlust bothering me, the smell of the sheer number of people that were packed into this building was atrocious. This place supposedly had over 300 people in it and most were clearly lodged in this building. Jim paused at a big junction, "Any idea if the person is in the east wing or in the west wing?" Daniel took a deep breath before glancing at me. I inhaled and wrinkled my nose at the miasma of people who did not faithfully use the showers on a daily basis. "East wing." We paused at each floor, but even Daniel's nose could tell which floors didn't have that musky zombie undertone. We eventually found the lady who was playing with electrical wires in a switch box. Nina interrupted her work to explain the situation to her. Once Nina administered the cure, Jim led us back outside into fresh air. Jim glanced at the various buildings, "Do you have any kind of preference for lodgings?" Nina tilted her head in consideration, "Is it possible to get one of those cabins along the fence? I believe they can comfortably hold four people." Jim shook his head, "Unfortunately, they are all occupied. There are some rooms on the bottom floor of this building that have doors so you can walk out right outside without having to go through the main hall."

Nina looked disappointed, but nodded, "Thank you." Jim led us around the outside of the building to show us the rooms since he probably realized that the two zombies would not appreciate another trip through the hallways. "It looks like we have two empty rooms on this side, will that be sufficient? There is another one on the other side of the building." Nina peered through a window, "There are two beds in each room, so that will be fine." I knew that Daniel would be choosing the expensive looking reclining chair. "Okay, I will leave you to get settled in then. If you need anything, just stop anyone who wanders by." "Thank you." Nina had already opened up the door and was looking around. The other empty room was three doors down. I entered it and glanced around. It was nothing fancy and resembled the average hotel room although it lacked a bathroom or kitchenette. If I had my way, I would be spending most of the night in the forest. It must be a common guest quarters since dozens of faint human scents scattered about the room. I snorted lightly before heading back outside. The four of us went to grab our stuff from the truck. Daniel managed to grab all four bags that contained Nina's supplies. That left the rest of us to grab our own stuff. Other than a sleeping bag that I had been told to bring along for appearance's sake, all of my stuff was in my backpack. I dropped the sleeping bag on the bed closest to the door and went back outside. I knew Nicky would prefer the bed furthest from the door. A quick check of the sky showed that we still had a couple of hours before sunset. Daniel and Nina came out of their room. Daniel came over to me, "I wouldn't mind hunting before sunset. Can you keep an eye on these two?" "I suppose so, as long as Nina doesn't attempt to get into mischief." He snorted in amusement, "You have Nicky standing behind you and you are worried about how Nina will behave?" "Of course. You wouldn't care if I trussed Nicky up and dumped her on a bed. If I did that to Nina, you would object and probably leave a few bruises on my hide." His tone was dry, "You would be correct. However, comparing Nina to Nicky is completely unfair." Nicky yawned, "No kidding. My mind is at least halfway intact." Daniel narrowed his eyes at Nicky although Nina just looked amused. She glanced at Daniel, "Go on, I will make sure to avoid overly aggravating Trinity so I will be fine." I am not liking the way she said she would avoid overly aggravating me... Daniel exhaled lightly with a last glance at me before heading towards the gate. Nina murmured, "Is there a reason why you are purposely provoking him?" She still looked amused at how easily I could rile Daniel up over the silliest and most unlikely things, like Nina potentially causing more problems than Nicky. I shrugged, "He has to learn to avoid taking Nicky so seriously, besides, I am pretty sure that annoying that zombie was part of my duties on this trip." Nina shook her head, "Peace and quiet would be much more preferable." I chuckled, "You stick a Terror and a Nightstalker in close proximity and you expect that? Let's not forget about Nicky..." Nina glanced at Nicky who was listening to our conversation, "Yeah, she is not getting coffee if I have any say in the matter." Nicky chuckled, "In coffee's defense, I have done some pretty weird shit without caffeine." I exchanged a look with Nina, "As I said, this is going to be a long trip..." Nina made a face, but didn't argue the point. I automatically tested the air as I tried to keep tabs on what was in the immediate vicinity, "So what do guests usually do to pass time in a place like this? Idle chit chat and gossip usually involves a shitload of questions and we already know how that is going to go with me." Nina made a face as she pictured that, "Well, how about we check out their archery range? You and Nicky usually spend a fair bit of time there. I actually do know how to shoot a bow, although my aim leaves something to be desired." I tilted my head, "Is it better or worse than Nicky's aim?" "I am not entirely sure..." I sighed heavily as I once more felt the babysitting role coming on, "Alright. Let's go. Please try to keep the casualty count to under three..." Nicky snickered as she started leading the way, "Three in total or three per round?" I growled faintly at her, but she just grinned over her shoulder at me. We continued towards the archery range.

 

Chapter 93

            Nina's aim was better than Nicky's, much to my relief. I kept tabs on the wind, although it wasn't in my favor. I did know when Daniel came back, although it took him some time to locate us. He seemed somewhat surprised to find Nina shooting a bow. I glanced over my shoulder as I heard him approaching, "Welcome back. No one is trussed up or being held against their will either." Nicky piped up, "And we haven't even hit the maximum casualty limit that Trinity set for us." Daniel raised an eyebrow at me. I shrugged, "Nina wasn't sure if her aim was better than Nicky's, so I had to set some ground rules before I let them pick up weapons." He chuckled and shook his head before going to grab a bow for himself. I watched him take a few shots, "I wasn't aware that you practiced archery." He shrugged as he hit the bullseye yet again, "I tried it once when I first arrived at Ironwind, but it never really grew on me." Either he had practiced a really long time, or else his instincts assisted him much more than mine did when it came to using weapons. I suspected the later reason. After his encounter with the three Nightstalkers, he did carry a dagger now. The question is, can he actually use it? "So you can use a bow. Do you also know how to use that shiny new dagger?" Daniel made a face, "Not really." Sometimes the levels of intelligence and common sense around me just left me speechless. His aim with a bow was perfect, yet he didn't carry one. Instead, he chose to carry a weapon that he likely had never practiced with. Brilliant... Trying to use a weapon you have no skill with is sometimes worse than not using it at all. This was particularly true among zombies. Daniel lowered his bow as he focused on me, "I saw you using that belt knife of yours when we fought those Nightstalkers, can you give me some training?" He was tentative, partially due to not liking to ask for help, but also partly because he wasn't sure how I would react. I sighed as I considered the stronger zombie in front of me and how my past training attempts with other zombies had gone. "I don't know much beyond the basics, but we can try. You do realize that any training session will probably frustrate you beyond belief and it will likely end up in a wrestling match, right?" Now that I thought about it, any time that I had shown another zombie something, or if they had tried to teach me, it had always ended up in a wrestling match. Our instincts simply didn't understand sharing knowledge and they considered any corrections or comments to be a tiny challenge that slowly, but surely riled us up. Our humanity would allow us to redirect that energy into a wrestling match instead of First Strike or an actual fight. Daniel looked curious, "I wasn't aware of that, but I would like to try. This dagger doesn't mean much if I have no clue how to use it." At least he had some common sense. I put my bow and arrows on the holders on the side of the building beside us. I looked around, "We had best take this to that more open area over there." He nodded as he put his own bow and arrows away. I pulled my belt knife off of my belt and ensured that the sheath was firmly secured to the blade. "Leave the sheath on for training like this. Normally there are practice blades to use, but if we ask we might end up with an audience." None of the locals were within sight, but the archery area was isolated behind the garages. Trees blocked the view as well. This was a good thing as far as I was concerned. Well, if Nina thought I was purposefully riling him up before, just wait until they realize how well zombie instincts tolerate training.

I exhaled gustily as I turned to Daniel, "Okay, first thing is stance." I moved into a fighter's crouch in front of him with my blade at the ready. He copied me. It looked like the stance was familiar to him, so he might actually have had training of some sort in the distant past. My instincts immediately protested facing off against the higher ranking zombie. They knew that an attack was basically just a suicide mission. I tried to ignore my instincts as they clamored for me to get the hell out of this situation. "Yes, that is good. Let's try a few simple moves..." I moved my blade to show different angles and techniques, as well as basic parrying. I wasn't going at my full speed, so that gave Daniel plenty of time to catch on. "Okay, let's try at a faster pace." Daniel nodded at my suggestion, clearly finding my sluggish pace too slow for his preferences. For me, a faster pace was never going to equal Daniel's speed. I would also be unable to block any strike unless he pulled it. My slower speed also ruled out evasion. In short, I could never get into a knife fight with a Terror and expect to come out on top. My instincts knew it and they simply wanted me to get away from what they saw as a fight with the Terror. I had to resist that growing desire to flee in order to keep training. As a lower ranking zombie, my refusal to back down would be riling up Daniel's instincts, particularly as our practice had us striking towards one another. Daniel's eyes were already going red, a warning sign that he was getting wound up more than he was letting on. I didn't touch my top speed, since I preferred others to underestimate me if something serious ever came up. Daniel was pulling his strikes to something I could pretend I parried. He was easily blocking my strikes and his blocks swiftly changed as he determined the best angle and place to parry each type of strike. His instincts were clearly helping him more than mine ever did when it came to wielding weapons. I decided to make one important point very clear. I struck out with my left hand and my knuckles actually succeeded in grazing his arm before he managed to pull back with a growl. That dirty trick had his eyes solid red and lightly glowing. Such an example was needed though. I bared my teeth lightly at his growl, "Never forget to always watch your opponent's other hand. That is the biggest mistake you can ever make." Daniel's growl deepened as his instincts were severely insulted that a Nightstalker had managed to get a touch in. As the one getting trained, he was getting riled up much faster than I was. Even his precise control around humans could not have prepared him for something like this and it was showing. If I got more than one or two tips in before he lost the ability to focus on our training, then I would be lucky. It wouldn't be long before my own instincts prevented this match from continuing. In short, we were both getting riled up rather swiftly. He closed in and tried a few different types of strikes. He still pulled his blows and I brought out a few different moves for him to pick up on. It didn't surprise me that he caught on within one or two attempts. The glow in his eyes was increasing. I didn't have time to look at Nina or Nicky, but I couldn't see them missing such a telltale sign that this session was about at its limit. My own instincts were up in arms over the 'fight' that I was so clearly losing against the higher ranking zombie. Such a situation was like touching a dull needle to a balloon, something was about to explode and it would be sooner rather than later. I narrowed my eyes as I decided to attempt another common trick. I tried a different move with the knife that involved trying to flip it out of an opponent's hand. Daniel was stronger than me, so it was doomed for failure unless I caught him off guard. He kept a grip on his larger dagger, but while he was focused on that, I swept my foot across his ankle.

He stumbled, but his faster reflexes prevented him from actually getting tripped. His snarl split the air as his eyes locked onto mine, marking the end of our practice. I bared my teeth in an instinctive reaction as I skipped back a few steps. We had both hit our limits. I dropped my dagger on the ground as I altered my body language. A wrestling match would prevent this from becoming more serious and would also settle our provoked instincts. Daniel instantly recognized my stance this time and copied it as he dropped his dagger. He came forward in a stalk as he started circling me. I dropped into a lower crouch as my teeth were bared. It didn't faze him and he undoubtedly saw that it wasn't serious as we both fell into the less serious body language that marked a wrestling match. At least both of us were on the same page. I feinted to the side, but Daniel was swifter than me and managed to snag my wrist before tugging me forward. With a snarl of my own I slashed out with my other hand and the back of my fingers skimmed his arm in a harmless retaliation. He managed to grab that wrist too. Bloody Terrors, why do they have to be so blasted fast? I twisted to the side before ramming my shoulder into his chest. He grunted from the force and staggered backwards a few steps. He returned the favor by whipping his foot across my ankles and taking my feet out from under me. Most would have fought to stay on their feet, but Nightstalkers had no issues taking the fight to the ground level. I let myself fall down and he released my wrists in his surprise. I kicked his leg, possibly leaving a bruise. He backed out of my range and considered me as I crouched on the ground waiting for him to return. He now realized that letting me fall to the ground while he remained standing may have not been such a smart move on his part. If he approached, I could easily lash out at him or grab his legs. He would have to bend down in order to reach me with his hands, which would put him slightly off balance. He growled faintly as he realized that I held a temporary advantage. The way I was crouched so close the ground would also allow me to launch myself at him so he instinctively kept his distance. A few seconds later he started chuckling as he realized that this match had been reduced to a standoff. He shook his head as he stood up out of his crouch. I snorted lightly as I got back to my feet. The wrestling match had not been quite what I had expected. It had turned into something closer to a practice fighting session as opposed to an actual wrestling match. I suspected that it was mostly due to Daniel's Terror instincts and how he held back since he didn't want to injure me. I had noted in the past that he had usually opted to avoid close range melee rounds. Perhaps I had just associated with other Nightstalkers too much. It hadn't quite settled things back to normal, but it was close enough that I wasn't going to comment or request a rematch since I was very likely going to lose the next match. Ties were rare in these matches. I was in a better frame of mind than when we had entered this place, so that was a bonus. I shook myself off, "Feel any more knowledgeable? Or am I better off asking Nicky to hold that dagger for you?" Daniel snorted in faint amusement, "I wouldn't give her a dagger even if my skill was so bad that I stabbed myself in the toe with it." Nicky rolled her eyes at the jab, "That is something that I actually have never managed to do and in case you didn't notice, I do carry a sword and have not injured myself with it yet." "Miracles of miracles..." Daniel shook himself lightly as he dismissed the matter. The zombie-like action was unlike Daniel and probably only because of our recent interaction. He looked at me, "That lesson certainly did help, although I was quite surprised at how my instincts detested it." I shrugged, "Yeah, it pushes all of the wrong buttons. If you want to piss a feral off, just pretend to use a weapon." Nina tilted her head in curiosity, "That wrestling game looked quite different from the first one. I also don't recall seeing you wrestle with Luke at all." I raised an eyebrow to warn her that her curiosity was getting a bit too nosy, "Such matches can vary a fair bit. I wrestled with Luke. You just weren't around those times." Nina looked disappointed before her eyebrows wrinkled in confusion, "Just how often do zombies wrestle? You make it sound as if you and Luke wrestled at least a couple times and he has only been traveling with us for about a week." I sighed heavily, "It varies by individuals and how well they get along." "So you are starting to wrestle with Daniel because you two are getting along better?" I snorted lightly before picking up my dropped belt knife and putting it back on my belt, "Possibly." I didn't really want to admit it, but it was the truth. Daniel was a bit closer to his instincts now, which meant that a wrestling match wasn't going to end up in serious injury. I also trusted him enough to get into a wrestling match with him. It was the zombie way of winding down or relaxing. A human usually had no qualms about sitting down with a drink to relax and talk with their friends or acquaintances. Or just goofing around and having fun. The virus had altered our minds a bit and now playful wrestling was a close equivalent for that. Trust or tolerance played a big part in who we would wrestle with though. Nina didn't respond, probably sensing that she wouldn't get any more information. Daniel looked thoughtful as he picked up his bow again. He was learning, albeit as slowly as an office worker heading to work with hangover, but he was learning. I had wrestled with Luke twice since he arrived at the Stronghold and only twice with Daniel since we met. The first week he probably would have fought me thinking that I was actually attacking him. Then again, he said that he had only pinned that first Nightstalker when she went after him, so I wasn't entirely sure. That Terror was far too confusing... I shook my head before grabbing my bow as well.

 

Chapter 94


 I watched the gate sentry open up the gate for me. "Just call out as you approach so we know it is you. Are you sure you don't want to wait until morning?" I chuckled dryly, "There is a reason my kind are called Nightstalkers." My comment did not do anything for the smell of unease and fear coming off of him and his companion. I walked out the gate and easily disappeared into the darkness since the light above the gate was rather pitiful. I had seen better porch lights. For the lack of anything better to do, I circled the compound to learn the lay of the land as well as to ensure that nothing sinister lurked out here. The tension faded away as I wandered aimlessly through the dark forest. It had been a long day and the fact that it was just the first was not comforting. I shook myself lightly before turning my nose to the wind. Too bad Luke hadn't been here. I guess he would have to wait to collect his mountain lion. I went in search of the big cat to claim it for myself. It was drinking from a puddle and unaware of my presence. I left the trees and silently crept up behind it. It paused as it sniffed the air. I was close enough that it could pick up my scent even though there was no wind. Considering I was already standing beside its tail, it was far too unobservant to survive the night. It started to turn its head and I launched myself at it. A loud crack marked the moment it instantly died. The blood was hot and welcoming after a vexing day. The heavier predator taste combined with the sweetness that the controlex had caused was an odd combination. One perk of traveling was that I could kill larger or more uncommon animals each night without worrying about the local population since I would be in an entirely different area the next day. People rarely realized just how many animals were actually around. I finished and was in a much better mood. I dragged the carcass to a nearby road and hung it from a tree. The locals would find it tomorrow morning since this was a main route for them. The marks on the neck showed that it was a sane zombie kill, so if they were brave enough to turn it into soup or jerky, then they had extra meat with no work. Or they could just take the hide. The choice was theirs. I passed by the fence for a lack of anything better to do. This place didn't have much in the way of nighttime lighting and people clearly hid inside once the sun went down. There were two gates with a dim light each and that was it. I paused and narrowed my eyes as my instincts roused even more, which was quite an impressive feat considering how high they already were since it was nighttime. Nina was walking towards a bathroom and three people were following at a distance. None of them were Daniel. The chain link fence was more than twice my height, but my Nightstalker abilities allow me to get over the fence without a sound. I bared my teeth in silent anger as I picked up their scents. These were the same three who had tried to kill me when I first arrived at Ironwind. The very ones who had shot me almost half a year ago. There was one gun present as well. I didn't see it, but I could smell it. I had thought that I had picked up their scent on our tour, but when I hadn't spotted them, I had assumed it was someone else with a similar scent. I was an invisible shadow as I slipped around them. It didn't surprise me that the same trigger-happy idiot was the one with the gun. They spread out around the washroom in the darkness, clearly waiting in ambush for Nina. Too bad for them that the hunters so often become the hunted. I carefully crept up behind the one with the gun. He had undone the safety strap so he could easily grab it if he needed to. He slowly crept up behind the washroom and I slinked in closer to him. My instincts wanted me to kill them all in silence. The controlex had no curbing effect on my instincts since it was a self-defense and vengeance reaction and had nothing to do with bloodlust.

I ignored the urge to kill them all. Killing them would lead to questions that I would rather not answer. As hard as it was, I resolved to be patient and see what was about to occur. I had to negate one danger though... I slowly and smoothly removed the gun from its holster with the man unaware. Nightstalker stealth made these three men look like bumbling idiots. They didn't even know that I was here. I silently backed away before removing the magazine and also ensuring that there wasn't a bullet in the chamber. Good thing I checked, because there was one there. I pocketed the bullets and turned towards the oblivious man. This part was going to be harder. The new moon barely shed any light as I crept back up beside the man and slipped the gun back into its proper place. The toilet within flushed with the dull glug of a toilet that used gravity to add and flush water. I disappeared once more into the shadows as I watched. Where the hell is Daniel? Since when does he let Nina wander around in the dark alone? Daniel's absence bothered me, especially considering these three goons had somehow been ready to take advantage of this situation. There were bathrooms in the main hallway of the building, so why did she come to use this one? My instincts kept lining these details up and simply shrieking at them in suspicion like a paranoid dog. My speed would be sufficient to take on these three humans since they had no working gun and I was not seriously injured. They weren't holding any weapons in their hands, although a few knives were visible. Immediate injury and death was not their goal, so I was willing to wait and see what was going on. Perhaps a few bruises will teach Nina to not wander around alone in the dark... The door opened and Nina came out, clearly unaware that the shadows had eyes. Two men darted forward and pushed her against the wall while covering her mouth with their hands. My muscles tensed with the desire to attack, but I remained motionless. It was a good thing that my sunglasses prevented them from seeing my eyes since I was too worked up to control their color or their glow. "Well, well, well, what do we have here? Not so tough without your guard dog to protect you, huh?" Well, at least I wasn't the only one to compare Daniel to a guard dog. Nina tried to struggle, but they clearly had her pinned. She would likely have a few bruises, but I really needed to know why they were after her. A second man gloated, "Did you think you could kick us out of Ironwind Stronghold without consequences? And you dared to use that zombie to back up your decree? You crossed a few lines by associating with the living dead. Your time has run out girly." I moved in closer as their motive of revenge became clear. The one man drew his knife and held it up so the starlight dimly glinted along its length. I loosed a deep growl of warning while remaining motionless and invisible. They all jumped and glanced around wildly. Nina looked relieved, yet still frightened. The man holding Nina held his knife tighter and turned back to her in a panic. I darted in as he tried to bring his knife up to her throat to use her as a hostage. None of them had brought flashlights and my body was a formless shape that darted in front of them and disappeared with the man wielding the knife. The snap of his neck in the darkness was the only sound heard apart from their frightened gasps. I dropped his lifeless body on the ground with a thump and swiftly circled around to the other side since they were focused on where I had disappeared to. The second man managed to hang onto Nina and keep her mouth covered so she couldn't sound the alarm. I didn't bother considering raising an alarm. I didn't need backup or interference as I evened up the old grudges with this latest vexation. The man with the gun pulled it and popped the safety as he kept his back to his friend and pointed the weapon towards the darkness. His wide eyes and fear-laden scent proclaimed that he now realized just how precarious his situation was. He gritted his teeth and pointed the gun towards Nina, "Show yourself zombie, or else I blow her brains out. Even your blood can't turn someone that fast to try and save them."

Nina had stilled with wide eyes. I decided to play along. I took off my sunglasses and slowly stalked out of the shadows where they had a better chance of seeing me. My instincts knew that I was setting up my own ambush and didn't protest that they could see my shadowy form. The man saw my eyes and focused on me, "What do you want? Trying to save her?" He snorted in contempt, "Foolish. We could easily just kill her and frame you. Then that other zombie can kill you as he tries to get revenge." I remained silent and let the man's own nerves rattle him. A gunshot would be loud and if both Nina and I were shot, the entire place would wake. Their belt knives were not adequate to quickly behead me, so it would only be a matter of time until I was back on my feet and hot on their trail. This tiny gang had not gotten this far alive by not realizing such details. He pretended to be tough, "Don't tell me we are trying to negotiate with a mute. How pathetic." My voice was low with a dangerous edge to it, "Don't mistake silence for weakness. Smart people don't make murder plans out loud." Unlike a certain recently deceased idiot about thirty feet off to the side... They recognized my voice and inhaled in shock as their fear increased. How did they not know that I was the Nightstalker who had come with Nina? I thought that it would have been kind of obvious. The one man murmured, "Shit, Caroline was right. There were two zombies." Ah. They must have kept out of sight in case Daniel recognized them and ratted them out. They wouldn't have seen me then. Too bad for them. The man pointed his gun towards me as I remained motionless. I could faintly hear Nina's muffled scream of protest and the grunts of the guy trying to restrain her desperate thrashing. Click. There is a certain look of complete disbelief when a person is so far gone up shit creek that they know they are about to go backwards over a waterfall. This man was wearing that expression. I smirked and pulled the gun magazine out of my pocket and displayed it in my one hand, "Is this what you were looking for?" The man froze. My instincts were raging behind my attempt at a cool and collected façade. This was the third time he had tried to kill me. I slowly dropped into a crouch with a low growl, "Three strikes and you are out." I knew they were mostly watching my eyes since it was so dark out. I closed them as I launched forward. My eyes opened at the last second to ensure that my strike didn't miss. A shocked gasp was choked off into a gurgle as a sickening crack told the other two of the failed assassin's fate. I slipped my sunglasses on once more so the last man couldn't see me as I backed up into the shadowy night once more. He didn't have a knife, but he was big enough that he didn't need a weapon to inflict serious harm. He had his back against the wall and retained his grip on Nina, knowing that she was his only chance of getting out of this alive. I glanced over my shoulder and faintly growled as I noticed another person approaching. Company was the last thing I wanted at this precise moment. I began to wonder if one of the voices in Nicky's head had a magnetic attraction to any dangerous situation. It was bad enough to have Nina wandering around unsupervised and if Nicky was sleep walking, then I was going to tie her to the bed in the future. The man also noticed her approach, "Hey, can you give me a hand over here?" I suspected that he hoped that I would back off and leave if more people showed up. Nicky kept walking in this direction. She paused some distance from the guy and scratched her head with a sleepy and bemused expression, "Can I give you some tips on women?"

Her question was not what the man had expected, "Uh... Okay...." He was stalling for time as he tried to figure who the lady was by her voice since he couldn't see her face clearly in the dark. I slunk into a low crouch as I carefully worked my way in closer as Nicky distracted the man. Nicky yawned lazily, "For starters, women don't like to be silenced with a hand over their mouth like that. But we don't really need to speak to get our point across. You can tell a lot from a woman's hands. For example, if she is pointing a weapon at you, then she is probably angry." The man was more confused now than before. My problem was getting Nina out of his hands without him harming her. The way he had his hand over her mouth, he could twist her head and damage the muscles in her neck or possibly even damage the spine. The last thing I wanted was for him to snap her neck. The man glanced between the dark surroundings and the strange philosophical lady who seemed bored, "Huh? What weapon?" Nicky dropped her face into her hand as if exasperated at the man's stupidity, "Oh boy. I was hoping for a battle of wits, but you, sir, appear to be completely unarmed." I actually had to restrain a chuckle as the man just continued to stare at the redhead in complete disbelief. The fact that she had not run off screaming for help the moment she saw the situation was completely baffling the man. Her bizarre comments were not exactly helping him process anything either. Nicky yawned again before shaking her head, "Okay, I would really rather be in bed since you are clearly no fun, so let's get to the point. What the hell are you doing with Nina and why is Trinity stalking you like that? You must have really pissed her off for her to do that." The man gritted his teeth as he realized Nicky must know me to use my name so casually, "This woman got us kicked out of a Stronghold and that zombie will attack if I let her go." Nicky snorted in disdain, "Woo hoo. You got kicked out of a Stronghold. I have been to quite a few on my own power. Get a frequent flyer's card and quit complaining. Besides, you did that to yourself. Even a simpleton would know better than to attack a guest." "And how is that going to get me out of here alive?" His snarky tone made me curl my lip up, although he didn't know where I was. It did give me an idea though. I silently backed up to a safer distance and lowered my glasses so he could tell where I was, "Considering you have not attacked me this time, I will give you a chance. Let Nina go unharmed and I will not retaliate or raise the alarm this time. I advise you to make miles though, Daniel is not going to be so forgiving." He huffed, "You expect me to believe that?" I snorted, "Use your head. You kill her, I kill you. You somehow manage to kill all three of us and Daniel will kill you. I am giving you the only chance at survival. Consider your options quickly because your time is rapidly running out. Daniel will come looking for Nina before too much longer." The man hesitated before looking at me, "Swear upon your honor and your life." Really? A guy with no apparent honor demanding me to swear upon my own? I didn't snort as I wanted to, but instead replied seriously as I stared him in the eyes, "Since you have not tried to actually harm me tonight, I will let you escape from this place as long as Nina is released unharmed. I will not raise an alarm and will only answer questions if someone comes to find me. Considering I am still sane, that shows that my humanity has triumphed where most have failed once infected. My honor is my own and can never be judged by another. My word is my word and I always keep my promises."

The man hesitated before slowly removing his hands from Nina and backing up. Nina ran towards us as soon as he let her go. I remained where I was as he kept backing away. Nina partially hid behind me as she rubbed her neck, "Thanks. That was a close one." I glanced back at her, "And exactly what were you doing out here?" I wasn't impressed that I had to rescue her without prior notice. It would show in my tone. She made a face, "All three bathrooms on the main floor were full and the people inside didn't sound as if they would be coming out anytime soon. Nor did I want to go inside after hearing some of those sounds. One person suggested the washroom out here. Those men must have set that up to try and get revenge." I exhaled gustily, "Fine. Let's get you back before Daniel does come looking for you." Nina glanced back, "What about the other two..." She trailed off knowing that they were dead. I shrugged, "I will take care of them later." I turned to look at Nicky, "And just why are you out here?" Nicky yawned again, "I saw a glimpse of your eyes glaring at something and knew that someone was in deep doo-doo. I figured that I had better come rescue whatever poor sap had pissed you off. I didn't know what was going on until I got closer." I sighed and caught Nina's elbow as she tripped and started to fall. She automatically grabbed my arm to avoid falling. I disliked the contact, but allowed it since the smell of her blood would stand out if she skinned her knees. It was a small miracle that she hadn't managed to get a single scratch in that struggle. "Thanks..." Nina wasn't sure how far she could go with me at night and she was off balance after her encounter with those men. Being unable to see me or the ground was not helping her either. I used my other hand to pull a tiny penlight out of my backpack pocket and put my sunglasses on before turning the tiny light on. "Here. Keep it on you for the future." Nicky looked sad, "Don't I get a present too?" I was saved from responding as the main door to the building opened and light from Daniel's flashlight spilled across the yard. He blinked as he saw me and dimmed the light a bit as he also pointed it more towards the ground, "What are all of you doing out here?" Nicky yawned again, "Women go to the bathroom in flocks. You really don't want to know." He snorted in disbelief, "Nina left to use the washroom and I find you all outside. So, yes, I do want to know." "Here is a clue then, the fact that there is a highway to hell and only a staircase to heaven says a lot about the anticipated traffic levels." Nicky watched Daniel expectantly. He looked just as clueless as any rational person would be at this time of night when faced with such a bizarre comment and no background knowledge. Sometimes her logic left a lot to the imagination, although I recognized the reference to the two dead people and where they had likely ended up. Daniel shook his head before focusing on Nina, "What is she rambling on about?" Nina hesitated and glanced at me, recalling my promise that he would have a chance to escape. If she said anything, Daniel would have his hide within two minutes. Nicky rolled her eyes, "We went to play a game of whack the piñata and the guy in charge forgot to bring the stick. He went to get it, but we decided to skip the game. He was clearly several coins short of a change purse." Nicky must be tired because her excuse was plainly a lie. Daniel looked at Nicky in disbelief and confusion. His eyes moved to glance between Nina and me as he waited for the proper translation. Nicky sighed and walked forward to link her arm with Nina's, "Come on, let's go to bed. We can have a girl's slumber party. You can have Trinity's bed since she isn't about to use it and I am tired of sleeping where no one else can hear me snore." Daniel watched with a rather baffled expression as Nina let Nicky drag her off without a complaint. He turned to me looking for answers. I shrugged, "Women. Nicky was giving advice to that poor guy on how to treat women and how to tell when they are upset. Little wonder he ran off. I am leaving before she returns to drag me back with her to continue that particular lecture." I turned and walked off with silent footsteps. I glanced back when I was sure he could no longer see me. Daniel stood there wearing the puzzled look that many men have when women completely baffle them and they know that they will never understand what the hell just went down. He glanced between the dark where I was hidden and towards the building a few times before shaking his head and heading over to Nicky's room. He opened the door and Nicky's peeved voice told the world that interrupting her sleep was not a smart move. 
 "What part of this is a girl's slumber party do you simply not understand?! Get your ass out of my room!" Daniel ducked and a pillow sailed through the doorway. He snagged a second one out of the air as he went inside and closed the door behind him. If Nicky continued her verbal assault, I was too far away to hear it. I knew that Daniel would not listen to her, and if Nicky wasn't so dog tired, she would have known that attempting to order a zombie around was not going to get the intended results. Perhaps I should have put thumbtacks on that chair in the corner...

 

Chapter 95


 I reluctantly approached the gate as the sky started to lighten. I had snuck over the fence when I left Daniel on guard, so the guards had no idea that I had gone back inside without them knowing. Mindful of their request I called out, "It is just me." I could easily see one of the two men holding a rifle, but it was obvious that neither could see me in the near-dark while I was so far out. A mocking reply came back from the one man in the sentry post, "And who is 'just me'?" Who else were they expecting to be wandering around in the dark? He either has short term memory or was not been properly notified when the shift changed. That didn't cut him any slack. I halfway growled and replied in a similar tone, "If you need an ID card, just ask. I am sure that a Nightstalker scream would easily prove my identity." And possibly wake up every single person in this place with the worse wakeup call ever... If that sound doesn't get their hearts pumping, nothing will. "Ah, that won't be necessary." I snorted as I walked closer. My tone was dry, "Glad to hear it." They unlocked and opened the gate to allow me back in. If I had known that the current shift was clueless, I would have just climbed over the fence and waited to see if anyone even noticed. One of those on the original shift would probably inquire as to which gate I had come back in through. If I wasn't attempting to be a polite guest, I would be sorely tempted to do just that. I didn't need them bothered by my actions though. Daniel was going to be upset enough to make up for it. I knew he hadn't found Nina's assailant either because I had crossed the third man's trail as he fled the Stronghold in the dark. Daniel had not stirred outside the fence since sunset, possibly afraid to leave the two humans unattended and unprotected. I reluctantly reached for the doorknob to Nicky's room and whispered, "It is just me." Daniel was clearly smarter than the sentry. Not once had he ever asked who 'me' was. Then again, if someone was approaching them in the dark, it was a pretty easy guess who it was. If he heard my light footsteps, he would recognize them. If he didn't hear my footsteps, then he would know who was speaking in the darkness like that. My voice also gave me away. I glanced around the unlit room as I closed the door quietly behind myself. Nicky and Nina were still sleeping while Daniel predictably sat in the padded chair. He gazed in my direction, but I knew he had no chance of seeing me. I ensured my footsteps were loud enough for him to track as I walked over to sit on the unclaimed half of Nicky's queen sized bed. I crossed my legs and leaned against the wall as I got comfy. "Care to enlighten me as to what exactly happened last night?" Neither Nicky nor Nina must have told Daniel. Considering that no one was knocking on the door, no one else had noticed the incident last night. I doubted that they would ever find the bodies either. I had taken them across the fence and dumped them far away. I had no desire to answer questions and how that third man had convinced the gate sentry to let him out with that motorcycle was something I would probably never learn. I didn't intend to inquire either, since it would also raise questions. I kept my voice as quiet as his to avoid waking our companions, "Not really." He exhaled slowly as his annoyance built up. He had probably stewed over this all night and his patience was already worn down. "And just why not?" I was silent for a moment before taking off my glasses so he could tell that I was looking at him, "Because your snarl would wake these two up and likely disturb our neighbors."

He growled faintly at my resistance, "And if I promise to keep silent? I want to know what happened. I could smell the fear on Nina and she wouldn't even talk to me. She has never done that before. And to go with Nicky? Something big had to happen and I won't be happy until I know what it is." He wasn't going to let this go easily. The lack of knowledge was also stirring his instincts and temper. I blinked slowly as I tried to come up with a way to compromise without him realizing the true extent of what had occurred. I narrowed my eyes as I settled on a plan of action, "Do you promise to keep silent and stop hounding me if I tell you?" His eyes stared intently at mine, "Yes." "Some men got upset with Nina and weren't exactly polite when they found her outside." His eyes narrowed, "What did they say to rattle her so?" Boy, was he overprotective. Talk about a big brother complex. I tilted my head slightly, "It wasn't so much what they said as what I did that rattled her." That was not the response he had expected. He looked confused now, "What did you do?" I looked away and put my sunglasses back on, "I killed those two men and I don't think Nina was prepared for that. Don't worry, they won't find the bodies and I doubt they will think we had anything to do with their disappearance." He growled faintly, "Why did you kill them?! Do you realize what problems you could have caused?" "I am fully aware. That is why I hid the bodies. If you want more details, then you can ask Nina once she wakes up. Now quit hassling me." He gritted his teeth as my last sentence rubbed his already irritated instincts the wrong way. He was silent though. I wondered what thoughts were rolling through his head now. It had been too dark when he caught us outside for him to see the faint early signs of the bruises that were now scattered across Nina's arms. I was not looking forward to the moment that Daniel could clearly see the tokens of her struggle. 
 
 Nicky stirred and rolled over as her arms splayed across the bed. It was a good thing I was sitting near the end of the bed and right against the wall, otherwise she would have bumped into me. I blinked slowly as I tried to figure out how someone shorter than me could actually manage to take up the majority of a queen sized bed. The earliest hints of the dawn light were starting to come through the thin curtains. My instincts were starting to retreat to normal levels and I knew that Daniel's would be starting to strengthen. How odd that I considered my normal levels to be the weaker daytime levels and yet Daniel considered his more alert daytime instincts normal. Bizarre. The sun's position didn't affect our strength and speed, just how easily we could see the world around us. The night and day did affect how strong our instincts were though. At their strongest, they were more alert and temperamental. They made control harder, or at least it affected my control until that controlex intervened. Nicky continued to sleep although she was getting more restless as she tossed and turned. The room slowly got lighter and I knew when the sun cleared the horizon from how my instincts rippled and finally finished settling. Nina's breathing showed she was having a dream and the faint trembling said that it wasn't a happy dream. Daniel's eyes focused on her. He blinked slowly before narrowing his eyes. I remained still and silent since I was pretty sure that he saw the big bruise on her upper arm. Her one arm just happened to be lying on top of the blankets and wasn't hidden from prying eyes. Daniel rose to his feet and pulled back the curtain to let more light in before walking to stand beside her bed.

He would be able to see more from there than I could from here. Daniel's head swung towards me as his hands curled into fists, "What. The. Hell. Happened?" His seething voice told of his growing fury and rage. I responded quietly, "Now you know why I killed those two men. I got there in time to keep it from going past the point of bruises, but that is about all I can say. I advise against waking her with a growl or a snarl though. Let her sleep." The bruises on her arms would likely be the worst, although I suspected that there was some light bruising around her neck and possibly along her ribs and shins from her struggles. Daniel gazed once more down at her before reluctantly going to sit back down. He was clearly brooding over what he had seen. Considering he didn't bother trying to question me, he must have known that Nina was the best person to question if he wanted actual details. He didn't want to wake her though and I had counted on that. Nicky groaned and rolled over again, managing to bump her shoulder into my knee. Her eyes blinked blearily into the morning light. Her voice was thick with sleep, "Okay, how did you sneak that close to my pillow without me realizing it?" I chuckled lightly, "Nicky, I am sitting near the foot of your bed. Perhaps the more appropriate question is why have you squirmed all the way down to this corner?" She groaned and pulled the disheveled blankets over her head, "It is far too early to be asking rational questions..." Her breathing slowed to something that was common when one was halfway between the point of sleep and being awake. Silence reigned for about another half an hour before Nina stirred and stretched in her bed. Once Nina woke up, I had never seen her fall back to sleep. Daniel remained where he was as he waited. Nina sat up and winced a bit before glancing around. Her voice was quiet and oddly raspy, "Good morning." She blinked as if surprised by the sound of her voice. Daniel was focused on her even more. I examined her neck from my seat, but the bit of light bruising was not sufficient to have caused actual damage to her throat. The two men had mostly covered her mouth to keep her from calling for help and had not really focused on her neck. Daniel's voice was quiet, but loud enough for her to hear, "Are you alright?" Nina stretched a bit more to check just how much her body hurt from the movement and nodded, "Yes, just a few bruises as far as I can tell." "Why is your voice like that?" Daniel asked the question that I wanted to know. Nina cleared her throat and it sounded painful, "I think I just lost my voice partially." Daniel tilted his head in a silent inquiry as he wanted more details. Nina glanced uneasily towards me. I shrugged, "Those three are no longer in this place. I hid the bodies of those I killed in the forest so the locals won't be any wiser. Feel free to speak." Nina visibly relaxed. I knew she hated keeping secrets from Daniel. She turned to face him, "The three bathrooms inside were full so I went to the one outside. I didn't expect three men to corner me. Remember the three that tried to attack Trinity at Ironwind?" Daniel nodded silently as his eyebrows furrowed in thought as his mind skipped ahead. Nina continued, "Turns out they were here and didn't like that we kicked them out of Ironwind. They thought they could get revenge, but Trinity appeared and took out two of them." Daniel interrupted, "Why didn't you call out? I would have come." Nina made a face, "I did try, but they put a hand over my mouth so I was silenced. I am pretty sure I screamed myself hoarse when that one bastard pointed his gun at Trinity." I raised an eyebrow in surprise. I had never heard Nina use such words before. Daniel glanced at me momentarily to ensure I wasn't hiding an injury, but a quick sniff told him that none of my blood had been shed recently. He turned back to Nina, "I didn't hear a gunshot." Nina shook her head, "Trinity somehow stole the gun clip without him knowing. He tried to fire it, but there were no bullets in the gun." Nina made a face, "Then she killed him for the attempt." I growled lowly, "That was the third time he tried to kill me. He had it coming even if you hadn't been there." Nina winced and Daniel turned his head to analyze my faintly glowering expression. As much as I would have liked to see that man suffer for all of the pain he had caused me, I was no sadist and his death had been nearly instantaneous. Daniel exhaled slowly as he fought his temper down to a lower level, "I guess I have to thank you once more for helping Nina." "Just don't let these two go wandering around in the dark again while I am away. They seem to be magnets for trouble." Nicky stuck her head out from under the covers, "Did you just call me trouble?" I shook my head at the sleepy redhead, "No, I said that trouble finds you like it has you on radar." Nicky yawned, "Welcome to my life.... Please fasten your seatbelt and keep your arms and legs in at all times. Don't feed the animals, drink the water, or talk to the voices. Enjoy the ride!" She pulled the covers over her head once more. I had a feeling that it was going to be one of those days. I looked over to see Nina watching at Nicky in bemusement. I idly commented, "And you expected her to keep an eye on me?" Nicky's muffled voice sounded from within the blankets, "Hey, you have to give me some credit. I did go out there and confuse that one dimwit when he was holding Nina as a hostage. You should be impressed that I even woke up, let alone noticed that your eyes were circling something outside." "And just how did you know it was me and not a feral?" Nicky lifted the blankets a bit to stare at me with an expression that said the answer should have been obvious, "You are the only sane zombie in the area that is close to my size and the fact that I saw your eyes showed that you were sane. Otherwise I would not have seen anything if a Nightstalker was on the prowl." Daniel's clipped tone interrupted our discussion, "Someone was holding Nina hostage?" Nicky glanced at a rather upset looking Daniel, "Oh, I didn't realize that you didn't know that detail. When Nina said they silenced her, I thought you would have figured out that part. My bad." Nicky dropped the blankets and let them hide her from view once more. Nicky was reminding me of that stupid whack-a-mole game. I wouldn't mind whacking her over the head at this particular moment either. Daniel turned to Nina, "I think you better retell the entire story in more detail. I am clearly not about to get anything useful out of these two." I stretched and nudged Nicky with my foot, "And that is our cue to leave. Come on Nicky, get up and dress quickly." I glanced at Daniel, "Keep in mind that we do have neighbors who are likely asleep." Nicky swiftly emerged from under the blankets and grabbed her backpack, "I can change in the bathroom down the hall. Let's go." I followed her as I left Nina the fun task of explaining things to Daniel without him blowing a gasket. It was best if I was not in the room when he realized that they had actually intended to kill her. I could take Nicky to breakfast as an excuse for my swift disappearance.

 

Chapter 96


 The bathrooms also had showers. We managed to linger in the shower and still beat Nina and Daniel to the dining hall. I hadn't heard any commotion, so I assumed that Daniel hadn't lost his cool. We were halfway done eating when the other two finally made an appearance. Daniel didn't look like he was in a good mood and the locals gave him a wide berth. Nina ignored his mood as she grabbed a plate. Daniel took a seat across from me instead of in the further seat like he usually did. Drat. This means that he clearly wants to talk with me and chose that seat for some reason. I took a long drink of water as he took his first bite of scrambled eggs. His eyes never left me. I exhaled in annoyance, "Just get it off your chest without causing a scene." "Are you sure that they were dead?" "If someone has no heartbeat and isn't a zombie, then I am safe in saying that they are dead." He growled faintly at my ambiguous answer, "I want a plain answer. Are all three of them dead?" Nina wouldn't have known if anything happened to the third man and Daniel was bothered by this lack of knowledge. I let my breath out slowly, "Two are unquestionably dead. I am not sure of the fate of the third." He narrowed his eyes, "How can you not be sure?" I huffed lightly, "Because I was escorting these two to safety and he left on a motorbike or dirt bike. There is no way I can catch something like that unless it passes fairly close to me. Considering he left in the dark, he may very well have run afoul of mechanical problems or zombies." I had also given my word and had not even attempted to go after him. He never had wielded a gun in any of our encounters, so I reluctantly concluded that he may have been more of a follower than a leader and he might finally give up attempting to kill people or zombies now that his friends were gone. That was about the limit of my optimistic side. My pessimistic side recalled the baseball bat he carried the first two times and hoped that a zombie had eaten him. Daniel grumbled, but turned his attention to his plate and continued eating. It wasn't as if he could do anything about it at this point. We were some of the very first in here to eat, so the lack of a crowd made things easier. It didn't take us long to finish and pack the truck up. Jim met us at the gate to bid us farewell. I nodded politely while hoping that they never wondered why three men were gone when only one had been seen leaving. It certainly couldn't have been due to a Nightstalker who had been roaming the area outside of the fence... Daniel drove down the road as our second day began. I dug around in my backpack for something I had found when checking out an abandoned house last night. Anything edible was long gone, but there were all sorts of other odds and ends that people hadn't cared about when looting it. I spoke to Nicky, "You wondered where your gift was last night? Catch." Her eyes lit up even before she had any clue what I had managed to locate in my backpack. I gently tossed the item to her. A grin spread across her face as she caught the rubik's cube, "Thanks!" I figured it was a safe gift to help pass the time. I had rummaged around a few rooms looking for something appropriate. Nicky rolled it around in her hands a few times before twisting the orderly colors into a jumble. If Nicky could pass hours simply coloring, then she should be able to also pass hours playing with this. Or that was my hope at any rate. It seemed to be working. In the end, it kept her busy for four hours until we reached the next Stronghold on our list.  Nina greeted the woman at the gate, "Good morning. We are from Ironwind Stronghold. You probably know that the third wave is approaching and we have come to give some tips as well as check for anyone who might be infected."

The woman looked dubious, "We know it is coming and we already have the suggested face masks ready. I have never heard of anything that could tell if someone was infected." Great. I guess I should have known that Nina wouldn't just stop at places that had expressly invited us when she could stop at all places we could possibly find. I just hadn't expected to come across such a place so early in our trip. Nina gestured towards Daniel, "Daniel is a sane zombie and his sense of smell can pick it up this close to the turning point. We have a cure as well as a serum that will let them stay in control if they decided they want to be a zombie." The woman narrowed her eyes in thought, "I seem to recall hearing about a sane zombie at Ironwind now that you mention it. Please come on in." Most Strongholds were hospitable. They were just leery in case those showing up were bandits or troublemakers. Daniel slowly drove the truck beside her as she walked. I planned to keep a low profile if possible since this place was clearly not expecting us to appear. They didn't recognize Daniel or Nina either. I noticed that Daniel's eyes were a dull red as he let them see that he really was a zombie. It was almost odd to see him with red eyes. The woman was talking with Nina, "How long do you plan on staying?" Nina shrugged, "Just long enough to give some people a basic rundown on what to do during the third wave and to get a quick tour to check for anyone infected. Hopefully no more than an hour." The woman relaxed and nodded before pointing, "You can park right there." Daniel parked the truck and we all got out. The woman was already sending someone off to find a group of people to listen to Nina's speech. She turned back to us, "You mentioned a tour is the best way to find anyone infected?" Daniel nodded courteously, "Yes, if I pick up the scent then we can track it down to an individual." The woman looked a bit surprised that Daniel sounded so human. She must have never met a sane zombie before, although considering that most sane zombies avoided humans, it wasn't really a surprise. She started to lead us on a tour. About halfway through Daniel paused, "Can we go in this direction? Someone is infected." I had noted the smell even as we started the tour and Daniel had probably also noticed it, but this was the first time we had come across a direct scent trail. It seemed like Daniel and Nina were content to let me remain an unknown entity. That was just fine by me. Daniel kept indicating directions as he tracked the scent. We eventually found the man in the garden. Nina broke the news to him and gave him the options. A minute later he had been given the cure. Daniel turned back to the woman, "I think he was the only one, but may we continue in the tour?" She nodded, "Certainly." She seemed impressed by what she had seen. I couldn't figure out why they were so trusting of strangers who came in and randomly injected a guy with some liquid. She took the lead once more, pointing out buildings to keep the conversation going with Nina. Daniel glanced at me and spoke very quietly, "That is the only one I smell. Are there any others?" I murmured a reply, "He was the only one." Daniel relaxed a bit and looked around until the tour ended. "Thank you. I didn't pick up any other scents, so if your friends over there want to hear Nina's explanation, then she will leave a few vials of the cure and we will be on our way." The waiting group was waved over by the woman and Nina went through her usual speech about the fine details of the airborne virus. She also went over the cure and the controlex drug as well as where Ironwind was in case they ended up needing more. I was probably going to hear that well-rehearsed speech so many times by the time this trip was done that I would be hearing it in my sleep.

They thanked her and one even gave her a small basket of fruit. Nina managed to pry herself away from their gratefulness after a few minutes. Nicky and I were already sitting in the back of the truck watching with amusement. Having a cure was a huge milestone for these people and I was pretty sure that Nina would be welcomed with open arms at any point in the future. Nina eventually made her getaway and got in the truck. Once she was inside, Daniel also got in and we slowly headed towards the gate to start driving towards our next stop. 
 
 This routine is going to get real old really fast... I helped to pack up in the dim predawn light. My instincts were only just starting to think about fading. That meant it was far too bloody early to be preparing for another long boring ride. Day four had begun and we were all up early to leave with minimal fanfare. Our planned route was slowly circling out from Ironwind. The places along main routes knew we were coming and happily accepted us. Other places had no such head's up and were understandably suspicious. Most loosened up as they spoke with us. All had heard the rumors of Ironwind and of the sane zombie there which helped our case immensely. Most places had at least one infected person, although a couple had been clean. We had still left the cure in each location with instructions on its use as well as precautions to take during the wave. I thought that they would have been more suspicious about letting Nina inject them with a mystery drug, but most of the infected admitted that they had noticed that some animals, particularly cats, had started to avoid their close presence. Only a handful of people were up at this time and we ate leftovers from supper as breakfast. Well, I simply watched them eat. The old man watched us getting ready to leave with a mournful expression, "Are you sure you don't want to stay a few days?" Nina smiled gently at him, "Your hospitality has been excellent, but we have to visit more Strongholds to spread out the cure." He nodded reluctantly, "Always feel free to return." "Thank you." Daniel started the truck and the man took that as his cue to stand back so we could leave. I leaned against the tailgate and watched the stars slowly disappear. Nina groaned from the front seat and looked over her large notepad, "Why isn't this making sense? I know that there is no way that this final number is correct..." I could see about half of the long column of numbers she had jotted down on the graph paper from my seat. I tilted my head, "Can you hold that up a bit higher?" Nina glanced out the back window at me in surprise, but raised it up so I could see the bottom half of the page. The mistakes were easy for me to spot. My eyes had been trained for this sort of proofing. "Whatever FT1397 and DG0121 are, they are listed twice. EN0032 has the numbers in the wrong column since it only has one number after the decimal, not two after the decimal like the rest do." That comment earned me three startled looks. Nina swiftly scanned the page and exclaimed, "You're right. No wonder my numbers weren't even semi-possible." She lifted her head to look at me in burning curiosity, "How did you spot that so fast?" "I used to be the assistant to an accountant. He was well known for his refusal to do anything shady. Most businesses wanted him to do their taxes to look more reputable to the small community and to the government. To enforce that image, he always had me check the numbers to ensure that companies didn't try to claim more than what they had actually spent. He even won some sort of big accountant award for his thoroughness. He helped everyone claim as much as they could, but sent cheaters packing."

Nina's eyes took on that familiar light as the interrogator in her woke to life once more, "Really? That is quite fascinating." I decided to get the spotlight off of me as swiftly as possible, "Hey Nicky, what did you do before the zombies appeared?" She was laying on her back watching the clouds. She turned to me with a grin, "I didn't need a job. I had my hands full just trying to keep all of my counselors and psychiatrists on their toes." Why did I even bother asking... Nina gazed down at Nicky through the open window, "If you don't mind me asking, you never made it sound as if you were strapped for cash." Nicky snorted, "Money was never an issue. My Mother ensured that my bank account was always packed full of that electronic green stuff, but she was too stuck up on her high horse to ever be seen in public with me. I only ever got to see her a couple of times a year. She was a model and an actor, but I think only a few people knew that she even had a daughter." I felt bad for Nicky. My parents had been taken from me, but hers had clearly not wanted her. Nina looked sympathetic and even Daniel was quiet. Nicky turned to look at the back of Daniel's head, "And what did you do Daniel? If you say that you were a janitor, then I am going to laugh." He moved the rearview mirror so he could see her prone form in the truck box, "I was actually a security guard for a small company. Worked there for years, but I only escorted two people out of the place during all of that time. The insurance company wanted a security guard around due to some safety deposit boxes on site." I raised an eyebrow, "You were a security guard and you didn't know how to use a knife?" His eyes met mine in the mirror, "I had a baton, mace, and a small handgun. I only ever used them in practice. It was a very small company with elderly clients." Nicky mused, "I guess that explains the guard dog act. Security guards do have some bodyguard training too, right?" Daniel nodded in surprise at her knowledge, "Some, but I had just started classes to upgrade to an escort or a lower end bodyguard." That explained a lot about Daniel's behavior with Nina. I inquired, "So you decided to become Nina's bodyguard?" Daniel looked startled, "How did you figure that out?" I continued to examine him, "I connected a few dots along the way." I was not about the mention the guard dog act while I might be able to get more information out of him. He usually didn't talk much about himself and anything that resembled an insult would end this information session. He shook his head, "Well, you are correct. I made a deal with Nina shortly after I turned that I would be her bodyguard as long as she didn't stop her research for a cure or vaccine." Nina nodded, "I readily agreed since there are always people who would rather force scientists to focus on weapons of war instead of looking for things that benefit society. Most people wouldn't consider trying to fight a Terror." I thought for a while longer and my own instincts pointed out a few things that stood out, "Daniel, how much of your bodyguard act is from your training and how much of it is influenced by your instincts?" Daniel remained silent although he now wore an astonished look. Nina was looking back at me in curiosity, "What do you mean?" I ignored her question as I continued to watch Daniel. Nina glanced between Daniel and me, "Daniel, do you know what she is talking about?" Daniel glanced at me in the mirror and I was surprised to see that he looked somewhat shocked. He responded slowly and almost reluctantly to Nina's question, "I am very surprised that she noticed it. I wasn't even entirely sure if it was just a figment of my imagination." Nina gently prodded, "I don't understand..." Daniel exhaled gustily as he reluctantly continued, "When we first started traveling together my role as a bodyguard was just that, a bodyguard concerned mostly with physical well-being. As the weeks went by, it slowly changed as our friendship built. At one point I even wondered if it was love, but zombies really don't feel that sort of attraction, so that wasn't it. It had me confused, but it didn't affect anything." He shook his head as he got back on track, "Months later if anyone threatened you, I would get angry and I put the reaction down as our strong friendship. It wasn't until quite recently that I thought it might be connected to my instincts." His eyes traveled to mine, "But how did you make that connection?" I took my time wording my response, "It didn't really cross my mind until now when I put your comments and past behavior together with something that Luke had said. As zombies, our emotions and our instincts are often quite closely linked. If Nina was threatened, you got mad and your instincts rose which caused you some control issues." I took a deep breath, "But if I think about it, it was more that your instincts were also reacting to the threat towards Nina and not just towards your emotions. When it comes to just your emotions, you generally have no issues with control. Nightstalkers and Runner have their own quirks and we know that Terrors must have their own as well." I shrugged as I tried to sum it up, "Your reactions were more instinctive and didn't seem to originate entirely from your humanity. Nightstalkers are well-known to be loners, but every sane one I met was loyal once we trusted one another. So, I assume that Terrors are also quite protective of those they trust completely and your instincts may be able to focus on the safety of a human instead of just yourself. It is as if your instincts handle a threat towards Nina about as well as they would to a threat towards you and your mind is already protective of her since she can't take the kind of hits or damage that you can." The silence was only broken by the sound of the truck motor and tires hitting gravel and the occasional twig. Nina was rapidly scribbling this down. Daniel stared at the road as he compared my words to what he felt. Sometime later Daniel looked in the mirror at me, "I think you may be right. But why would it be so much more pronounced the last few weeks?" I considered it for a moment, but the answer was quite obvious to me, "I am pretty sure it is because you are more in tune with your instincts lately. Sure, you can override them easily, but if they take the side that your human mind is, you tend to let your instincts bolster your own reaction which causes your reaction to be stronger than usual. If your mind is at odds with your instincts, you tend to suppress them very well. You can understand your instincts more easily now, so you are noticing it more. "Those pyromaniacs in the shed caught you off balance since you weren't expecting it and you weren't in tune enough with your instincts at that point to realize that half of your problem actually was your instincts and not just your own reaction. I also think that you didn't know how to redirect your anger at that point. When you found out Nina had been threatened the other day, you were a bit more in tune with your instincts and were expecting to have to work for control so you probably overrode your instincts and only had to deal with your own reaction." I tilted my head and added thoughtfully, "I honestly think Luke is right. Terrors have a much easier time with control because they aren't quite as in tune with their instincts. It would explain why you have so few problems with control. It is just when your control is strained that you aren't accustomed to fighting for control and things get risky." Daniel had a faraway look in his eyes and Nina was still furiously trying to get this onto paper before she forgot any of the details. I turned my gaze to contemplate the scenery as well as our latest discovery of a quirk that Terrors apparently had.

 

Chapter 97

            The ride was silent as each was left to their own thoughts. This suited me just fine. My peace and quiet was interrupted as Nicky started picking at the frayed edges of my shoes. I sighed, "Must you do that?" Her voice was lazy with boredom, "These shoes are looking worse for wear. There must be dozens of shoes left in stores or houses, why don't you get a new pair?" "These are broken in and comfortable." "Well, you certainly have the first part right..." I chuckled despite myself and shook my head. I was due for a new pair, but I was most fussy when it came to shoes. If they didn't allow me to move silently, then they were worse than going barefoot. Most sane zombies actually did go barefoot. The skin of the bottom of our feet was quite tough. Nina's voice came from inside the truck cab, "And there is Riverbend Stronghold." And there goes my good mood... Thanks Nina... This place was remote enough that there had been no chance of word reaching them about our coming. Neither Nina nor Daniel had stopped at this location in the past either. Nicky sat up as we approached. We slowed and Nina greeted the sentries. One went in search of the leader in charge. The man who came didn't offer his name and was quite suspicious of Nina's story. He likely thought we were bandits scoping the place out. Nina went over all of the fine details of the sneezing and third wave. The leader eventually let us in with reluctance. It didn't fail to escape my attention that both he and six armed men came with us. The leader grudgingly started to take us on a tour and he made sure to avoid anything that resembled a defense. I took a deep breath and three scents of zombie infection rode on the air. The man refused to comment on the buildings or things we saw. Nina decided to ask the same question that she had at every location, "Does there happen to be a man in his mid-twenties here by the name of John McComfry? His brother Luke is trying to locate him." The man shook his head, "None here by that name." I took a discrete sniff, but he spoke the truth, at least as far as he knew. Nina offered the usual masks and cure, which he accepted unenthusiastically and passed to someone else behind him. This guy is practically as grumpy as a Nightstalker, he just lacks the virus. Daniel took a sniff and pointed, "There is someone in that direction, may we go?" The leader looked at him with narrowed eyes for almost a full ten seconds before reluctantly nodding, "Fine. These people are under my protection though." We entered the building and followed the scent to a large back room where the person clearly spent most of their day. I now saw why the leader didn't really want us in here. It was a daycare for kids under the age of six. Daniel sniffed the air and looked around at the whirling group of a dozen children. The leader was watching him closely and the guards were also on edge. Daniel sighed as he looked at me, "I can't identify which one it is. I know it is a girl, but I would have to get close to figure out which one it is." The leader swiftly transferred his gaze to me in surprise. He had not been aware that I was a zombie. I turned my gaze so I was clearly looking at the leader, "I suspect that even if I pointed the child out that you either will not believe me or that you will not allow Nina to administer the cure or controlex. May I suggest proof that you are more likely to believe?" Nina and Daniel looked at me in slight confusion. They had no clue what I was talking about and I had never mentioned anything like this before. The leader judged my faintly irritably expression before slowly nodding, "What do you have in mind?"

I turned to one of the guards, "Go find us a cat. Any cat with a nose will do. I advise picking up a pair of gloves at the same time. Bring it up here, although you might want to keep your distance from Daniel or myself. Cats aren't exactly fond of zombies." The guard blinked in surprise and disappeared out the door. I turned back to the leader, "Do you want me to approach the children or have the girls pass in front of me? I will not touch them." The leader exhaled in an irritated huff. He was clearly not happy about having a zombie come near the children. He turned to those babysitting, "Walk the girls in front of her one at a time while we wait for this cat." I could understand Daniel's inability to determine who the infected one was. This bunch had been all over this room a few thousand times and had been in close contact as well. They really did need to be separated to figure this one out, even with my nose. Three children were walked in front of me and I shook my head slightly at each. The fourth one was the one we were seeking. I looked at the leader, "She is infected." He gritted his teeth and stared at me in challenge, "And?" He loaded question made me turn to growl faintly at him as I flashed a canine tooth at him, "My temper is short and I have been polite so far. Keep a civil tongue in your head unless you are looking for a fight. You can have the final say unless it involves murder." He narrowed his eyes but did not respond. I suspected that he just realized that two zombies against six guards when only two carried guns was a miscalculation on his part. I turned to walk towards Daniel, "Camouflage those eyes of yours and suppress your instincts as much as you can. Our group is going to wait against the far wall." I turned back to the leader, "Have the girls lined up against the opposite wall. Then have the guard pass in front of the line with the cat." The leader frowned, but nodded at the babysitters. We had barely lined up against the walls when the guard came back. The grey female in his arms was happily purring with the attention and petting the guard was giving her. The leader called him to his side, "Walk in front of the children. We will see if the cat predicts the same thing that the zombie did." I hate to break it to you buddy, but I am predicting that you are all about to get a surprise. I watched in motionless silence as the man walked just out of reach of the children and their caretakers. The cat seemed oblivious to the children. Then he got close to the end of the row. The cat whipped around in the man's arm and hissed fiercely at the infected girl before clawing her way out of the man's grip. The guard yelled in surprised pain as his arms were shredded by twenty fully extended claws in the cat's escape attempt. The cat was a grey streak as it disappeared out the door full tilt. Cats did not do well if a zombie snuck up on them and this one hadn't been paying attention so its reaction was a bit more extreme than I expected. The guard winced as he inspected the deep claw marks. The leader closed his eyes and took a deep breath before slowly exhaling. He opened up his eyes and I saw most of his suspicious walls had come down as he had solid proof that we had spoken the truth. His face was that of a leader when a child in his holding was dying. Children were dear and fiercely protected in this new age. To lose one was a tragedy. He walked slowly up to me. As per usual, I didn't even come up to his shoulders. I kept my normal expression on as he approached. I growled a faint warning when he started to enter my personal space and he stopped. He stared at my face with a somewhat desperate expression for some time before finally speaking, "What can we do?" Why the hell was he asking me? I responded in a level voice as I fought to maintain my patience, "Nina already went over the options. We do have a cure or we can offer the controlex. I personally suggest the cure since any zombie children I have ever encountered were feral and hell on wheels to deal with."

He nodded slowly, "Then we will take the cure." I glanced towards Nina, "She is carrying the cure. Do you want to do it here and just let the children carry on with whatever they are doing, or do you want to leave the room for the injection?" "Which is the best?" His near hostile manner had vanished and he was completely relying upon our knowledge. This new attitude was easier to deal with and didn't chafe against my instincts so badly. I shrugged, "Personal preference. It completely cures within six hours. In my shoes, I would just pull her into the hall so the other children don't see it and send her right back in to keep playing. Just don't let her kiss anyone today. The airborne strain shouldn't be contagious until the point when the sneezing starts, but no sense in taking chances." He nodded, "Then we shall do that." He motioned the woman with the child towards the hallway door. We all went into the hall and Nina wasted no time readying a syringe. She politely asked the leader, "May I approach the child?" He nodded and she managed the injection without the child even knowing when it happened. The child had been too busy staring at Daniel's red eyes in curiosity. I suspected that Daniel had used his eyes as a distraction before. The leader sighed in relief once it was over as he looked at me, "Thank you." I shrugged, "It is why we are going to each Stronghold within a certain radius of Ironwind. Now why don't we go track down the other two infected adults that I smelled as soon as we entered?" He blinked in surprise, "There are two more infected?" I snorted and replied dryly, "We can always have a cat double check for us if you like." To my surprise, the leader started chuckling, "I think we can skip that step." The guard sent him a rueful look and the leader shrugged in response, "Sorry Jacob, I had no idea the cat was going to react like that. She only said gloves, not full body armor." The atmosphere had relaxed substantially. The leader turned back to me and gestured down the hallway, "Care to lead us to the other two?" I nodded slowly and took the lead, unsure as to why he hadn't asked Daniel since he had been the one tracking thus far. Perhaps he had seen how Daniel had asked me to pinpoint the child and figured I was the better tracker. The leader walked beside me while giving me plenty of space. He seemed much more cordial now, "You are from Ironwind you said?" I hadn't spoken a word until we had been in the daycare, but I still responded, "Yes." He nodded in thought as we exited the building. I sniffed the air and lightly jerked my head towards one direction. He took the hint and headed in that direction, "I had heard rumors of a Stronghold to the east working on a cure, but I hadn't heard that they had actually developed one." "It was a fairly recent discovery and occurred mere weeks ago." He either took no note of my faintly flat tone or ignored it. I detested questions. Especially when Nina had already gone over this with him. Apparently she had not managed to desensitize me to people asking questions. I paused at the base of the sentry post and looked up, "The one on the left." The leader looked up, "Steve, come down here for a moment." Daniel gave me an odd look and murmured, "How can you tell from down here?" I glanced back, "The zombie scent belongs to the same person with the shaving crème scent and the other person has clearly not shaved for days." He nodded slowly at my deduction. I turned my attention to the young man who was approaching our group in confusion. I gestured to Nina, "Your turn to explain." Nina came forward and explained things as well as the options. The man wasted no time in asking for the cure. At this point, if anyone did just ask for the controlex, I was going to be extremely surprised and possibly request that Nina check him for brain damage. Most saw a zombie as the red eyed creatures of nightmare that was out to kill anything that was living. A zombie could still infect whatever remaining friends and family they may have and most would not chance it. The second was another man as well. Once he was also inoculated I took a deep breath to double check the air. "That is it. Everyone else is clear. I still suggest the masks just in case." The leader nodded, "It is still a week away, but we will start wearing them in three days to be on the safe side. Most already carry them just in case someone nearby sneezes." I shrugged, "Then our job here is done." The leader hesitated, "Are you sure we can't offer you rooms for the night?" I shook my head, "We can hit at least one, if not two more places before nightfall if we push. If they let us in, then we are doing even better." He tilted his head in thought, "You are heading south along this road toward the next place, right?" I watch him intently, "Yes." Something was on his mind. "If it is James' place, then tell him that Damien says hi and that I enjoyed our card game yesterday." I blinked slowly, "Thank you." It was the warmest tone I had managed in this place so far. Gratitude did not come easily to me and the faint hints in my voice would be easy to miss. He grinned, "Call me Damien. Come back and visit one day. You remind me of an Aunt I used to have. Never could get her to smile, but you could never get that irritable old soul to lie either." I hadn't smiled or lied in this place yet, but I had told more than my fair share of lies over the years. I nodded slowly although I didn't really like being compared to an old woman despite the compliment attached, "Thank you. I am not sure if I will ever come this way, but if I do, I will be sure to stop in and say hi." He escorted us back to our truck and watched us leave. The cold man had turned into quite a welcoming person, although he had tended to disregard my three companions. I watched the place disappear into the distance and a thought occurred to me. I turned to Nicky, "Are you sick?" Daniel glanced in the mirror as Nina looked back in concern. Nicky gave me an odd look, "No, why?" "You didn't say a single word the entire time we were in that place." Nicky chuckled, "Oh, that. I was wondering if you would notice. I had to bite my tongue when that guard was packing that cat into the room. Cats won't even come near me since I started hanging around with you and the pesky things never used to leave me alone." It hadn't occurred to me that the cats would pick up the afterscent and avoid her so thoroughly. Nina commented, "I never thought of using a cat before. I will have to remember that one." I raised an eyebrow, "Be sure to have someone else pick up the feline. Daniel's scent clings to you enough that it probably won't let you near it. It is something to suggest to places we visit as a way to tell if someone is truly infected or just having an allergy attack." "Why didn't you mention it earlier?" I shrugged, "I never really thought about it until now. There were only a couple of cats at Ironwind, so their avoidance of me wasn't that hard for them or particularly noticeable. I have no problems telling if someone is infected, so I never thought of ways for others to prove it. It should work with horses and most dogs too if the person in the final week or two. Cats have a much stronger reaction though." Nina winced, "I'll say. I hope that guy doesn't get a nasty infection from the cat's claws." I snorted, "That isn't my problem. If he had believed us in the first place, I wouldn't have had to resort to such stunts." Nina sighed, "Well, the next place should be easier since he gave us his name and a greeting." "I hope so." Nicky just snickered as she pulled out her rubik's cube again.

 

Chapter 98


 The next place was indeed a piece of cake with Damien's greeting. We were in and out within an hour. Nina was still hoping to hit two more places today. I was tired of this trip already, but I had allowed myself to be dragged along for the ride, so I figured as I might as well keep going along with it. Nicky sat up, "When's lunch? I'm starving." Daniel slowed and pulled over to the side of the road. Smart man. A hungry Nicky was not something that we wanted to deal with on a road trip. Nicky started to dig through our supplies and pulled out some spices. She looked at me, "Any chance of you catching a pheasant or two? I have a hankering for KFC and I even have a whack of spices." I sighed before testing the air, "Would chicken work instead? Some farmer's flock must have gotten loose some time ago. It will still take me a few minutes to get there and back." Nicky grinned at me, "How much trouble would I be in if I pointed imperiously and ordered 'fetch'?" I growled lowly in warning, "Heaps. And I wouldn't be bringing back a chicken either. Perhaps a big stick to beat you with though." She chuckled and shook her head, "Good thing I am not that dumb then. Can you bring me a chicken? Pretty please?!" She attempted to give me big puppydog eyes as she begged. I sighed and got to my feet, "Just to get away from you for five minutes, I will go track down a chicken." If I didn't go, she wouldn't stop asking and would probably be a right pain in my butt for the rest of the day. If I got her a chicken, she would stuff herself full of food and probably nap most of the afternoon. The choice was logical. I approached the trees and Nicky called out, "Please clean it too!" I snorted as I disappeared into the trees. I picked up speed as I tracked the birds. The quiet of the forest was far preferable to hanging around the campfire while a hungry Nicky waited impatiently for food to cook. This flock had been wild for some time and the birds were smart enough to remain on alert while avoiding hanging close to the trees. Too bad for them that chickens don't really fly that far without tiring, and perching in a tree wasn't going to stop me. I picked a chicken that was the closest to the forest and waited as it pecked at the long grass in the clearing. The moment it turned its back towards me I charged forward with silent footsteps. A couple of the other birds saw me coming and started to take off in a flurry of wings. The bird I was targeting started looking around to see which direction the danger was coming from. The two seconds that the bird hesitated was two seconds too long on the ground with me targeting it. I ensured it was dead and shook myself off lightly. I preferred to hunt at night. I drew my belt knife before skinning and cleaning the chicken. The smell of the blood did nothing to me since the sun was above the horizon. I headed back to where Nicky was waiting. I grabbed a stick to roast it on and passed both to Nicky. Daniel turned his head and narrowed his eyes as he looked down the road. I glanced over, but didn't see anything since there was a bend in the road. I didn't hear anything either. I kept half an eye on him since I knew his hearing was better than mine. His eyes never left the road as he maintained his vigil. Nina and Nicky were amiably coating the bird with a thick layer of spices and did not notice Daniel's preoccupation of the empty road. I subtly tested the air, but came up empty. I didn't hear anything unusual either. Just birds, insects and the usual small sounds. I scanned the treeline in boredom as I ensured that no zombies were around. 

Daniel shifted his stance slightly and my instincts stirred as he was no longer so relaxed. The faint sound of a distant dirt bike finally reached my ears. Two wheeled methods of transportation were not exactly common nowadays. The odds of Nina's attacker showing up were slim to none and I knew that others also traveled along this road, but this was just uncanny. I wouldn't mind seeing that man dead, but if it was him, he had just arrived at the wrong place at the wrong time. I seriously hoped that it was another traveler. The girls were distracted with their attempts at setting the chicken up on an impromptu rotisserie made of sticks and didn't notice the sound of the approaching bike. I watched as a red dirt bike rounded the corner. The full helmet made it hard to see his face and he was just too far for me to make out his facial features. Daniel's eyes narrowed for a couple of seconds before his hands curled in fists as a snarl split the air. Daniel's reaction told me exactly who had rounded the corner so close to our picnic spot. The biker was close enough now that I could see the man's wide eyes as he recognized us. He was braking hard, but his chances of getting turned around before Daniel caught him were slim. Nina and Nicky had jumped when Daniel snarled. I took several swift steps so I was beside Nina and spoke urgently, "Do you want your assailant from the other day dead?" Nina looked shocked, but shook her head, "No. That one did release me without harming me." I had figured that Nina wouldn't have wanted someone dead. She wasn't a vengeful type of person. Her decision was about to make my life unnecessarily hard. I huffed in irritation, "Daniel, let him go. Nina doesn't want him dead." The growl rumbling from Daniel's chest didn't falter. He ignored me as he slowly slipped into a hunting crouch as the fearful biker was still trying to slow down enough from highway speed to turn. I suspected that Daniel was going to let him start to turn around before catching up, like a cat letting a mouse almost get to safety. That would be the hunting side of his instincts showing through so strongly. His desire for the chase was blocking out other thoughts while his instincts were keeping him focused. I muttered, "Aw, bloody hell." Daniel clearly had no intention of stopping. There was no way I could actually stop a Terror by force, he was stronger and faster than me. But sometimes life isn't about who is the strongest or the fastest... I thought rapidly, but the man's chances of survival were plummeting by the second. The man had slowed enough to start his frantic turn on the loose gravel coating the highway. Daniel was starting to stalk after him slowly. I knew the second he revved the engine, that Daniel would be moving full tilt in pursuit. I also knew who would win at this close distance. I could only come up with one semi-possible idea to slow Daniel without attempting to seriously harm him. Well, a similar tactic worked before... I started running with silent footsteps as I came up behind him. Daniel just started to run as I launched myself at his back. I snarled loudly as I used my feet to ricochet off his back to a safer distance. The distraction worked and Daniel whirled around to defend his back with an enraged snarl. His instincts had been high before and my surprise attack had sent them skyrocketing. I swiftly backed up. Daniel glanced between me and the now-accelerating biker. His human mind knew that I wasn't a true threat and wanted to go after the biker, but his instincts were far more focused on the fact that a lower rank zombie had dared to attack him as well as interrupting his hunt. His instincts would not tolerate such an insult. His hesitation gave me time to get into the trees. The bike picked up speed and I turned to flee into the forest silently. It was a good thing that I had been this way recently. I took to the trees and parted ways from my previous scent trail. Daniel would likely not realize that he was tracking a slightly older trail until he came to the place where I had caught and cleaned the chicken.

I glanced through the trees to see the biker racing away at speeds that even Daniel couldn't hit. That left just me on his hit list and he was going to be pissed. Perhaps hiding for ten minutes will allow him to cool down. I hope that Nina calms him down a bit. I found a handful of scent masking herbs and used them. They would give me about 30 seconds of space. Barely worth the effort, but I would take it. I held still in the trees as I dimly heard Daniel pass by as he attempted to track me. I bared my teeth in silent triumph as he continued down the trail I had left when going after the chickens. Moments later I continued moving. Sitting in one spot was a foolish move in a zombie game of hide and go seek. I didn't dare cross the road in case he could see me. There was no wind, so I took that into account as I crossed a creek. I went down a trail for some distance before doubling back and returning to the creek. I broke off a branch before using a nail to cut my palm and touch the branch to my cut before sending it downstream again. I also continued downstream after it in hopes that Daniel would assume it was a trick like last time and follow the other trail I had just doubled back on. A minute later I left the creek and broke my trail in several spots. I had more or less made a slow loop that ended up where I had killed that chicken. My scent was strong here from my previous trip and I had a hunch that Daniel wouldn't return to this spot to check a second time since he knew my scent here was a dead end. I climbed up a tree to ensure that he couldn't sneak up on me. I had not heard him break any trees, so he wasn't completely enraged. I distantly heard Nina and Nicky calling out for me, but didn't feel like returning just yet. They must really be shouting for me to hear them from here. They weren't shouting for Daniel though, so they must have sent him looking for me. If I could hear them, then I was close enough for them to hear me if I responded. I considered the situation. Enough time had passed that I was sure that Daniel had regained control of his instincts. I sighed as I knew that it was time to return. My presence was probably the only reason that Nicky still lived. I had a sneaking suspicion that even if Nina and Daniel left, that Nicky would remain and wait for me to return. Ha! What am I talking about? They wouldn't give up searching lightly. The earliest I could see them giving up would be tomorrow at noon in case I returned during the night. I really didn't want to meet Daniel in the trees though. What else could I do to throw Daniel off track? Perhaps it was time to pull another item out of the veritable bag of zombie things that he was unaware of. I got to my feet and ensured that the Terror wasn't lurking below before descending to the forest floor. I took a deep breath and gave that low creepy owl-like proximity call. Such a sound carried and I knew that the women would hear it. That also meant that Daniel would hear it. The sound was one that only sane Nightstalkers made, so it should really throw his instincts for a loop. I started running as fast as I could while remaining silent. Daniel's hearing was excellent and he would have no trouble determining exactly where that strange sound had originated. He would undoubtedly come investigate. I veered towards the road while remaining in the trees. It took me a few minutes to get close to the truck. I could see both women looking worried. Nina bent to turn the chicken a bit more. Daniel was absent, likely checking the area that I had just vacated. I exhaled reluctantly before walking out of the trees. Nicky immediately spotted me and grinned as she relaxed. She waited until I was closer before speaking, "You know, if you made that sound at night, you could scare the crap out of a lot of people." Nina just realizing that I was here and looked up with a relieved expression. I huffed faintly, "Considering that sound is only made by sane Nightstalkers and is just a proximity call, I fail to see why it is any worse than a Nightstalker scream."

Nicky just grinned and shook her head, "Well, we have no way of knowing that and that sound would be perfect at a halloween party." Nina stood up with a sigh of relief before cupping her hands around her mouth and shouting, "Daniel! She's returned!" I gave her a half-glare, "You could have left him out there for a while longer." Nina shook her head, "That wouldn't be nice. Besides, he felt bad enough for almost going after that guy. Chasing you off as well was hitting him pretty hard." I sighed gustily, but didn't reply. I wasn't sure what kind of mood he was in, but I doubted that remorseful was even in the ball court. Daniel would probably be more restrained if we had human spectators. That was what I was banking on at any rate. I had interrupted his kill as well as ambushed him. His instincts were going to be out for blood unless he had an insanely good handle on them. I walked over to lean against the truck as I waited for the Terror to make his appearance. I didn't have to wait long before Daniel arrived. I had heard him coming and he rapidly slowed his pace before emerging from the trees. He was breathing slightly hard, so he must have really been running hard as he tried to circle the area and pick up my trail. His eyes were a dull red and he growled faintly as he spotted me. Nina frowned lightly, "Relax Daniel. You said she didn't actually harm you." He barely spared a glance at her as he came towards our group. I kept a sharp eye on him since his instincts were still fairly high. He was also solely focused on me. He growled again as he got closer and I lifted a lip to flash a tooth at him to let him know that I did not appreciate the way he was approaching me. That act of defiance made Daniel growl more deeply. I stopped leaning against the truck as I moved to the side so it wasn't behind me. His body language shifted to a less threatening stance as he continued to close the now-short distance between us. Nicky wasn't stupid and pulled Nina to a safer distance. Nina watched in worry, but let Nicky drag her away. I could regret this one... I narrowed my eyes as I slipped in a slight crouch before altering my body language to match his. I was surprised that he realized enough to wait for me to change my stance to show that I accepted the wrestling match. His eyes flashed a brighter red the second he saw it before launching himself at me with a low snarl. His immediate charge almost took me by surprise considering how our past matches had gone. I didn't have time to drop to the ground to avoid his charge and the force of his tackle sent both of us flying. He managed to grab my arms and I snarled as I tried to twist out of his grip before we hit the ground, but it was to no avail. I didn't manage to free myself, but I did manage to ensure that he was on the bottom and took the brunt of the impact as gravity reclaimed us. The faint smell of his blood showed that his t-shirt had not protected his back from a sharp rock or stick. We were both growling as we wrestled. I hadn't been particularly in the mood for a wrestling match, but with his instincts so high, this was the easiest way to bring them down without bloodshed. It was a zombie thing. Such matches fit both playful moods as well as when irritation was overly present. Almost like a makeup session between friends. It showed that he truly wasn't angry at me. My acceptance of the match showed that I hadn't meant my earlier surprise attack and didn't hold a grudge. He wasn't holding back much and I was losing this match badly regardless of which tricks I tried. Moves that worked well on Runners or decently on Nightstalkers were mostly useless against the stronger Terror. I dug my knee into his side and he grunted as he rolled me to the side so I couldn't continue that tactic. My side hit the dirt with a fair bit of force and I felt my sunglasses start to slip down. They had started to slide with the first tackle, but this was more serious. Daniel managed to grab both of my wrists and as I tried to jerk them free the jolt caused my sunglasses to come off. I had felt them sliding so I had enough notice to close my eyes tightly, but the light was still bright enough to make me snarl. Nightstalkers did not do well in the daylight. Daniel had seen them fall down and immediately released me. He got to his feet as he swiftly backed away. I wasted no time in pushing my sunglasses back into place. They hadn't truly fallen off my face, but they had slid down so far that they almost came off my nose. I growled and shook my head, trying to dissipate the faint pain that I still felt from that brief exposure. Even with my eyes closed, the sunlight was painful. Daniel inquired, "Are you okay?" I snorted, "That was worse than trying to stare at the sun with a hangover." My tone was halfway a growl and I tried to settle my instincts somewhat so I wasn't so snarly. I blinked slightly watering eyes. Things were somewhat blurry, but I could see shapes at least. "Sorry. I didn't mean to knock your glasses off." I had mostly gotten the upper hand on my instincts and shrugged as I got to my feet, "It happens." It was a somewhat common occurrence with wrestling Nightstalkers. I had accidently knocked Kelly's loose and she had knocked mine off in the past. This particular pair of glasses fit pretty snug, but one of my backup pairs fell off much more readily. That was exactly why it was a backup for my other backup pair... I shook my head lightly to try and get the haze to disappear, but I knew it would be a couple of minutes before my vision recovered. Nicky spoke, "Hey, don't look at me like that. She has her sunglasses back on so there is no reason for me to approach her." I glanced over, but while I could make out Nicky's silhouette, I wasn't sure who she might be looking at. My best guess was that she was talking to Nina. "I thought we brought you along to help her in times like these?" Nicky snorted, "It is one thing for me to try to stop her from killing an innocent human – and I do not include Daniel in that category. It is quite another for me to go near her when she gets lightblinded." Daniel's voice carried disbelief, "You have never cared about invading anyone's personal space before. You were beside her last time." Nicky replied, "There is a huge difference between a meditated and planned out situation and one where it accidently happens while she is in the middle of a dog fight." I interrupted their argument, "It wasn't as bad as it could be. Just don't come within arm's reach for a few minutes. Can someone turn that bird before that side burns any more than it already has?" Nina hastily went to rescue their lunch. I walked over to lean against the truck once more. I crossed my arms impatiently as I waited for my sight to fully return. The pain was mostly gone already, but things were still blurry. My sight recovered before the chicken finished cooking. My stance relaxed as I could see the world around me once. Daniel gave me my space since he knew that his proximity would have a stronger effect on me than the others. They gave me room as well, unsure of just how far they could push me at the moment. Daniel's instincts seemed to have settled after that interrupted match. I seriously hoped that the biker never crossed paths with Daniel again. I still can't believe that he happened to be traveling along the same road as us... His luck is almost worse than mine and that is saying something. All three of them sampled the chicken. From the way Nina and Nicky were stuffing themselves, it must have turned out quite good. Daniel glanced over me, "How are you doing?" "Back to normal." My tone was a bit short, but my sight had returned. Nicky sighed happily as she finished a piece of chicken, "Oh, that was good. We really have to get you to go hunting during the day more often. We didn't have to overcook it since we knew you didn't contaminate the meat." Daniel shook his head at Nicky's way of thinking, "Ready to hit the road once more?" Nicky cocked her head to the side as she regarded Daniel from her seat on the ground, "I honestly prefer riding as passenger to driving, but either one is actually much better than trying to beat up the pavement. I know I won't win that battle." Daniel snorted at her bad joke and started packing up the bit that we had unpacked.

 

Chapter 99


 Nicky sat up and examined the Stronghold we were approaching, "Oh, I know this place. I stayed here for a few weeks." Nina twisted in her seat to look back at us. I examined the perky looking redhead, "Did you leave on good terms?" Nicky tilted her head, "How do you define good?" That was not what I wanted to hear... I narrowed my eyes as I focused on Nicky, "Are they going to attempt to throw you right back outside of the gate?" Nicky shook her head, "I don't think so, I wasn't here long enough to annoy people that much. They may want assurance that you don't plan to leave me here, but I doubt they will mind me visiting." I sighed heavily, "What is this? Something strange has to keep happening every time we turn around? We have been travelling for five days already. Something has to give." Nicky grinned at me, "I believe that something is your peace of mind." I growled at her and gently kicked her ankle. "No need to get violent! I am just stating the facts! Besides, road trips are always guaranteed to be filled with fun and action if you are along." I could clock her upside the head right about now... "That is not a detail that I am particularly enjoying." "You may not be enjoying it, but I sure am!" That's it... I growled lowly at her overly enthusiastic mood and snagged her ankle before dragging her across the mattress towards me. Nicky yelped in surprised, "Hey! What do you think you are- eek!" Her protests broke into giggles as I started tickling her. I had to use extreme care with my fingernails that could so easily rip through clothing or skin. "Mercy! Merc- eek!" I chuckled with a feral grin as I used my leg to roll her away from me. Nicky scrambled against the truck cab breathlessly as she sat up. She was breathing hard, but grinning. Nina was looking over her shoulder at us with a surprised expression. Nicky turned to look at her, "It is really unsafe back here, can I climb through the window to join you up front?" Daniel and Nina both responded at the same time, "No." Nina shook her head and elaborated, "Besides, we will be at the Stronghold within two minutes. Just sit still and behave so Trinity quits tormenting you." I blinked slowly and commented, "For someone who hangs around zombies, you really don't understand the true meaning of torture." Nina turned to look at me, "You mean leaving prey half dead with entrails hanging out while the zombie chews on the neck or chest?" "That sounds about right for a feral." She shrugged, "I did watch a few feral Runners hunt from downwind where they couldn't scent me. Only did it a few times since Daniel didn't like me that close to a hunting zombie. I hope you have never been so cruel in your hunts." "No, I prefer a quick clean kill. I don't like to see them suffer. Besides, I may be fast, but if I only injure a deer or rabbit, they can outrun me. It isn't fair to the animal and zombie instincts detest losing a kill, which adds extra incentive." Nina didn't reply since Daniel slowed down as he approached the gate. I saw a few people holding binoculars in the sentry posts and I was pretty sure that they had seen Nicky and me horsing around in the back of the truck. I somehow doubted that they would think we were bandits. I don't recall ever hearing of bandits having a tickle war...

I listened as Nina greeted the people and they let us in without too much convincing. An old man greeted Nina, "Hello, I'm Ryan. Welcome to Brookside Stronghold. Where have you come from?" Nina shook his hand, "I'm Nina. Three hours ago we left Drake's Stronghold to the east, but we truly hail from Ironwind Stronghold." I tuned Nina out as she went on to explain about our long trip to spread the cure and locate any infected. We had hit one Stronghold after lunch, but Nina had wanted to push to get to this place before sunset. I glanced at the sun. We had about two hours before it set so we had made it in time. I took a deep breath, but the biker had not passed through here, so that was a relief. I could smell three infected people though. A couple of other scents seemed familiar, but I couldn't quite place them. My instincts stirred faintly, as if these people had annoyed me in the past. I followed the others as the man let Daniel take the lead to track down those infected. My mind went on a sidetrip as it focused on the oddly familiar scents. There were two of them and I had mostly likely met these people within the last three months, or crossed their scents in one of the many places we had stopped or stayed at. It wasn't the traders and it wasn't one of the residents from Ironwind, which didn't leave many options considering my instincts recalled them enough to stir unhappily. My instincts weren't agitated, so they had never thoroughly pissed me off. My mind just refused to let the puzzle rest. Some days I wonder if I have obsessive compulsive disorder... It jiggled around the edges of my mind and refused to let me truly remember it. It was like trying to recall the name of a song when you recognized just one line of the lyrics. Both of those are as annoying as hell to boot. The people were almost certainly using different hygiene products here which was also altering their scent just enough that I couldn't recall the person's identity. I had obviously not been around these people much if a bit of soap or shampoo prevents me from recognizing them. I have never met many people, so I wonder who it could be? Bang! "Die you savages!" I ducked with a snarl before launching myself at Nicky and Nina. I managed to grab both of them at the same time and drag them behind the dubious cover of a large shed. The old man was scrambling the other way for cover while Daniel ducked behind a truck. I could easily hear his snarling. My teeth were bared in rage as I realized who had just tried to shoot us. Against all odds, the two pyromaniacs whom had been exiled from Ironwind Stronghold had ended up here. Even worse was that at least one of them had a rifle of some sort. Our only grace was that their aim was apparently as bad as Nicky's. Daniel's eyes were glowing a furious red and he started to sneak to the side. He darted from the cover of the truck to get behind a building. Another shot rang out, but once more they missed. I suspected that they only had one gun or else more shots would have sounded. With luck, their attention would be on Daniel. I turned my gaze to the two women who were huddled on the ground to make themselves as small as possible, "Stay here and Do Not Move." I emphasized the last three words with force. Both women nodded their understanding and agreement. I straightened up into a half crouch and examined what I could see from here without sticking my head out. I hadn't been paying attention to the buildings ahead, so I wasn't sure exactly what the layout might be. Daniel darted across the opening between his current hiding spot and a garage. He was slowly trying to work his way away from Nina and Nicky. His trail would also allow him to eventually get behind our attackers.

Hopefully their attention would be on Daniel. I decided to circle the other way. The distance between this shed and a nearby truck wasn't that great. I used as much speed as I could as I crossed the distance. I slid to a stop behind the truck. I waited motionlessly for a gunshot, but it never came. They were either waiting for me to try again or they hadn't noticed me as they tried to target Daniel. If I get shot again, I will be extremely pissed... I took a deep breath and dashed over to the next piece of cover which was a building. I could hear numerous locals shouting in the background as they tried to figure out what was going on while getting under cover. Most seemed to think that it was a bandit attack and the few that had seen us enter thought we were bandits. I gritted my teeth, if we got targeted by every person here, we were in serious trouble... I heard the old man shout out that we weren't the guilty ones and that the other two were to blame. I breathed a faint sigh of relief as that word was spread further. I climbed in one window of the building and ran down a hallway. Parting the blinds on a window finally allowed me to figure out where our snipers were hiding. Their location was terrible in every aspect and I simply couldn't figure out why they had chosen it. They had barricaded themselves inside of a small wooden garage. The windows were small and they would not be able to see in all directions easily. A faint growl left my chest as my instincts wanted to kill them. Even getting close to them was going to be hard. I left the room and continued down the abandoned hallway. I slipped out a second window before darting over to hide behind yet another building. Bang! Bang! I ducked low behind the building, but the bullets had not been aimed at me. They really had something against Daniel. He had poked his head out, but he had aborted that attempt to run as a second gun came into play. I guess both are armed... Oh joy, just what we needed... The locals had quieted down as they hid and waited for the gunfire to cease. I was close to the garage and only one road separated me from it at this point. There were three windows on this side and I didn't see either of them from this angle. How can they be this stupid? Is this a trap? Such thoughts did not sit well with me and my instincts had risen quite high. I carefully examined the view, but my instincts didn't see anything suspicious other than the pair's behavior. My instincts wanted no part of actually entering that building unless I was somehow completely hidden. My instincts longed for the cover of night that would have made this much easier. How much ammo can they have in there? Is there any chance of them running out? It was a very unrealistic idea considering how trigger happy they were being. They must have lots of ammo to be shooting so much with no care. I waited and the moment I saw Daniel try to once more to cross the gap between two buildings, I also ran and slid beside the wall with my back against it. Bang! Daniel's pained snarl rapidly transitioned into a roar of fury that had me pressing my back against the wall. The hair on the back of my neck rose at that sound and my instincts urged me to hide. I couldn't see him, but that was a very good thing because if I couldn't see him, then he couldn't see me at this moment. A mere second later a resounded crash of smashing wood echoed across the area along with Daniel's snarl. Bloody hell... Both of us could snap trees, so a thin wooden wall wasn't about to stop a pissed off Terror. I heard two terrified yells start before they cut off with dull snaps. They either had not had sufficient time to reload to attempt a second shot or they had frozen in fear. The thump of two objects hitting the floor was followed by semi-silence, only broken by Daniel's growling.

I hesitated before carefully peeking in the window. As I had suspected, those dull snaps had been our attackers' necks. Both were sprawled on the ground with their necks at an unnatural angle. Daniel's blazing red eyes showed that he was still worked up. He was standing still while low growls continued to echo from within the garage. My guess was that he was trying to calm himself down before he caused more damage. He went over to yank the headbands off of the man and woman before tossing the pieces of cloth into a corner. The headbands had concealed the tattoos that Ironwind had put on their foreheads to proclaim them arsonists and murderers. Daniel exhaled heavily before shaking himself briskly and turning back to walk out the door. I silently and carefully walked around the edge of the garage to see what he was going to do. Daniel was heading towards where Nina and Nicky still hid. His red eyes and tense muscles conveyed his immense and tightly controlled anger. I now saw that his one shirt sleeve was soaked in blood, even as some ran down his arm and dripped from his hand to the ground. Daniel's rough voice cut through the silence, "The attackers are dead. Someone else can deal with the bodies of those murderers." I evaluated him from where I stood and was relieved to note he was in control, even if he was still livid. The fact that he was in control was the most important thing. Those few seconds were just a glimpse of the power that the Terrors held. A single Terror was more than capable of wiping out an entire Stronghold within minutes. It also reminded me just how easily he could have thrashed my hide on any of the numerous occasions I had annoyed him. A Nightstalker's strength could not compare to a Terror's. Perhaps I ought to be glad that his control seems to be so impeccable... Nina and Nicky slowly came out of hiding to watch as Daniel approached them. The old man made a cautious appearance and more people had also started coming into view. Most of the locals showed no desire to come near. I didn't blame them. Daniel had just killed two people. Nina instantly spotted his injury and started digging around in her bag for her first aid supplies and gloves. Daniel glanced at his arm before using his nails to cut the sleeve off his t-shirt. I could see that it had hit his upper arm, more or less right in the bicep. I didn't think it hit the bone, but it was going to be sore for more than a few days. It would barely even slow him though, and thus counted as a mostly minor wound despite the fact that the bullet had carved an entrance and exit wound through his arm. Nina wasted no time in using a cloth to wipe up most of the blood before covering the wound with padding and wrapping a large tension bandage around it. I slowly approached the group as Nina doctored Daniel up as much as she was able. I gave the Terror his space, his instincts were still high and my presence would not be welcome with his recent injury. Nina sighed, "That is the best I can do until the bleeding stops. Good thing that zombies heal fast." Nina stuffed the blood splattered cloths into a ziplock bag and sealed it before stuffing it in her backpack. Nina noticed me watching, "We will burn this later. I am not about to chance leaving the blood of a Terror around even though it will dry swiftly in this heat and destroy the virus." I nodded silently, that was a wise move on her part. I turned my head to watch the old man directing a bunch of people to remove the two deceased attackers. The locals were unhappy that those two had opened fire within their Stronghold, but they were spooked about what had just occurred. Voices floated back as they entered the garage. "Shoot, no wonder they always wore those headbands. I can't believe that we let them in so easily..." "I don't understand why they would shoot inside the fence. Who are those new people anyways? How did they break through the wall of the garage like this?" Many people were confused as to why the attack happened and most had not been aware that we had even entered the Stronghold. Most would refuse to go anywhere near Daniel at this point. Especially once word spread that he was a zombie. The old man came over to us hesitantly, "I am dreadfully sorry about that. We had no idea that they would attack you. Is there anything we can do as an apology?" Ryan's words had been directed at Daniel. I suspected that he was trying appease Daniel to prevent more mayhem, but Nina took advantage of the offer, "Would it be possible to have supper and for us to spend the night here? We will leave at first light to continue our journey." Ryan nodded although he clearly wished we didn't want to stay for even that long, "We can do that. Supper is mostly over, but some food will still be available. May I show you?" Nina nodded, "Please." Ryan took the lead and we followed him while others ensured that we didn't pass near them.

 

Chapter 100


 I used the excuse that I had eaten while riding to avoid taking a plate. This place had no clue what I was and thus didn't stare at me like they were gawking at Daniel. Most were shocked to see a sane zombie sitting calmly at a table munching on some sort of baked pasta. I took a sip of water as Nina passed a handful of vials to another lady who had joined us. The local nurse nodded her thanks and pocketed them, "Do you mind if I accompany you after supper? I am curious to see these three that you say are infected." The nurse was uneasy around Daniel, but was intrigued by Nina's knowledge. Nina nodded amiably, "Certainly. As I mentioned before, you can always use cats to double check." I smirked silently at that memory. Nina turned to Ryan, "On a side note, does there happen to be anyone here by the name John McComfry? We promised his brother Luke that we would ask around." Ryan shook his head, "Not here. We don't have any Johns or Jonathans." Supper wrapped up and Ryan began to continue the tour that had been interrupted so rudely. Daniel did well enough tracking the first two. He had problems with the third person though. I sighed faintly before murmuring, "Turn to your left and keep walking down that side street until I give you further directions." Daniel sniffed the air and turned as if tracking the last person. I subtly checked the air, "Turn right." Daniel sniffed before turning. Nina blinked and gave Daniel an odd look. She must have known that Daniel was unable to track someone's scent just on the air for this much distance. He relied on actual scent trails in a place where so many people lived closely together. Such trails also tended to fade rather quickly with so much foot traffic. Three turns later Daniel was finally close enough to catch the scent on the wind himself. The woman was shocked to say the least, but didn't hesitate in opting for the cure. The nurse smiled at Nina as her task was finished, "I am glad to have met you. Feel free to stop by the infirmary any time. Hopefully we will meet again one day." Nina returned the smile, "Thank you. I hope so as well. If you ever pass by Ironwind Stronghold, please stop in and say hello." "Will do." The nurse parted ways as she went to her own work. Ryan guided us down the road, "We have a few options for guests. If someone doesn't mind crashing on a couch or on the floor, we have a cabin with two queen sized beds." Nina nodded, "Thank you very much. That will work quite well." I smirked as I knew who would be getting the beds. Sharing a smaller room was more common nowadays simply for safety. If trouble came calling, it was easier for someone to notice it if several people were in the same room. Some who traveled a lot were simply unable to sleep if they were alone and preferred to share a room with complete strangers as opposed to having a room to themselves. The cabin was on the opposite side of the Stronghold from the other sleeping accomadations. He probably didn't want our group, notably Daniel, near any of the other residents in case another fatality occurred. Perhaps it was a good thing that he didn't know that he was playing host to not just one zombie, but two. 
 
 I silently climbed over the fence and dropped down on the other side. I carefully looked around, but no one was watching me. Then again, it was so dark out that they would be lucky to see their own feet. A lap around the Stronghold showed that this group favored snares and few predators were present. Few, as in one bear and fox remained.

They had likely trapped the predators first so the prey had a chance to multiply in order to feed the humans. This terrain didn't seem favorable for rabbits. That probably explained why they had so many sheep and goats. I explored further out and growled faintly at the rather slim pickings. Every rabbit was deep in its burrow and digging a furball out of a maze of tunnels was not a relaxing pastime. I didn't even bother trying. The area was mostly fields and I found a few snares in any patch of forest. Their snares were empty too. This area must have not had much in the way of wildlife even before the zombies showed up. Before the controlex had altered the virus in my blood, going a night or two without hunting wasn't a concern and I had been able to eat human food to keep hunger at bay back then. I had not yet tried to skip hunting for a night since then, but a roadtrip that hopscotched between Strongholds was not the time to try. My patrol continued in a widening circle as I ranged further afield. I crossed a fairly recent trail of the bear and debated my options. Considering that I had seen nothing so far, this might be my only option if I didn't want to go hungry tonight. I shook myself with a faint growl before following the bear's trail. The larger kill would hopefully help keep my temper in check. Once I drained the bear I dragged it beside the road where they would find it come morning. No sense letting the meat and hide go to waste. I continued circling the compound in semi-boredom. A squirrel scurried along a branch, dislodging a pinecone that just barely missed me. If I hadn't known that the squirrel had no clue that I was here, I would have thought the act was deliberate. I was sorely tempted to scare the squirrel for making me dodge the falling object. I examined the squirrel as it climbed higher into the tree before disappearing into a hole. My eyes narrowed in thought before a dark grin found its way onto my face. I had passed several abandoned houses throughout the night and swiftly backtracked to the nearest one. I entered the vacant building and did a quick search of the house for an object with certain criteria. The dried out aquarium didn't have a secure lid. The small display case wasn't quite what I was looking for either. Ah ha. I found the jackpot. I grabbed the hamster cage and returned to where I had seen that squirrel. Finding the correct tree was easy. My own scent trail led right to it and it wasn't really possible for a zombie to get lost either. Even if I returned 5 years later, I would know this tree since I had fixed it in my mind so I could return for the squirrel. Stupid instincts and their selective memory. They could have helped me remember names of people at Ironwind to make my life easier, but nooo.... they have to memorize a freaking tree in the middle of nowhere that I will never see again. I held the cage over the hole and blew my breath down into it. The squirrel predictably freaked out and tried to escape. It practically flew out of the hole and I swiftly shut the cage door. I chuckled as I dropped back down to the ground and headed back towards the Stronghold. The squirrel clung to the bars as I entered the room. Daniel had recognized my footsteps, but my early return had him confused, "I have never seen you return so early. Is something wrong?" He flicked his flashlight to low, but slowly brightened it so he could see me as I approached him. "No, I just figured I would bring you this." I put the cage down on the end table beside Daniel. Daniel peered toward the cage and its small inmate in confusion, "Thanks for the thought, but this wound won't affect my hunting ability any." I snorted, "I didn't intend for you to eat it. I doubt you will sleep much tonight and figured that it give you something to watch through the long night. I gave Nicky a rubik's cube, so you might as well have this." "Okay... Thank you I guess..." He could have sounded more appreciative. He resembled my one co-worker when I gave her a piece of handmade pottery that she didn't really like or want. I turned and left the room silently as I headed for the forest once more. For me to bring him a squirrel of all things was sure to confuse him. When I had been seriously injured, he had been kind enough to drag back several rabbits. I had brought him a mere squirrel. Perhaps he would figure it out. I wasn't holding my breath. 
 
 The sun was just about to rise as I once more returned to the room. The empty cage outside the door gave me some hope that Daniel might not be completely hopeless. I opened the door and the triumphant grin Daniel gave me told me that he had finally figured it out. Nina and Nicky were still fast asleep. I smirked at him as I sat down in a chair on the other side of the room, "How many hours did it take you?" He looked amused at what I had chosen as my first question, "I will admit that it took me a couple of hours. I simply couldn't figure out why you would bring me a squirrel, unless you had planned to simply make me wonder about that detail all night as an evil joke. It just didn't make sense." I chuckled, "I could have very well done that just to mess with your head. That does kind of match my sense of humor." He chuckled as well, "That did occur to me originally, but it didn't seem like quite enough to lure you back inside the Stronghold at night. So, I began to wonder if it had anything to do with my arm. You had mentioned that you had not intended for me to drink the blood, which made me think outside of the box. Then I remembered how you kept removing the polysporin from the wounds when they were healing so quickly." "So you managed to put two and two together?" He shrugged, "I thought it was an insanely long shot in the dark, but I didn't have anything else to do while waiting." I leaned back in the chair, "I wondered if a few hours of contemplation in boredom would help." "Well, it did. Do wounds always heat up like that?" I nodded, "Yes. If you add too much blood at once, it can actually get painful." He nodded slowly as he took note of that. He looked curious, "I don't suppose you would tell me what soap or tomato juice does while you are in such a generous sharing mood?" I chuckled darkly, "But what would occupy your mind when you are bored? If Nicky could figure it out, then I am sure that you can too." He sighed, "If it took a bullet wound to get you to spill this secret, what would it take to discover the other two secrets?" I grinned ferally at him, "Let Nicky color your jacket and wear it along with everything else she colored for you before handing her a bottle of soap, five big cans of tomato juice, and three extra-large expresso coffees." He winced, "I think that may be worse than getting shot in the arm..." "Possibly. There is one way to find out though..." "No. I have seen what two cups of coffee do to that human. I have no desire to know what one expresso can do, let alone three of them." I chuckled at his response before we both lapsed into a comfortable silence. 
 
 -------------------------------------- Author's Note: Thank you for taking the time to read my story. I hope you are enjoying it! If you like it, please vote on each chapter. Such support means a lot to me.

 

Chapter 101


 "Okay. Who the hell put a dead squirrel in the garbage can?! I mean, it is one thing for us to toss food wrappers in there, but you guys are usually better about burying your unwanted leftovers." Good morning to you too Nicky... She was still in her pjs and glaring at the offending object in the garbage can. Nina yawned as she grabbed her bag of toiletries, "Just a squirrel? Be thankful it isn't a rabbit, a beaver, or a bear." Nicky transferred her early morning glare to Nina, "If one of them managed to stuff an entire bear into that little knee high can, then we have other issues. But it is definitely a squirrel." I glanced at Daniel as I subtly tattled on him, "I still say you should have stuck it in the bed with her to see what she would say." Nicky grumbled incoherently under her breath as she went to take advantage of the bathroom first. Nina glanced at Daniel in surprise, as if it hadn't occurred to her that he was the guilty culprit. She did a hilarious double take at his unbandaged arm. The scab had set once he removed the polysporin and it was obviously healing faster now since most of the redness around it had faded. She looked at him in shock, "You figured it out?" He grinned, "Yes." He was proud of that detail since it had taken him almost a month to finally figure it out. The fact that it had taken him that long was a disgrace to zombies, but he simply didn't realize it yet. I resisted the urge to shake my head at his ignorance. Nina practically managed a magician's magic trick as her bag containing her hairbrush, toothbrush and other supplies suddenly appeared on the bed at the same time her notebook appeared in her hands. "How is it done?" Her sleepiness had been replaced with eagerness and curiosity. I had never seen someone wake up so fast in my life. "I had to actually drip blood into the wound. Now we know why she kept removing the polysporin. It formed a waterproof barrier." Nina kept asking questions and Daniel answered while I simply shook my head at the two of them. They were going over what should have been long-discovered knowledge like it was the latest and greatest discovery. To my amusement, he hadn't realized that zombie saliva would also assist. Yep. He still has some learning to do. Nicky came out of the bathroom and went to the front door before opening it. She stretched in the early morning sunlight, "It feels like a beautiful day is about to start. I think I will slip some coffee and stir things up a little." I growled in opposition of that idea as Daniel also chimed in with a growl with that thought. Nina shook her head rapidly, "No, we are peaceful travelers going from place to place to help prevent the third wave. We are not attempting world domination." Nicky glanced over her shoulder and grinned at Nina, "You know, if you think about it, between the four of us, we actually do have the best chance of taking over the world. The only problem is that I am kind of handicapped without caffeine." I looked over at Daniel, "Well, now is your chance to give her an espresso like you had been thinking." Nina's head whipped towards Daniel with an incredulous expression, "You thought what?!" I hadn't been aware that Nina's voice could go so high. I am going to get him in deep shit at this rate... Excellent. I managed to keep my slightly annoyed poker face in place despite feeling something that might have been akin to mirth, although such a feeling could certainly not belong to me. Daniel sharply growled a reprimand at me and I smirked in response. He shook his head with a faint growl before clarifying for Nina, "I had asked Trinity if she would also share the secret about the soap and tomato juice. She had said that Nicky would show me if I let Nicky color my jacket and then wore everything she colored before giving her three espressos."

Nicky turned around with an enthusiastic expression, "Okay, I am in full agreement with that plan." I inspected my long fingernails idly, "If she gets even a sip of an espresso, then I will be walking to our next destination while she rides with you." Nina put her head in her hands while shaking her head, "No, no, and no. No espressos, no coffee, no sugar, no caffeine, no splitting up, and no trips to the darkside." Nicky scratched her head in bafflement, "Then what are we supposed to do for fun?" Nina grabbed her bag of toiletries before heading towards the bathroom, "Trinity gave you that rubik's cube and I will even let you color a pair of my socks. I am heading for a shower and the world better not have ended by the time I come out." Nicky snorted, "You honestly think I can make the world end in fifteen minutes? Give me some credit. A cup of strong coffee and an energy drink can accomplish that in ten minutes." I rolled my eyes and headed for the front door, "I am going to relax in the chair outside where there is peace and quiet." Daniel raised an eyebrow in misgiving, "You are leaving Nicky with me?" Nicky rubbed her hands together, "Oh boy! This could be fun!" I held my dignity intact by not voicing any of the thoughts that crossed my mind as I swiftly exited the cabin. I closed the door behind me as I went to sit in the sun in an attempt to find whatever shreds of peace and quiet might possibly still exist in this world. I gave up sun tanning as I heard Nina open up the squeaky bathroom door. With a heavy sigh, I went back inside. I paused at the sight before me. Nina had just come into the main room and was just as confused as I was. Nina gave Daniel a surprised look, "Do I even want to know?" "Mmrphrmurmple!" Nicky's response was less than intelligible the way she had been gagged. No wonder I had only heard her muffled voice and not actual words previously. Daniel had also tied her to the chair with so many coils of rope that I could barely even see her shirt or pants. I had no idea where he had found the rope and I certainly was not about to inquire. I shook my head as I turned around to head right back outside, "I am not even going to ask. I think I will wait in the truck." Daniel kyboshed that escape plan, "No. You are needed for when I release this fiend." I looked over my shoulder with a faint snort, "You are the one who tied her up." "She was the one who would not go outside to locate you." "So you had to tie her to a chair like a hostage?" Daniel pointed to the light fixture above, "She kept trying to get her hands on those." I saw that someone, likely Daniel, had managed to wedge Nicky's package of markers into the edge of the decorative light fixture that hung from the ceiling. "So? Give her a pair of Nina's socks. She hasn't decorated any of her wardrobe yet." Daniel gritted his teeth at my I-could-care-less tone and wording. They were likely triggering his instincts unfavorably. My lack of sympathy was probably not helping either. "Murphrurpiff! Hirfirfurry!" Nicky squirmed in her ropes, but it looks like she had finally met her match with 50 feet or so of rope. I examined the worked up spitfire of energy that refused to sit still before sighing. I knew that type of energy and it was going to have to be dealt with. I rubbed my temple with one hand as I regarded Daniel, "We have been on the road for six days now. You and I have gotten exercise while hunting, but neither of these two have done much. If she had been my horse, I would have made her run in the round pen for ten minutes just to burn off some of that energy."

Nina blinked in surprise at my rationale. Daniel tilted his head as he failed to see what I was implying, "So...?" I glanced at her markers above, "Grab those markers and head towards the fence while I will untie this tornado. Let her chase you until she is too tired to stand." He snorted faintly, "My instincts detest running away from anything. Surely you know that." I rolled my eyes, "You barely notice your instincts half the time. Besides, this will give us peace and quiet for the rest of the day." He huffed, but lightly jumped to reclaim the markers from their high hiding place. He looked at Nicky, "I am going to toss these into the forest. If you want any chance at finding them, you better keep up. I will be courteous and at least wait for you to spot me before tossing them, but if I get out of your sight afterwards, too bad." Nicky's struggles increased, "Murmephree!" She was not impressed with the thought of him tossing those markers away. An evil grin crossed Daniel's face as he was finally getting some sort of revenge that Nicky didn't just laugh at. I moved out of the doorway and he jogged lightly through the open door. I shook my head before going to untie Nicky. I ended up cutting the ropes in several spots with my nails. Daniel had put a lot of effort into making sure that she couldn't get loose. For the sake of semi-silence, I didn't bother removing the gag. The moment the bonds were loose, Nicky shot to her feet and tore off towards the door while ripping the piece of cloth away from her mouth, "Get your ass back here Daniel! Those are my felts!" I sat down on the bed with a sigh. This was not what I signed up for when I had reluctantly let myself be dragged along on this trip. Nina shook her head in sympathy, "I don't know how you manage with her around you so much." I turned my head to watch the scientist brush out her wet hair, "I am beginning to find that she is a lot like a child in some ways. A set and predictable schedule is best, while avoiding too much sugar is a must. They apparently also need sufficient exercise to keep them under wraps without actually being wrapped in restraints." Nina hummed thoughtfully, "I suspect you could very well be correct. I wonder how long they will be gone..." I shrugged, "She has six days of energy stored in that tiny frame somewhere. With luck Daniel will find every last smidgen of it and we will have peace for a day or two." She continued brushing her hair as she headed to the bathroom to take advantage of the mirror. I could hear her humming very faintly. I closed my eyes as I tried to get a ten minute cat nap in before our dynamic duo returned. My eyes opened as I heard Daniel approaching the door. He opened it and came in. Nina came out of the bathroom with her hair styled back. She glanced at Daniel, "Where is Nicky?" He chuckled, "She is asleep on top of the blankets in the back of the truck. She more or less just passed out. I think it is safe to say that she will be low key for a while." Alarm bells rang in my head as my instincts shifted. I scrutinized Daniel's face and spoke urgently, "On top of the blankets or under them? Nicky does not sleep without a blanket over her." His eyes widened for a second before he disappeared from the door as he raced back to the truck. Nina looked at me with wide eyes and I growled faintly in frustration, "Let's grab these last two bags and go keep the peace. On a side note, I did not come along on this trip as a babysitter." We heard both of them long before we got within sight. I had no idea what the locals would think if they were up this early and listening. Perhaps it was a good thing that the main sleeping buildings were on the other side of the Stronghold. "Calm down already. It was just a package of markers and I gave them back. No need to be so dramatic." "I will not calm down! I will raise hell and break shit!" I sighed gustily and asked Nina, "Are you sure I can't start walking and you guys can catch up to me on the road?" Nina sighed as well, "No, you have the best chance of calming her down." I snorted, "As if I plan to use the word calm after Daniel's attempt." "That is probably a good plan – oh my..." Oh my indeed... Nicky was standing in the truck box with a pissed off expression while holding a big bottle of liquid soap in one hand and a can of tomato juice in the other. Daniel was keeping his distance from the threatening objects while trying to get her to lower her weapons. Judging from the standoff, he was having absolutely zero success. With a low growl I decided to wade into this situation and attempt to defuse it with my usual Nightstalker tact. I walked forward and growled sharply at Nicky to catch her attention, "Did he give you the markers back undamaged, yes or no?" She reluctantly replied, "Yes." "Good. Now sit your ass down and put those things away. The sun has been up for half an hour and I am already out of patience." I didn't slow my approach and my bluff worked. By the time I was close enough to hoist the bags in, Nicky was sitting down and glaring at Daniel as she angrily crossed her arms across her chest. In truth, I was fast enough that I could dodge her choice of weapons that now resided on the mattress beside her. Daniel didn't know how they were used though, so he had wisely kept his distance. I sat in my usual place and passed Nicky the bag that held her breakfast. I seriously hoped that some food would settle her down. Nina slipped around the truck and got inside the cab. Daniel cautiously approached and got into the driver's door without Nicky grabbing the soap or cans by her knees. I noticed that neither one inside opened up the window at the back of the cab. I honestly couldn't blame them since Nicky was glaring at that window like she was just daring them to do it. I had a feeling that it was going to be a mighty long day today.

 

Chapter 102


 Nicky eventually sighed as she both finished her breakfast and gave up glaring at the window at the same time. She flopped backwards and I growled faintly as her head rested on my leg. She ignored my faint protest. Her eyes closed as she pulled a blanket over herself. How can she sleep again so soon after waking up? Honestly, it shouldn't be possible... I exhaled slowly as I suppressed my instincts. They did not like any kind of contact. I had never really been the huggy kind of person as a human either. I didn't like it, but I could probably tolerate it if it meant that Nicky would sleep. I could only imagine how she would react if I shoved her head off my leg. I really didn't feel like dealing with any more drama today. The hours passed by far too slowly. It was easier than when Liz had sat on my lap and I had battled the bloodlust, but it was still no walk in the park as my instincts objected to the contact. They were slightly confused though, and I knew why. Zombies were normally very touchy about their heads and necks, and yet Nicky had her head resting on my leg while her neck was exposed as she slept. I watched the scenery go by as I wondered which was worse, sitting in the back of a truck with Nicky using my leg as a pillow or arriving at a new Stronghold filled with strangers. In the end I decided that the Stronghold was the greater evil.  I glanced at yet another normal zombie as we passed by it. There were quite a few on this road. If I needed any proof that this was a commonly used highway, then the number of zombies around would suffice. Lots of zombies usually meant larger Strongholds. Oh goodie... Just what I needed to make this day go even peachier... I wasn't even sure how large the biggest Strongholds were. I knew that most ranged between a hundred and four hundred. The air swirled around me as the truck kept driving and it brought me the slowly increasing scents of civilization and humans. We were approaching our next target. I nudged Nicky awake as the walls came into view, "Rise and shine sleeping beauty. We are to be dignitaries in this new kingdom, so you must look the part." She blinked sleepily at me, "Since when do you attempt to crack jokes?" "You must have been dreaming if you think you heard me making jokes." She sat up and rubbed at her eyes, "No kidding. It must have been part of my dream. I initially wondered if someone else had joined me back here. A growl, sure; a snarl, fine; but a joke? That is so not Trinity." I chuckled at her view of things. Leave it to Nicky to be more worried about a joke than a growl or a snarl... Nicky yawned, "It is far too early to be smiling." Considering it was almost noon, it could not be called early. I shrugged, "Life is short. Smile while you still have teeth." She gave me a funny look before scooting away and knocking on the cab window. Nina opened it a crack and Nicky wasted no time warning them, "Guys we got a problem." Daniel glanced in the mirror while Nina looked concerned, "What is it?" "Trinity is cracking jokes back here and it is freaking me out." Daniel rolled his eyes, "She is yours to deal with. For once you can have a taste of your own medicine. Now you know how your mood swings make us feel sometimes." Nicky sat up straight in an attempt to glare at Daniel through the rear view mirror, "My mood swings are not weird. They are limited edition." He snorted, "Then consider Trinity's jokes a rare change from her growling."

I narrowed my own eyes at that comment, "I have been attempting to be polite and have not growled that much. I think you need to go hang out with ferals for a while to get your perspectives straight." Nicky sighed, "And she's back to normal, thank goodness..." "Just for that I may have to try and recall some lame knock-knock jokes that my sister told me." Nicky looked intrigued, "You had a sister?" The words had left my mouth before I thought about them and I regretted it now as it felt like a knife was twisting in my heart. I clenched my jaw and growled lowly before looking at the scenery. This was not something I was ready to talk about. Not now, and possibly not ever. Nicky wisely turned to inspect the Stronghold that we were approaching. I mentally berated myself for letting my guard down so far. I had occasionally joked in a similar way with my light-hearted sister as she had always teased me about being too serious. I had no idea why I had done something similar with Nicky. I had never let anyone else ever see that side of me other than my sister and parents. The memories that this was unburying were painful and not something I wanted to deal with as we were about to enter an unknown place. I raised my mental walls once more to levels that they had not seen for quite some time. I had not realized that my shields had slowly been slipping and coming down until they had been too far down to protect me. My reflective dark grey sunglasses turned towards wooden palisade that this place sported in the name of a fence. 
 Our stop at the large place was mercifully brief. There was a small dog at this place that barked incessantly at any zombie or infected person, so those who were infected had been forced to leave. They gave us a quick tour, but none here were infected. The locals were not sure where those four people had gone, but most had headed further south and had likely banded together for safety. Nina had promised to try and find them while taking notes of places that they may be staying. We were now approaching a much smaller Stronghold. I had never seen such a small Stronghold before. If there were even a hundred people behind that tall solid fence, then I would be surprised. Daniel came to a stop outside the gate and I could see him frowning at the closed doors. He honked the horn lightly to let them know we were here. I stilled as I waited to see how the locals would react. I had never seen a place without visible sentries or people coming to check who was approaching their home. They had to know we were here, so they were just hiding. But why? A man's head popped over the wall and his distasteful expression showed that they knew we were here. They were not entirely happy to see us though. He called down, "Who are you and what do you want?" A very faint growl slipped out of my throat at his disrespectful tone. Daniel leaned out of the driver's window, "We are travelers from Ironwind Stronghold the north. As you know, the third wave is coming. We have a few ways to detect who is infected and we also have a cure with us." "And just how do we know that you aren't lying bandits?" Daniel took a deep breath as he kept a handle on his temper. The insults would not be doing his instincts any favors. "Feel free to search us, but other than a few knives and a sword, we have no weapons. Four mostly unarmed people should not really pose much of a risk to an entire Stronghold even if I am a zombie. Even from here I can smell that two inside are infected, although you will likely find that out for yourself in a week." Several more heads appeared above the fence as more residents tried to get a look at the zombie. Daniel had let his eyes go red when we pulled up. People above discussed the matter, not realizing that Daniel and I could hear parts of it, or at least I could only hear parts. Daniel probably heard almost everything since they weren't exactly whispering. I wondered if those inside realized that Daniel was quite capable of destroying their wooden fence within minutes.

A voice to the side called out, "I am not sure about the other three, but I will vouch for the woman with sunglasses." That was the absolute last thing I had ever expected to hear, especially when I didn't recognize the voice. I turned my head to examine the man that everyone was now looking at. You have got to be kidding me... In theory, I knew that I should have expected it, but the thought of coming across the man who had been lurking by the zombie pit had not crossed my mind. The first man didn't seem happy, but called out to the second man, "If you are willing to take responsibility for them, then we can let them in. Three are women and I can't see them getting into much trouble even if they tried. I don't trust that zombie though." This guy is so wrong that he could build a bridge to the moon on his assumptions. Nicky would probably chase him across the entire thing as well if she got into the coffee... The man who had originally planned to kill three Nightstalkers to avenge his brother shrugged, "Fine. Let them in." Daniel, Nina and Nicky were glancing at me in surprise as they wondered who had vouched for me. I murmured, "Keep an eye open." I was seriously confused and also quite suspicious. I had met this man once, and for less than two minutes. I had scared the crap out of him by sneaking up behind him and then had practically interrogated him. Yet he vouched for me. That action had my hackles rising in distrust and suspicion. He had laid in ambush for weeks waiting for three murderous Nightstalkers to return so he could kill them. If this was another ambush, then I didn't want us to blunder into it blindly. I took a deep breath of the air. It wasn't surprising to smell guns in a Stronghold, although they were almost strictly used by sentries and guards as the limited ammo was carefully rationed. The gates slowly opened with a groan and Daniel let the truck slowly roll through the now-open gate. I looked around cautiously, but saw no weapons pointed at us. Several held bows in their hands though; I wasn't entirely sure if I could manage to grab an arrow midflight or not. I seriously hoped that I was never put into a position where I had to find out. The man was climbing down the ladder and coming over. He was the only person to actually approach the truck. I could pick up his scent now and analyzed it as he came closer. I took a deep breath as I focused on his personal scent and swiftly dug through the layers as best I could at this range. Surprise. Caution. Some distrust. Curiosity. Bizarrely enough, an undertone of hope. None of the scents were those of someone on a hunt or contemplating aggressive actions. It gave him some leeway, but it wasn't going to get him far until I knew what he was up to. The first man whom I suspected was the local leader was watching the mystery man and me. His eyes narrowed as it became apparent that we were not long lost friends like he had assumed, "Logan, why did you vouch for her when you do not seem to know her?" He did not sound impressed. Logan glanced over at the leader, "I said I would vouch for her, not that I knew her." He frowned, "Are you saying you don't know her? Why the hell would you vouch for her then?!" Logan shrugged dismissively, "I met her once. If she had wanted me dead, she had a golden opportunity then." The leader clasped both hands in his hair and tugged the short strands in frustration, "I am surrounded by idiots! How this place is still standing, I will never know!" I dropped my opinion of this leader by a few more rungs on the jump bar. Logan shook his head at the display, but didn't seem surprised. He stopped about ten feet away, "You mentioned that there were several ways to locate those who were infected?" The question had been directed at me, so I replied, "Yes. Daniel can sniff them out. If you don't trust him, simply try to hand someone a cat. If they are infected, you will see what I mean." Logan knew I was a zombie since he had seen my eyes glowing that night. I would prefer if the others never learnt of that detail. The last thing I needed was for insane vigilantes coming out to kill me just because I was a zombie. Let someone else have that dubious public honor. He nodded thoughtfully before looking around, "Ah, Trent, please go locate a cat and put it in one of those animal carriers. We can see how it reacts once that zombie finds one of the people who are infected." I got to my feet and jumped lightly out of the truck. The others also got out. Daniel came over to our side of the truck and tilted his head as he inspected Logan. Logan blinked as he realized that Daniel was nowhere near as short as me and he also just so happened to discover that Daniel stood taller than he did. Daniel watched him, "I assume you want me to track down the two infected now?" Logan shrugged, "Might as well. Trent will catch up once he corners one of those felines." Logan seemed like a quiet and easy going person, but I wasn't about to jump to any conclusions. Daniel glanced around while taking a deep breath. I rolled my eyes and murmured, "To the left, towards the chicken coop." Daniel took the lead as we and quite a few spectators followed. Daniel was keeping a subtle eye on our surroundings, although I was doing the same thing. I hastily revised my guess of the population here. No wonder they had felt uneasy about letting four strangers in. There weren't even fifty people in here. Logan walked beside me while leaving a generous distance between us. Nicky and Nina walked behind us. It didn't take us long to locate the man grinding grain into flour with a large hand-crank grinder. Logan was clearly dubious, but Trent showed up with a meowing cat in a pet carrier before it got awkward. Logan tilted his head inquiringly at me. I sighed gustily as I was forced to explain, "You walk up to the cat and wave your hand in front of it, then let that guy do the same." Logan waved his hand in front of the carrier. The cat kept meowing plaintively, clearly unhappy with its confinement. The infected man approached the carrier and his hand didn't even come close to the wire door when the cat let out a shrieking battle cry before practically losing its mind in the plastic carrier. Those watching were surprised and started murmuring amongst themselves. The guy holding the cage backed up to try and calm the cat down. The infected man turned to me with an almost despairing expression. I jerked my chin towards Nina, "She can offer you either the cure or something that will help you remain sane if you decide to become a zombie." The man shook his head, "The cure... I don't want to be a zombie..." If I hadn't known he was terrified of the thought of becoming a zombie, then his words might have slightly offended me. Nina pulled out her supplies and injected him with the specified drug. It was a good thing that Nina had made so much up before we had left Ironwind Stronghold. We have injected probably a hundred or so people over the last 6 days. Not a single one had even considered the other drug. I refrained from growling at how our audience had grown and was blatantly staring, pointing and whispering during the entire process. Nina put her stuff away, "There you go. You can try approaching a cat tomorrow morning after showering thoroughly. It should be fine and prove that you are truly cured. I will leave a few vials of the cure here just in case, but it has been 100% effective in every case we tried." The man was quite grateful. Daniel sniffed the air while subtly glancing at me. I wondered if my hearing and sight were as inferior to his as his sense of smell was to mine. Probably. I murmured, "To the left." My lips had barely moved and the words had been far too quiet for any human to pick up, but I was pretty sure that Logan had noticed. He was sharp. I was going to have to keep an eye on him. Our group followed Daniel as he pretended to track down the last person. Once he got closer, he would be able to track the infected person among the hundreds of scent trails left today by about 50 people in a small area. I couldn't wait for Nina to dose the last person so we could put this Stronghold behind us.

 

Chapter 103


 Nina administered the cure to the infected person and glanced at Daniel, "Is that all of the infected?" He nodded. She sighed in relief before turning to Logan, "Thank you for your help. Everyone inside is clear. I still advise wearing those masks I left with the nurse." Logan nodded, "That is good to know." The leader had a sour expression, probably upset that Logan had been the main focus of attention during this show. The leader was not taking this blow to his puffed up ego very well, but he simply grumbled on the sidelines. Our audience still whispered and discussed the most recent excitement in their otherwise pretty boring daily lives. Boring, who am I to speak? I spent four months almost solely in the company of a dog while running around in a forest chasing animals. The crowd started to break up now that it was over. Logan accompanied us to the gate, "I assume you are going to other Strongholds before returning to Ironwind?" Nina nodded, "Yes. We are about half done, so our trip should be over in about a week." He nodded thoughtfully, "May I join you? I have been planning to leave this place for several days and was just waiting for another traveler." What?! Is my luck seriously this bad? Did Nicky write the words 'stray magnet' on the back of my shirt when I wasn't looking? This cannot be happening... Nina smiled, "Certainly. We will be happy for the company." Apparently it was happening... Yeah, let's find a total stranger and just invite him along for an entire week trip when we will mostly be packed into one truck... What a great plan! I felt like shrieking my annoyance to the sky. The lack of sleep must slowly be getting to me if I was getting this grouchy. Nicky noticed my crabby expression and grinned at Logan, "This could be fun. Just give Trinity plenty of space until your presence grows on her like a bad fungus." He gave her an odd look before climbing into the truck box. It was his saving grace that he chose the corner furthest from the one I usually took. He had seen us come in, so his decision was almost certainly intentional. He had a backpack that must contain everything he wanted since he didn't have to go collect anything. I got in and resigned myself to having to tolerate another newcomer. This was reminding me more and more of our original trip to Ironwind Stronghold. Completely frustrating. The gate opened and Daniel drove out before picking up speed as he went back to the highway. Logan looked too relaxed for someone who knew he was traveling with not just one, but two zombies. Nina opened up the back window, "If you don't mind me asking, how do you know Trinity?" Logan scratched the back of his neck self-consciously, "We met once for a short time." Nina looked confused at his words and reluctance to answer her question. She glanced at me in askance. I snorted lightly, "Remember the bear traps I brought in that one morning? Well he was the one responsible for setting them up." Nicky eyed up Logan speculatively as she came into the conversation, "I suppose he is also the one who made that big ass fire?" Logan nodded slowly. Nina tentatively inquired, "Would you mind telling the entire story in more detail?" Logan gave in and reluctantly gave a shortened version of our encounter from start to finish. Nicky looked perplexed by the end of it, "So she snuck up behind you in the dark, insulted you after you accidentally insulted her, and then told you to clean up the mess you had made?" 

That actually sounds remarkably closer than his original rendition. Not quite how I would have worded it though. Logan wasn't sure what to make of Nicky at this point, "I suppose that is one way of looking at it." Nicky shrugged as she dismissed it, "Yeah, she tends to do that to me too." She suddenly tilted her head as she looked at Logan, "Trinity also said that you made me seem normal. I think we will have to have a competition just to see who gets stuck with that booby prize of a title." Logan just looked confused, "I am normal." Nicky sighed, "Sometimes I pretend to be normal, but then it gets boring and I have to spice things up a little." How lucky for us...  Logan was looking at Nicky with a perplexed expression, "What do you mean?" Logan struck me as a fairly serious and down to earth person who didn't find humor in life unless someone whacked him over the head with it. I wondered how long it would take him to realize that Nicky was probably about to attempt to bury him alive with his current outlook on life. Nicky grinned at him and tried to clarify her earlier comment, "It is only a matter of time before they add syndrome behind my last name." Logan was now wearing a completely confused expression. Daniel muttered from inside the cab, "Let's be honest, we don't need to add the word 'syndrome' or even use your last name. The mere sound of your first name is sufficient explanation for those who have been around you a few too many times." Nicky chuckled at Daniel, "True... True... Depending on how far we plan to travel, it will show how many places just happen to recognize that word of warning for what it is." I exhaled gustily before muttering, "Is there any way for me to opt out of this trip and simply walk back?" Nicky just grinned at me, "Nope." That was exactly how my luck tended to run. 
 
 The ride was quiet until we reached the next Stronghold just before supper. The route we chose had us slowly spiraling outwards in a circle away from Ironwind. That meant that this place had word from a nearby Stronghold that we had previously visited. This new place let us in happily. It was a welcome change to having to practically batter the gates down just to help the idiots. Logan tagged along quietly as he looked around. I was more interested in the older lady leading Nina. She must have been in her nineties and used a cane, but boy could she move with it. Her ability to keep up was certainly not in question. Helping her walk was not her cane's only purpose either. It occasionally waved around in the air to emphasize some point as she chattered with Nina. The cane whipped out and whacked the back of the legs of the young man standing beside her, "Timmy! Where are your manners?! Open up the door for our guests so we can grab some supper." The teenager jumped with the impact and swiftly corrected his oversight. I narrowed my eyes at the fairly busy supper hall. It wasn't as busy as it could be, but it was still going to be an unpleasant meal to endure considering how much my instincts detested crowds. Whack! "Timmy! You let the guests dish up food first, you overgrown monkey!" The amount of energy this old lady had was more than what most in their prime ever possessed. I declined a plate and simply followed the group. The old lady looked around, "This place is much too crowded. We can eat in the upper hall. It will be quieter up there."

The old lady gestured with her cane towards a staircase. This time Timmy was on his toes and opened the door for us. The upper hallway was actually just a large room. A handful of other people ate up here in the relative quiet. Whack! The cane swatted targeted Timmy's wrist this time. "Timmy! You let the guests pick their seats first. I fail to see how you are my grandson when you behave like this." I smirked in amusement and made a mental note to never let Nicky have a cane regardless of how much white hair she ever sported. Timmy rubbed his wrist and stepped back. It was a wonder that he wasn't black and blue if this was a common occurrence. The lady mostly chattered with Nina while eating since the scientist was the most willing to talk with her. "...and we have someone called Luke back home who is looking for his brother John. John McComfry. Have you ever heard of that name?" The old lady chewed thoughtfully, "McComfry... McComfry... Name rings a bell, but that bell is a bit rusty. Hmmm... Oh! Yes, used to be a vetrinarian clinic owned by a McComfry family not far from here. Nice couple with five kids. Three of the kids grew up and got their degrees and came back to work at the clinic. Town is in no man's land currently, so no one will be there now." I was surprised, that matched what I knew about Luke's past. His parents had also been vets. I made a face as Timmy noisily slurped some noodles out of his soup. Whack! "Timmy! That is uncivilized! You don't make noises like that while eating! I really must have a word with your mother about your lack of manners." The old lady had somehow managed to uncannily target Timmy's ankle while juggling her own spoon and a slice of bread. I could only imagine what she had been like as a teenager. I was amazed that her mother hadn't drowned her. Between the less crowded area and the spirited grandmother, the meal was actually interesting. The old woman escorted us out of the hall and into the outside world. A pair of children ran past us shrieking with their game of tag. Daniel and I both winced at the loud piercing noise. Whack! Whack! The cane managed to somehow lightly tag each child right on the rear end, "Julie! Edward! You almost ran into our guests! Take your games into the playground, you two." The children were surprised to see us, but not surprised by the reach that the cane had somehow acquired. They swiftly made themselves scarce. "Now where were we... Oh, yes, a tour. That's right. This way please." The old woman led us around the place. She talked almost constantly while not running out of breath. I was only picking up one scent trail, so I decided to see if Daniel could track it by himself. The old lady apparently knew everything about everything in this place and the details she managed to include on everything from the chickens to the garage proved it. I huffed lightly in disappointment as I realized that Daniel was not going to have to work hard on this tour at all. The wind was blowing the scent right at us and our tour was headed in the correct direction without the old woman realizing it. Daniel glanced at me when I huffed, but when I didn't comment, he put it down to me just being me. Logan looked around in curiosity at whatever the old woman pointed to or chattered about. Daniel interrupted the woman, "May we please check behind that shed? I believe that someone over there may be infected." She looked over at him in surprise, as if she had forgotten about the original purpose for our visit. "Oh, of course. The fletchers are usually working over there at this time of day." That explains the smell of feathers and glue. This wrinkled old woman may not be the leader here, but she probably knew far more about what actually occurred than he did. We rounded the corner to see four men fletching arrows. They looked up as we rounded the corner. Daniel walked slowly over to them to avoid spooking them, "One of you is infected. I just need to get closer to see who it is. We have the cure with us." Logan was watching Daniel closely as he walked into the open area around their loose circle. Daniel took a deep breath before turning and taking a step towards one man. He took another sniff before speaking, "You had best see Nina." Nina was already opening up her kit, "Do you want the cure or something that will help you retain control if you turn into a zombie?" The man stood up with one eye on Daniel and the other on the strange lady holding up a needle, "The cure please." I gazed around in boredom at our surroundings as Nina finished. Our tour continued and the old lady looked over at Daniel, "We have a few here who are sneezing. We suspect it is just a cold that is going around, but would you be willing to check for us?" Daniel nodded, "Certainly. We have seen that cold at quite a few locations we stopped at. Anyone we have found sneezing so far has just had a cold." "I believe a few of them are over this way. Let's go take a look and I can show you the guest quarters at the same time."

 

Chapter 104


 The old lady led us over to a fifth sneezing person. Daniel didn't even bother approaching her, "She only has a cold. Is there anyone else?" The old woman shook her head, "Not that I know of, but we can finish up the last bit of the tour if you like." Daniel nodded courteously and I refrained from rolling my eyes. One shed looked much like another in my opinion. The lady started tottering off in a different direction and I subtly inspected the chain link fence. This part of the tour did interest me since I planned to sneak over that fence undetected. I saw several potential ways. I glanced to the side as a man started approaching our group with a hopeful expression. My eyes blinked slowly as the familiar looking man came right towards us. Nicky followed my stare, before her jaw dropped, "Shit. That guy looks almost exactly like Luke." Glad I am not the only one to think that. Nicky's comment had caught the attention of Nina and Daniel and they paused to look. The old woman looked confused as she greeted the man, "Ron, how are you doing today?" His eyes barely left us, "I heard this group knew of a Luke who was looking for a John McComfry?" Nina took a few steps forward, "Yes, Luke is at our Stronghold and is looking for his brother. Do you happen to know where he might be?" I was a step ahead of Nina since my nose had already caught his scent. Even with Luke being a zombie, I could tell that he was somehow related to Luke. Luke had managed to discover the fate of all of his immediate family members with one exception... The man nodded slowly, "That would be me..." The old woman scratched her head, "I thought they were looking for a John?" He smiled gently at her, "No offense, but I tried to correct you a few times. My name is John, not Ron." She shrugged, "I ain't no spring chicken and my hearing isn't as good as it used to be either." John turned back to us with excitement, "How is Luke? I looked for him for a bit and hopped between a few Strongholds, but I never found any trace of him." I remained silent to let someone else tiptoe across this minefield. I had barely spoken a few words, so no one here was about to expect me to step up either. Nina took another step forward, "He is okay and is currently at Ironwind Stronghold. He looked for you for months. There is one detail that may make you not want to see him though..." John shook his head, "He is my brother. As long as he is alive, I don't care." Daniel focused his dull red eyes on John, "Good to hear you proclaim that since he is actually a sane Runner." John paused and starred at Daniel as if expecting that he was trying to pull a bad joke off. He shook his head before inquiring, "He is sane though, right?" Daniel relaxed marginally as John didn't react poorly, "Yes. The only difference is that his eyes are red and he is a bit easier to irritate. You will have to be careful with direct contact, but it isn't too bad." That seemed to reassure John, "Where exactly is Ironwind Stronghold? I have heard of it once or twice, but I have no clue where it is." Nina perked up, "It is to the north. A day or two of driving. If you don't mind traveling with us for a week, we will be going back there and will be happy to give you a lift." I suppressed a groan of exasperation at the thought of another traveling companion. I reined in my growing irritation. He was Luke's long-lost brother after all. Luke was going to owe me big time for this...

John grinned, "Thank you so much! I appreciate the lift. I can't wait to see Luke again. It would take me a few minutes to pack, when do you plan on leaving?" Nina smiled, "We are staying the night and leaving early in the morning, so you have time." Nina was clearly thrilled that John wanted to come to Ironwind Stronghold. "Thank you. I will certainly be ready in the morning whenever you choose to leave." John was just as polite as his brother. The old woman looked bemused, "Talk about a last second vacation. Well, I wish you luck dear." John smiled at her, "Thank you." Nicky started chuckling and muttered, "Oh, he is going to need more than luck to survive this trip..." John didn't hear her comment, but Logan did. He watched her with a perplexed expression. At this rate Logan was going to remain in one of the Strongholds we were visiting just for his sanity's sake. The tour continued and John came along as he peppered Nina with questions about his brother and Ironwind Stronghold. 
 We all piled into the truck in the early dawn light. Thankfully John decided to sit beside Logan. Nicky was attempting to become the Great Barrier Reef as she sprawled across the middle of the mattress as she separated me from the two men. John had no clue that I was a zombie. I didn't see that state of naivety lasting long, although he didn't seem to have any problem with Daniel. John was talking with Logan as the truck left the gate, "I am surprised that so many people are in one group as you hand out the cure. Wouldn't it make more sense if you split into two groups?" Logan shrugged, "Possibly, but I am just catching a ride like you are." "That is interesting. May I ask which Stronghold you came from?" "I was at Drayton Stronghold for a couple of weeks and spent a lot of time at the Stronghold by Bow River before then." John turned his intrigued gaze towards Nicky, "Can I inquire as to your story?" Nicky grinned, "Oh, I came from Ironwind Stronghold. They brought me along to bring color to their wardrobes and to keep them on their toes." John blinked in confusion and Logan didn't look any wiser despite the amount of exposure he had to her. John tentatively commented, "I am not sure I understand..." Yep. John is definitely Luke's brother. They look similar, act alike, and talk like one another. Nicky chuckled, "Yeah, that is what Logan said yesterday as well. Just stick around, you will both figure it out eventually." John looked kind of lost as well. He turned to me as if hoping to change the topic and break up the dispute, "Did you come from Ironwind to help distribute the cure, or are you catching a ride there as well?" I exhaled slowly, "I came from Ironwind, although I am not along for this ride entirely willingly." I decided to distract him, "I met Luke months ago, but he left not long after we met to look for you. It wasn't until this last week that he decided to stay at Ironwind and that was only because we promised to check the Strongholds we visited." John was quiet for a while and seemed touched that his brother had not given up on him even though he was a zombie. "That sounds like Luke. That guy never gives up when it comes to family and friends." I replied quietly, "He hunted for you for months. He managed to locate all the rest of your family, but all he knew is that you survived whatever happened in your house and that you were nowhere in that town."

John lowered his head into his hands, "I had no idea he would turn up there. He was in the east visiting our grandparents and I headed in that direction trying to find him. I should have remained around there so he could find me..." I had no reply to that and remained silent. Nicky turned her head as she looked up at him from her prone position, "Well, look at the bright side, you get to see him again." He looked down at her and nodded solemnly, "That is true and I am looking forward to seeing him again. He is, and always will be, my brother." John was apparently a bit more sentimental than Luke, although the zombie virus likely had a hand in Luke's current personality. I knew that Luke was intensely loyal once you earned his trust and it looked like John was much the same in that regard. Blood ran deep too, and family bonds often bent rational law. 
 Evening was once more approaching and we still hadn't found the third Stronghold we were searching for. John was a bit nervous as the sun started to approach the horizon, although it didn't seem to bother Logan. He was just more watchful. "I can see the Stronghold in the distance, so we will be there before too long." Considering it was Daniel speaking, he either delayed his discovery or we would take twenty minutes to get to this place with his eyesight... He must have waited until we were closer since it wasn't more than five minutes later that we pulled up in front of the fence. The people at the gate heard Daniel out and let us in. Rumor had come to this place that a group of people and a zombie were travelling around and handing out the cure. "You can use this guest house. There are only two beds and a couch so it may be a bit crowded if you like your personal space." Nina thanked the leader, "This will be fine. We have sleeping bags with us. Thank you very much for your hospitality." He nodded, "I will have someone cook up some food since everyone else has already eaten. It isn't that much trouble for just a handful of people. We are kind of hoping that you can check if there is anyone infected here before retiring to your rest." Nina reassured him, "Of course, it would be our pleasure." She turned to Daniel, "If you could?" Daniel nodded and turned to the man, "Care to give us a tour? I can smell that someone here is infected, but it is often easier to locate them if I get closer to them." The leader happily provided the tour as Nina went over the details of the third wave and various precautions. I tuned them out as I gazed at our surroundings. Logan and John listened intently to Nina despite hearing the same spiel for the third time today. Daniel was clearly not having any luck locating the guilty culprit. I sighed before quietly helping him, "Turn to the left." Daniel took shameless advantage of my assistance and headed down the correct street. It took several turns before we located the man. He was rather easy to spot. He was holding a bucket of oats and trying to lure some horses to his side of the fence. The horses weren't stupid and kept to the far side of the pen. No one in our group had any difficulty figuring out source of the problem that this man was having. The leader went forward to have a quiet word with him before bringing him over to Nina. John and Logan never seemed to tire of watching Nina inject the cure. Our tour continued on. We passed quite a few groups of people who were relaxing. Several called out greetings as we passed. We nodded a response as we carried on. A few started following us in curiosity. Their quiet presence as they tailed us slightly stirred up my instincts which were more noticeable since the sun was starting to approach the horizon.

One young man ahead hailed us, "I hope you are enjoying your tour. Your supper is ready for you and is in the main hall. Our hospitality can't be beat by anyone else, if you need anything, just ask." We had walked closer to him by now and my instincts stirred as I narrowed my eyes. I bit back a growl, but that didn't help conceal the dirty look I gave him. He was observant enough to notice it. He raised an eyebrow at me, "What? You doubt our level of hospitality?" I snorted faintly, "As long as you were not the one responsible for it, then it will likely be quite welcoming." The young man frowned in confusion, "I have never been less than cordial towards guests and I have no idea what you are referring to." The others were also giving me odd looks. It did not help with my rising irritation. I leveled a challenging stare at him, "Does putting a pail of water above a gas station door about two weeks ago ring a bell? Well, guess who got caught in that trap." The young man's jaw dropped as his face started to turn a striking shade of red due to his embarrassment. The leader watched his reaction with narrowed eyes, "Bill... Please tell me that you did not do such a thing." Bill ducked his head in shame, "Jackson put me up to it since he was too short to reach that high... We never thought that anyone would figure out who did it." I did not enlighten him as to how I knew. After my challenge and his guilty reaction, he didn't question it either. The leader exhaled slowly in clear disappointment, "You should have known better. You will be scrubbing pots and doing dishes, as well as mucking out the pig, cattle, and horse barn for a month. I will be having a word with Jackson as well." "Yes sir." Bill turned to me, "I am very sorry. Is there any way I can make it up to you?" The last thing I wanted was attention in this place. I huffed, "If you are offering, our truck needs a wash and that mattress and its cover could use a bit of beating to get all of the dust and dirt off of it." I honestly didn't expect him to take me seriously, but he nodded, "I will see to it." Although considering how unimpressed the leader looked, I suspected that Bill would have been forced into it, even if he had protested. There were only so many surviving humans out there and it would not be good if one of his people offended a potential ally or trading partner with childish pranks. It also would not reflect well on their reputation. The leader turned to look at me, "I am sorry that anyone in this place would have done such a thing. Please accept our hospitality and let us know if we can do anything for you." I nodded somewhat stiffly. My instincts did not like to let this one go so easily. They wanted to add a few bruises to that man's hide for setting up such a trap. I overruled my instincts, although the others would likely notice that I was more irritable than I had been on our ride thus far. Logan was watching me closely. He seemed surprised that I had not reacted more severely. If only he knew how tempting it was. My instincts were not in agreement with me in this case and I was bound to be cranky until I got a good run in to wear down my instincts. The leader led us to the supper hall. It was deserted at this late hour. The sun wasn't quite touching the horizon, but it would be by the time we were done. I had to bite back a growl as Bill decided to sit beside me. Nicky wandered over to him and tapped him on the shoulder, "Move over bucko, that's my seat." He flushed a bit, but nodded and moved down one spot as he sat at the end of the bench. Nicky slid into the spot he just vacated. I murmured, "Thanks." She turned her head to grin at me for a second before peering over to see what kind of food the cooks were bringing over. Three people put down large platters of food while a fourth one passed out plates. The others wasted no time in dishing up food. I didn't bother putting anything on my plate. Bill commented upon my empty plate, "Honest, I didn't poison it. Please eat." "I am not hungry. I'll pass." "Come on, don't be that way. Uncle will have my hide if you don't eat." Nice try kid. "Then you better start running because I am not hungry." The leader smirked a bit at my response and I was pretty sure that he was that said uncle. I raised an eyebrow at him, "Are you planning on forcing this issue?" The leader wisely shook his head, "No. I know many travelers pack their own food and I have met a few people with some pretty severe allergies." I nodded as a non-reply before dropping the discussion. John had a confused look on his face, "Now that I think of it, you didn't eat anything at breakfast or lunch either." I shrugged idly, "I tend to eat when others aren't watching." Daniel smirked around his mouthful of fried fish. Bill shook his head, "No one is going to judge you for your table manners. Even he is eating," Bill jerked his head towards Daniel. "Besides, turning down good food is just stupid." I exhaled slowly as I tried to ignore the minor insult, "Drop it, kid." He huffed petulantly, "I am not a kid and stop being such an obstinent drama queen." I inhaled as anger rippled through my mind and I nearly snarled at him for that insult. Daniel growled a warning as he narrowed his eyes at the offending youth and Bill flinched. Bill's Uncle was not impressed with him, but Nicky's reaction was faster than his. She turned sideways on the bench and used both legs to kick him off the bench. He wasn't expecting it and fell off the end to land on the tile floor. He winced as he got up off the floor and stood up. Nicky leveled a glare at him, "First you dump a bucket of water on her and now you insult her? Your flexibility simply amazes me. How do you manage to shove your foot in your mouth and your head up your ass all at the same time?" Bill's jaw dropped at the insult. I had to chuckle somewhat at his expression and her humor even though I still quite outraged by Bill's words and past actions. My instincts wanted to thrash him. Nina covered her mouth with her hand to try and turn her laugh into a cough. Logan was watching me warily. It was no secret that the insult had pissed me off. Bill made a face at Nicky, "You could have just told me to shut up. You didn't have to be so mean." Nicky sat up straighter in indignation, "Mean? Mean? You call that mean after everything you have done?!" She turned to me and drew her sword before passing it to me, "Here, hold my dignity, I have some sketchy shit to do." She quickly dug around in her backpack before pulling out a big can of tomato juice and dish soap. She stood up as she started to advance on the startled-looking teenager, "This won't work half as well as on humans as it does on zombies, but it will make me feel better." Daniel's eyes were locked onto Nicky with a calculating expression. Bill took a few nervous steps back as he evaluated Nicky's wild expression. He glanced at me as if looking for help in calling off my over-zealous friend and I idly commented, "I advise you to run. I will come collect her in a half an hour if I am feeling generous." Bill turned and took off full tilt as he tried to evade the vengeful redhead. Nicky wasted no time in following in hot pursuit, "Get your ass back here so I can give it a proper beating!" Nina glanced at me with a startled expression, "Did she get her hands on coffee when I wasn't looking?" "Not that I know of. I think her internal insanity blitz detonation timer just hit zero though." John and Logan looked confused, but they had never seen Nicky take a partial trip to the darkside before. Nina looked concerned, "I don't think we should let her chase him around, we are guests after all." The leader looked halfway amused, "Don't worry about it. It will do him some good to get a few bruises. Perhaps it will teach him that my punishments are quite mild compared to some that others will dish out." I think I might like this leader. His nephew gets a bit of a beating and his Uncle doesn't even blink despite the fact that he already dropped a month's worth of unpleasant chores on him. He did deserve it though. I shrugged, "Sounds good to me." The others continued eating with occasional glances towards the doorway.

 

Chapter 105


 I slowly blinked as Nicky backed in through the doorway. Nina inhaled, "Oh my..." The others were simply watching in disbelief. She had backed in because she was pulling a steel dolly hand truck meant for moving small pieces of furniture. Only she had tied Bill onto it.... Nicky will be Nicky... She wheeled her load over to the wall and stood it up, "I will park you right here for now. Now behave and quit being a pain in the ass or I will let Trinity also get her revenge and you really do not want to piss her off." Bill very prudently remained silent. I wasn't entirely sure that he was capable of speaking simply due to shock. I was quite certain that he had never ever been that dirty either. Nicky held up a large bottle of dish soap with a sad expression, "I ran out of soap..." The entire contents of that bottle were somewhere on Bill. His skin and clothing were caked in soap, dirt, straw, and other unidentified bits of stuff. Judging from the whiff of his breath that I was getting from here, he had a bunch of it end up in his mouth and had likely swallowed some as well. I didn't see the can of tomato juice either. Considering that Nicky didn't even come up to his shoulders, she had done quite a number on this youth. I suspected that he also had a few bruises hidden under his clothing. I could see one on his forehead already forming as well as some on his arms and legs. I wasn't quite sure how she had managed to keep him still long enough to tie him to that dolly though... Nicky tilted her head at the leader with big eyes, "Can I get a refill before I leave?" He was still in a bit of shock himself at the state of his nephew, but nodded, "I am sure we can arrange that, but please refrain from using it on anyone else here." Nicky grinned as she slid onto the bench beside me, "Unless they act like him, I think I can promise that." Bill finally spoke and his voice was a bit raspy, "Uncle, don't do it. Please!" Nicky turned towards him with a faint frown, "Behave yourself. You are about to exceed the limits of my medication." I raised an eyebrow in correction, "You aren't taking any medication and you haven't since I met you." Nicky turned to me as a grin appeared on her face, "Oh, well, that explains what just happened then!" I am sure that she did that on purpose... John leaned over to Logan and whispered, "What exactly did just happen?" Logan shrugged, but John hadn't whispered quietly enough. Nicky turned towards him, "Some people like to ride the crazy train, but I am the one who built that thing. Oh, and I drive it too." I eyed up Nicky, "I thought that captains sailed ships and that conductors ran the trains?" She chuckled, "Both are on board and we are having one hell of party together!" That was not what I wanted to hear... "I think we had better bring the party to an end and let everyone go home." "Why? It was such a fun party." She had better not get worse overnight or we will be tying her to the top of the truck cab. I am not sure if the Strongholds will let us in like that though. I gave a big sigh, "Nicky, please eat your supper before it gets cold." I left my other thoughts unspoken, but I hoped that food would settle her down. Otherwise Daniel was in for a rough night. I sure wasn't about to skip my free time at night to babysit her when Daniel could just tie her up and gag her.

Nicky mumbled something I couldn't hear, but pulled her plate over and began to eat. The leader looked at his nephew, but left him tied up for the moment. He picked up his conversation with Nina, "You mentioned that you were planning on going to other Strongholds to distribute the cure, but can I ask if you plan to stop at that small camp with infected people down the road?" Nina sat up straighter, "One place had told us that they had kicked out quite a few that the dogs and cats had pegged as infected. A few other places had made leave if they thought they were infected, but no one was sure where they might have gone. Where is this camp you speak of?" "If you continue down the highway there are about forty people camped in a town about two hours away." Daniel inquired, "Right along the road?" He nodded, "Yes, the road runs right through it. They do avoid contact though, so you will probably have to call out to locate them." I doubted that. We would be able to easily scent them and know if they were in a certain town. We may end up approaching them instead of them coming to us, but the moment they heard a cure was to be had, they would likely flock out from wherever they were hiding. They had nothing to lose other than a few days... Daniel looked thoughtful, "They can't be that hard to find. There are only a few towns along this highway if I remember that map correctly." The two discussed the exact location of the town as the others finished their supper. I returned the sword to Nicky since she had settled down. We got up to head to our guesthouse. I eyed up the trussed up trouble maker. Should I? My instincts demanded some form of retribution and this might appease them a bit.  I paused as we walked past him, "By the way, don't forget to wash the truck. You might also want to hose yourself off while you are at it." I continued out the door with my poker face on to hide the fact that I felt like grinning in a rather predatory fashion at my taunt. Bill didn't respond. He would be sore after Nicky's beauty treatment. With limited electricity in this place there wasn't much running water either. He would be hauling buckets to wash the truck. His Uncle would ensure that it was done properly and both knew that we planned to leave quite early in the morning to boot. It wasn't much, but it was a strike against him and my waking instincts recognized it. The leader remained behind to untie his nephew as the rest of us headed towards the guest house. The sun was mostly set and it didn't surprise me when Daniel turned on the lights the moment we got inside. Daniel glanced around the small place, "I can sleep in the chair out here." Nicky poked her head in one of the two back bedrooms, "You are only going to fit one person in these beds. I wouldn't mind a good night's sleep in an actual bed as long as no one wants to fight me for it. I had enough wrestling for tonight." Logan shook his head, "Ladies first. I am fine with a sleeping bag." John nodded in agreement, "I agree with him. Nina or Trinity can decide who wants to get the second bed and the other one can have the couch." I shrugged, "I don't care either way." I walked back towards the door, "I will be back later. Don't bother waiting up for me." John looked confused, "Where are you going this late at night?" He still hadn't figured out what I was and I didn't feel like enlightening him. He probably wouldn't sleep all night with such a surprise. It couldn't remain a secret for long since he was already puzzled by the fact that he hadn't seen me eat. I shrugged, "For a walk. I might visit the sentries for a bit." I closed the door behind me to effectively end the conversation. I walked silently through the growing darkness. No one had noticed me and it was rapidly getting dark enough that they would not spot me. I waited in the dark shadows under the overhang of a shed as the last traces of light disappeared from the sky. It was dark enough now that I could get over the fence undetected. I paused before I touched my hand to the fence. Clever people... I have never seen anyone tie bells to a fence before... Strings of various sized bells were strung across the fence as far as I could see. This must be their way of knowing if a Runner was trying to climb over it. It was a good idea, but it had one flaw that rapidly became apparent. A tiny bit of wind started to blow and the smallest bells jingled in the wind. The larger ones would need more force, such as when a human or Runner tried to get over the fence. But a Nightstalker was not a human, and nor did one compare a Nightstalker to a Runner. The faint movement of the fence from my passage would have made the smallest of bells lightly jingle, but it wouldn't matter with the light breeze. My ability to move smoothly came in handy once more as I scaled the fence and dropped to the other side. Getting back in could be fun if the wind dies down. I disappeared into the darkness to track down one of the many rabbits I could scent. 
 I returned to the guest house before the sky started to lighten. The gentle breeze made getting over the fence easier. I let my footsteps fall just heavy enough that Daniel would be able to track me, but the others wouldn't hear. I opened up the door and was not surprised to see Daniel gazing in my direction in the darkness. Logan and John were wrapped up in their sleeping bags and sound asleep on the floor. The couch was empty, so Nina and Nicky must have been occupying the beds. I stretched out on the couch. It would probably throw Logan for a loop since he probably never thought that zombies laid down. It would also keep confusing John. I was curious as to how many days I could hide under the radar without him realizing it. My ability to blend in was a bit more hampered than it was before due to the fact that I didn't eat food anymore. I napped for a bit between the time the sun rose above the horizon and the time that the men started stirring. I held still and pretended to sleep as Logan and John woke up and rolled up their sleeping bags. Logan gave me an odd look before glancing at Daniel. Daniel wasn't even bothering to pretend to sleep and merely ignored my act. He knew that there was no way I could sleep with them moving around. Nicky came out of the back room while yawning. She blinked in confusion as she saw me stretched out on the couch. With a grin she started tip toeing closer to me. I took a deeper breath before turning my head, "Nicky, you could die young attempting stunts like that." I sat up as Nicky groaned, "You take all of the fun out of things. I should have known you were awake." "The way you were tromping around? No one can sleep through that." She shrugged, "Well, Nina did." She looked at Daniel, "Do you want to wake her up, or should I?" He rose to his feet, "I think it is safer for everyone if I do it." Apparently he didn't want to see what Nicky would consider as a wakeup call... Daniel knocked on her door, "Nina, we are ready to roll whenever you are." Her voice sounded from within, "I will be right out. I am just about ready." She had clearly been awake and was just being quiet. Daniel had probably been able to hear her soft footsteps. The walls in this place must be pretty well insulated since I didn't hear her. I passed Nicky some of the breakfast foods we had packed and she munched on it as we waited for Nina. I shouldered my backpack and grabbed my sleeping bag as I headed for the truck. A smirk crossed my face as I saw the clean truck. Nina climbed into the truck and opened up the back window so we could hear one another, "That camp is closer than the other Strongholds, so we will make that our first stop." I didn't bother objecting. One group of strangers was as bothersome to visit as any other in my books. If Nina tries to invite all of them along for the ride, I might just have to sit down and have a few words with her...

 

Chapter 106


 I wrinkled my nose. Even if we hadn't been told that this group was here, we would have known well before we reached the town. I hadn't realized how well the smell of the zombie infection carried if a larger group of infected people congregated together. Movement drew my eyes up to the top of a three story apartment building. A man sat up there watching us. Glimpses here and there showed that others were also present and had seen or heard us coming. It looked like none of them even bothered to think that we would stop here. I was kind of surprised that there were no zombies here despite the lack of a fence. The smell of their infection was not enough to stop a zombie from trying to turn them into lunch. They must have been luring them away somehow. Daniel rolled to a stop near the middle of the small town. He had probably seen more people than I had. He got out of the truck before calling out in a loud voice, "We heard that there were infected people here. We are from Ironwind Stronghold and we have a cure with us." Daniel's eyes were once more red to let others see what he truly was. I planned to just sit here like a lump on a log for as long as possible to avoid all of the upcoming drama. A few people cautiously emerged from the surrounding buildings. I could see others peeking out of windows in case it was a trap. Nina got out of the truck and lowered the truck tailgate to form an impromptu table. I had been leaning on it so I shifted sideways so I could lean against the side of the truck instead. "How do we know you can be trusted?" Daniel looked at the man who had spoken, "I can't offer much hard evidence, but we have been to several places distributing the drugs as we prepare for the third wave. You can see by my eyes what I am. We have two different drugs here. One is a true cure and the other is a serum that will allow you to turn into a sane zombie." One woman approached hesitantly, "I do recall hearing about a zombie in Ironwind and those eyes can't be faked. I would like the cure, but I have nothing to pay with." Nina shook her head, "There is no cost. We are doing this to simply help people." The infected woman nodded and came closer to Nina. Daniel remained near the front of the truck. Mere feet separated the human from me and I began to wonder if Nina's choice of table was deliberate. Against unarmed or poorly armed humans, my strength and speed were sufficient to stop any trouble before it got too carried away. They would also be watching Daniel or the men beside me instead of considering me as a larger threat. Nina injected the cure, "This will take about six hours to fully work and after that you should be fine. You can try approaching a cat later on. Just wash up and change your clothing beforehand." "Thank you." The woman backed away, but didn't go far as she watched others coming for the cure. This group was more willing to allow the injection than many others had been. They knew that they were infected and had nothing to lose. One man with a face mask was sneezing while waiting in the growing line. I pretended to yawn to hide my mouth as I spoke quietly to Daniel, "That man just has the cold. Is there any point in wasting the cure?" Daniel came closer to the man before taking a sniff, "Did you know that you actually aren't infected? You just have that cold that is going around." The man had grown nervous with Daniel's approach, but just stared at him in disbelief now. He snapped out of his daze as he shook his head, "Are you sure?" Daniel nodded, "Quite sure. You can get the cure if you want, but it won't stop your current sneezing since that is from the cold." "I would still like to get it if possible..."

Daniel nodded and went to lean against the truck while watching as more and more people came out of buildings and down the street. The stream of people coming eventually stopped increasing as all were present. The last Stronghold had told us that there were about forty, but they had clearly miscounted. There were at least 80 people here as they counted down the last days of their lives. One cured man sat on the steps of a nearby building, "I have no idea where to go now. My old home will not accept me back just in case I am still infected." Nina looked up as she readied another needle, "If you have vehicles, you can head to Ironwind Stronghold. Tell them that we sent you. There is another sane zombie there that will probably double check to ensure that the cure worked. Once he clears you, they will accept you." The man looked surprised and then hopeful, "I have a car, how can I get there?" Daniel pulled out a map and went over to him. The man was uneasy, but didn't object as Daniel neared him to point out landmarks on the map. The two discussed the best route to get there as others hovered nearby eavesdropping. It took Nina just over an hour to give each person their dose. John wiped the sweat off his forehead, "It is warm in the sun with no breeze." Logan was seated where the cab mostly shielded him from the sun. Nicky had gotten out of the truck and was sitting on the ground in the shade that the truck cast. John looked at me in confusion as he realized that I wasn't sweating despite sitting in the full sun. I pretended that I didn't notice that he was looking at me. Nina finished tidying up and looked around, "Is there anyone else? I will leave a couple of vials of cure just in case, but that is all I can spare at this location." The man Daniel had been talking to came forward, "I can take those. I think I have talked with most of the people here. A few are going to head back to their original Stronghold, but most of us are going to travel together to Ironwind Stronghold. Can you possibly write a letter so they don't think we are bandits?" Nina nodded and pulled out her notebook, "That is a good idea. Give me one minute." Nina scribbled down a bunch of writing before tearing off the page and passing it to him, "Here. Also ask for Nic. You can also tell him that my favorite salad is strawberry salad, that way he will know that I was the one who sent you." The man took it and carefully folded it before putting it in his front shirt pocket, "Thank you very much." I raised an eyebrow at John and Logan, "They are going straight to Ironwind Stronghold if you want to skip five more days of traveling." Logan shook his head, "I'll pass. We have a better chance of surviving a zombie attack than they do." John looked at him in realization, "You're right. I never thought of that. I am sure that Luke can wait a few more days if it means my chances of getting there are increased." So much for trying to give Logan that subtle nudge. John was Luke's brother and I was willing to tolerate him more due to that fact, but Logan still raised my suspicions. He had managed just fine by himself for weeks and he was worried about traveling two days with a larger group? Right. Nina looked at the grateful crowd who had loosely circled our truck, "Unless someone needs something else, then we are continuing on to the next Stronghold to find and help more who are infected." The man shook his head, "You have already helped us. Safe travels and we will see you at Ironwind Stronghold." Nina nodded, "We will see you there."

She got into the truck. I reached over to pull the tailgate up so I could once more use it as a backrest. I didn't move against it yet, just in case someone tried to shoot us from behind. I wanted to be able to keep an eye on this oddball crowd until they were out of sight. Nicky climbed in the back as Daniel started the truck. The crowd parted for us and silently watched us drive out of sight. They were an odd sight. Most were in dirty clothing and had come here to find others in the same situation. The company had given them some meager comfort as they waited for the third wave to strike. It had also forged bonds of friendship that ran as deep as their desperation and upcoming defeat. A defeat and desperation that they had been unexpectedly freed from. 
 
 Nicky sat beside me as she spun her rubik's cube around and completed it once more. She passed it to me, "Jumble this up for me. I can solve it too easily when I do it." With a sigh, I twisted the colorful little toy into a confusion of colored squares. I passed it back to her. She turned it around as she inspected the newly reset puzzle, "Hey Daniel, are we going to reach that next Stronghold before or after lunch?" He replied, "We won't get to the next place until late afternoon. Are you getting hungry?" After yesterday, his precaution was warranted. Nicky thought about it, "Not yet, but probably in another hour." John was reading a book as Logan watched the scenery. Nina and Daniel occasionally spoke quietly to one another. It was a boring and quiet trip. I wasn't sure if that was a good thing or a bad thing. Daniel eventually pulled over so we could cook a warm meal for lunch. I leaned against the truck as I watched Nina build the fire. Nicky was preparing the soup as the men gathered firewood. Daniel disappeared for a while and I knew he was out hunting. When he returned I could smell the faint traces of blood and could also see that he had doctored the wound on his arm again. Nina passed out the bowls of soup once it was ready. John watched her and seemed confused when she didn't even ask if I wanted any. He kept watching me as he ate, clearly mulling over what he had seen so far. He finally spoke up, "You are a zombie, aren't you?" I snorted lightly in amusement, "What gave me away?" He considered it before replying, "The fact that you skipped all meals stood out the most, but part of it was your standoffish behavior. You act different than Daniel though, so I know you aren't a Terror. May I ask which rank you are?" John was just as observant as his brother, although he had come to this conclusion more slowly than I would have expected. He had still beat Ben, Hank, Marissa, and the others though.  "Nightstalker." He nodded slowly, "That was why you were out most of the night." "Correct." John didn't ask any more questions and didn't seem confused now that he knew I was a zombie. He would probably attribute any odd behavior to me just being a zombie. I was kind of surprised how easily he accepted it without becoming nervous in my presence. It didn't take long for them to finish and for us to hit the road once more. 
 "Heads up. Something isn't right at the Stronghold." My head came up with Daniel's warning, but I couldn't even see the buildings yet. The others turned so they could see ahead, but they also craned their heads to no avail. I took a deep breath before growling faintly in frustration, "We must be upwind since I am not even picking up the scent of the buildings. I can't see anything from here, what doesn't look right?" "There are zombies staggering around inside the fence." Logan narrowed his eyes, "That isn't good. They must have been overrun. The third wave isn't supposed to hit for another couple of days, right?" Nina's eyes were fixed ahead, but she still responded, "In theory, the way the sneezing only lasts three days, after only two waves, it gives a six day window for the start of this wave. According to my calculations, we have at least 24 hours before the first possible cases show up." I thought for a moment, "That doesn't take into consideration the fact that someone in the original wave might have received that flu vaccine earlier than it was supposed to be officially released." Nina sighed, "True." Daniel swerved to avoid several regular zombies as he continued to approach the fallen Stronghold. I could just see it in the distance now. The lights in the sentry posts were still on, so whatever had occurred had happened at night and not long enough ago for the batteries to run out of power. I took a deep breath before a growl rattled my chest, "There is a feral Nightstalker somewhere around. Don't enter any dark places." Nina glanced back in surprise, "Could it have attacked the Stronghold?" "Probably. It was either an existing feral that showed up or someone infected with the sneezing strain had terrible luck at both turning early and losing control. I doubt he turned from a bite mark since he would have to have been bitten by a Nightstalker or Terror in order to turn into a Nightstalker." Daniel commented, "Not enough damage for a Terror." I nodded in agreement, "Very true. There may be survivors depending how long ago this happened. The other Strongholds hadn't known about this or they would have mentioned it." Daniel kept driving closer. I kept a close watch out since I could now also smell a Runner. Daniel drove alongside the fence before stopping. He cupped his hands around his mouth before shouting, "Are there any survivors?" He tilted his head as he listened hard. The rest of us were quiet. I gazed at the Stronghold. The fence was intact and it looked like all the zombies were trapped inside. The couple we had passed on the road had likely not originated from this place. Zombies started to gather beside the fence while rattling the chainlink fencing. Daniel shook his head in frustration, "I can't hear anything, but these zombies are making a fair bit of noise." I examined what I could see from my seat, "You could let Nina drive and go check it out for yourself. You are a zombie and should be able to pass through that crowd easily enough." Nina looked back, "Why don't both of you go in?" "Because there is a Runner around somewhere and considering I haven't chased one away from the truck so far this trip, we are about due for such an event. A chainlink fence will only slow a Runner down." Logan joined the discussion, "My aim with my bow is decent. I can probably stop or at least slow a Runner as long as the truck doesn't completely stop." Nina nodded in agreement, "That sounds like a plan. If we do run into trouble, we can call Daniel. He will hear us and he is fast enough to return. If there is anyone alive, then we have the best chance of finding them if both of you go in." I huffed, but had no argument. The smell of humans was still strong enough that Daniel may not notice a fresher scent. Daniel looked at me, "Ready to go?" "Fine." I was not looking forward to this. My sunglasses would confuse the zombies and I didn't feel like getting into a First Strike match. I stood up and jumped out of the truck. Nina slid over into the driver seat and began slowly driving to circle the place before I could change my mind and climb back into the truck. I shook my head, "Let's get this over with." He nodded and turned to face the Stronghold that looked to be inhabited solely by zombies.

 

Chapter 107


 Daniel ran forward to jump up the fence. He nearly made it to the top with that jump and easily got over it. I shook my head before simply opening up the small gate and slipping inside without letting any zombies out. He shook his head at my lack of ambition before turning to snarl at a zombie who had gotten too close to him. It growled as it moved away from the higher ranking zombie. I took a deep breath, "I am not picking up any stronger scents, but we had better check each building just in case. Ensure you close the doors behind you to contain the zombies." He nodded and started heading in one direction. I headed the other way as I slipped into my slight crouch to keep the normal zombies from thinking I was human. I did a quick circuit around the edge of the fence before going deeper into the Stronghold. The truck passed by me once during my circuit. From the frequent snarls I could pick up from Daniel, he was having far more trouble passing seamlessly through the zombie ranks than I was. I bet that idiot never practiced like I told him. Well, he was getting practice now. I shook my head as I went inside the largest building. I bared my teeth silently at one zombie who then proceeded to ignore me. Once I got to the bottom of a staircase I called out, "Anyone here?" The only replies I got were from dozens of zombies. The smell of death and rot was also strong, so someone had cut off a few zombie heads at some point. I climbed the stairs and passed through the hallways silently as I tested the air. Most doors were open and it looked like utter chaos had occurred. A glance in the open doorways revealed blood splatter on the floor or walls in most of the rooms. No survivor would be in a room with an open door, or the zombies would have congregated there. I would also be able to scent them easily. I did check behind each closed door, but some of those rooms held zombies while others were empty. I kept searching while occasionally pausing to growl or flash bared teeth at zombies. Regular zombies didn't usually push too hard with such hints. I hadn't crossed paths with the Runner yet, although I did pick up quite a few trails from that Nightstalker. I checked out all of the twenty some buildings before heading to the garages. Half of the parking stalls were empty. I glanced back over my shoulder as I heard Daniel approaching the doorway, "Half of the vehicles are missing. I guess about half made it out. It explains why such a large place has fewer zombies than expected. Whether or not they were infected is another question." Daniel came through the doorway to look around, "That makes sense. There is only one highway and considering that we didn't pass them, that means that they are ahead of us somewhere." I nodded, "Very likely." He exhaled in relief, "I am glad that some got out, but some are probably infected as well. Let's head back to the others. The next Stronghold is five hours away so we will have to find a place to camp for tonight." I nodded and followed him out of the garage. 
 I stood on the edge of the roof and checked the scents on the wind. There was a Runner upwind somewhere. Too close for me to relax with so many humans up here with nightfall approaching. We had managed to find a gas station with a flat roof before the sun set. Another hour would see the sun touching the horizon. I turned back to the group and wandered over to Daniel. "There is a Runner upwind and I am almost certain that it will show up before sunrise. Do you want to deal with it or should I?" I was lazy and he was stronger than me. Killing in cold blood didn't quite sit right with my humanity either. My instincts were of no help in this area since they saw no reason to kill another zombie.

Daniel looked at the sun before standing up, "I can do it. Upwind, as in that way, right?" He pointed in the correct direction. His shirt sleeve pulled back as he pointed and I could see the bullet strike on his arm. The wound on his arm was healing swiftly and the scab would likely fall off in a couple of days. I resisted the urge to roll my eyes, "Yes. That way. You should also practice your zombie skills with it first. Those zombies earlier growled more at you than they did with me and they couldn't even see my eyes." He made a face, "I will consider it. I will be back shortly." He went to the edge of the roof and jumped off before lightly running in the previously indicated direction. I knew that the sinking sun was bothering him far more than the thought of growling at a zombie. Neither of the two men present were aware of Daniel's handicap in the dark. The humans quietly talked among themselves as the sun kept descending. John was understandably nervous as this would be his first night outside of a Stronghold since the zombies arrived. I mostly ignored them as the evening drew closer to nightfall. Daniel came back just before the sun touched the horizon. Nina built up the fire more as the sun dipped below the horizon. I stood up, "I'll be back later." Daniel nodded and kept watching the fire. Logan looked curious, but didn't comment. I dropped off of the roof to roam the night once more. 
 
 Nicky laid down on the mattress as she once more became a boundary line in the back of the truck. She kept spinning the rubik's cube as she tried to solve the latest twisting. Her foot kicked one of our bags as she tried to stretch out. She groaned, "You know, if we stuck the small cooler in the truck cab and strapped the sleeping bags to the bumper with ratchet straps, we would have a lot more room back here." Logan rubbed his chin as he examined the somewhat crowded area we rode in, "That is actually quite a good idea, provided we can find some ratchet straps." Nicky grinned at him, "I know the voices in my head aren't real, but boy do they come up with some awesome ideas!" Logan wasn't sure how to respond to that one. John must have picked up some medical knowledge from hanging around his veterinarian family too much, "You hear voices?" "They are normally pretty coffee dependent, but they come and go. I usually ignore them, but sometimes their ideas are just too good to pass up. Like coloring Daniel's socks. I know he packed a white shirt in his bag somewhere too." Daniel muttered from up front, "Leave my clothing alone. You are a challenge to my sanity some days." Nicky turned her head so she could see the back of his head, "Sometimes I question my own sanity. Occasionally it even replies." I bet it does. And all it wants is more coffee... John tentatively replied, "You manage far better than some people I have met and many of them claimed to be sound of mind." Nicky snorted faintly, "Then that was their problem. They thought that they were okay. I can help with that though. Show me a sane man and I will cure him for you." I think she just explained her life objective in that one sentence. I sighed, "Why don't we wait until the third wave is completely over before embarking on that impossible task?" Nicky rolled her head towards me with a grin, "It isn't impossible! It just needs several pots of coffee!" I growled faintly, "Coffee that you are not getting."

She sat up in alarm, "But it won't be possible without coffee!" "Exactly. We don't need to cure sane people. Let the poor naïve things rest in peace." She blinked at me a few times, "Shit. You really never do plan to let me get my hands on coffee again, do you?" I snorted, "Not while I am in the fallout zone." A grin slowly spread across her face, "So if I have a talk with my little voices and they all agree to leave you out of this, can I have coffee?" I was not touching this one with a ten foot pole, "You will have to check the others and get permission from Daniel as well." She spun around, "Daniel? Please!" "No." "Aw! Come on! Why not?" He looked at her in the rearview mirror, "Because you come close to dying each time. So, for your own safety, no." "Awww..." I smirked, "It looks like he shot down that idea." She glanced back at me, "Remember, if plan A fails, you have 25 letters left." I refrained from growling at her current obsession, "Regardless of how many letters are in the Alphabet, we don't even have coffee with us." "Yeah, I know. That is the biggest obstacle, but the voices in my head are working on a solution." Daniel muttered, "Don't let them work too hard. Tell them to take a nap." Nicky grabbed a half empty bottle of water and threw it through the window into the cab. I noticed that the cap wasn't on it as some water escaped the bottle mid-flight. Daniel's snarl told everyone what he thought of that little stunt as the offending object entered the cab. He half closed the window after rescuing the water bottle. Not much had spilled out due to his reflexes. The truck didn't even swerve as he did this. John and Logan were both uneasy after hearing his snarl. Luckily for Nicky, he had his hands full driving and couldn't come back here to subdue her. I looked at Nicky, "How did you manage to actually throw that thing through the window with your aim?" Nicky chuckled, "I was just wondering the exact same thing. When you figure it out, let me know." Nina was looking back through the half-open window, "Hey Nicky, could you possibly dig in the left zipper of my bag and grab that pair of white socks? I would love to have a blue and purple swirl pattern if that is within your abilities." I guess Nina is starting to learn how Nicky's mind works. Nicky dug out the requested object and pulled out her markers, "Can I put pink highlights in as well?" "Please." I bared my teeth in a silent grin. I highly doubted that she wanted pink, but was simply trying to distract Nicky with a slight challenge and had accepted the modifications to speed up the persuasion. Nicky pulled out the correct markers and lay down to start coloring. Nina's gamble had worked and silence once more reigned. 
 
 "Yes, the survivors from that overrun Stronghold are here. Please come in. We heard a group was traveling around with the cure and we were hoping you would show up before it was too late." The brown haired man ushered us in through the gates. Nina inquired, "I assume from your wording that some are infected? If it was a bite or a direct blood contamination, then we need to get to them fast."

"I will take you straight there. They are in isolation in a hotel just outside the fence. Two have already turned, but most are still surviving. Some probably are not infected, but they agreed to stay there for a week to make sure. We couldn't let them inside the fence in case someone turned." The man set a fast walk as we crossed the Stronghold before going outside of the fence towards a four story high hotel. I wrinkled my nose against the smell of dozens of infected people. They may have escaped the Stronghold alive, but unless Nina intervened, they wouldn't remain that way for long. Two people were guarding the door and let us in. I blinked in surprise as I saw that they had replaced the doors on the rooms with jail cell doors. At least that made it easy to see the person within. Daniel paused by the first door and sniffed before glancing at Nina, "She will need the cure." The doors did nothing to stop sound and the voluntary inmates began to come to their doors as word spread that someone had brought a cure. I could now see that there was one person per room and they were unable to open the doors from inside. I could smell and hear the groans and growls of two zombies. In truth, I was surprised that more hadn't already turned. Nina spoke quite loudly so that everyone on this level could hear her as she explained about the cure and the serum. The woman in front predictably opted for the cure. The brown haired leader scratched his head, "Joanne, I hope you don't mind remaining in there at least until morning or preferably for a few more days? I really don't want to chance the cure not working and have someone turn inside the fence..." She nodded in understanding, "No problem. I can stay in here for several more days. If you bring up more yarn, I can knit some more blankets to kill the time. You have been very hospitable considering most would have turned us away without a second thought." He relaxed, "Thank you. I will have someone bring you more yarn." Our group kept moving down the hallway. All of the patients were willing to stay in their rooms for four more days. The leader had agreed to bring a cat in at that time. Those who were able to pet it without it freaking out would be welcome to join their Stronghold. Daniel sniffed and shook his head, "He isn't infected." I also checked and corrected Daniel, "You better get your nose checked. He is infected, but it is progressing much slower." The hints were faint even for my nose, but the man was at the bars and close enough for me to pick it up. The leader looked startled. He had not known I was a zombie. Nina shrugged, "Neither the cure nor the serum will harm him if he is not infected, so I will give it to him as a precaution." The man wanted the cure, of course. Soon we kept moving. We had injected every person we saw so far and we had stopped in front of at least twenty rooms so far. I sniffed the air and inquired, "How many people got out? I find it strange that everyone we have seen so far is infected." "Ah, yes. A total of 84 people showed up the other night. We put those that we thought were infected on this floor since it has the strongest doors. The others are on the other floors." I nodded, that made sense. It also explained the bewilderingly high numbers of infected people. We passed by a room with a piece of plywood nailed over the door. The moans of a zombie told the fate of its occupant. John looked uneasy as we passed it. Logan didn't pay it much mind, but he watched Nina and Daniel with interest. Even after all of the times he watched Nina administer the cure, he always seemed intrigued and curious. I thought it was odd and kept an eye on him, but never really saw anything else that raised any warning flags. I watched as Nina emptied another vial, "Are you going to have enough?" Nina nodded absently as she ensured that no air bubbles were in the needle, "Enough for this place at least. I have just under 200 doses left before the only option is the serum. We could always return to Ironwind to restock, but it would take us two days of driving considering our distance at this point." "I hadn't realized that you had so much stockpiled in that truck." Nina injected the arm that the man put through the bars before shrugging, "I saw no sense in leaving more than a dozen vials behind since Luke was going to make more in our absence." That also made sense and I didn't respond. Nicky yawned in boredom, "I am not sure who originally chose this wallpaper, but they must have been to the Glenbrook Mental Institute since the exact same stuff is on their walls too." Daniel rolled his eyes, "Behave or we can lock you into one of the empty rooms in this place and just collect you on the way back." Nicky grinned at his mild threat and wandered over to a door with no occupant. She bent in front of the lock and a few moments later I heard a click before Nicky waved a bobby pin in the air and proclaimed, "You wouldn't even make it down the hallway. The locks on these doors are the same cheap shit the police stations use in rooms to contain drunks or those who just need a time out." The brown haired man leading us was beginning to look worried as hints of Nicky's past came to light once more. He was probably wondering how often Nicky had ended up in police custody to be able to pick that lock in under ten seconds. I didn't even bother wondering because I really didn't want to know the answer to that question. Some things were better left unknown. We climbed the steps to the next floor and the mostly human scents were reassuring. Daniel stopped by the first door and glanced at me, "I am not picking anything up." I came a few steps closer. The man was uneasy, but didn't move away from the door. Some of those who had come along to observe must have come up here to spread the word of our arrival. We didn't have to explain why we were here. "As far as I can tell he is uninfected. He can try petting that cat every two days for the next week. If he is infected, it will be quite obvious and someone can administer the cure then." The man was relieved and happy to accept such precautions. It took us much less time to go through this hallway since only four were infected. We kept going through the entire building. The brown haired man sighed in relief, "Thank you so much. I will bring that cat in as you suggested. Could you also check on the residents as well?" Daniel nodded, "Yes, let's go back and I can ensure that none have that airborne variant." The man happily led us back. Daniel paused in surprise as we entered the gate. I didn't blame him. This was a first. Around two hundred people were lined up along one side of the street and were clearly waiting for us. The man noticed Daniel's surprise and explained, "I sent someone back and every single person is in this lineup." This man was surprisingly good at thinking ahead and having things organized. Daniel started walking down the long line as the rest of us followed. He easily located the two infected and Nina inoculated them. Checking a Stronghold usually took an hour or more, but this time it took under five minutes for Daniel to check everyone. Nina left ten vials of the cure since there were so many in quarantine. The leader and quite a few others were very grateful. They were sad that they couldn't offer us lodgings for the night since we planned to keep going. One thing was certain, any of us were welcome to stop here at any time. 

 

Chapter 108


 I examined the night sky and decided it was time to head back to the Stronghold where we were spending the night. The sun would start to rise shortly and I usually didn't stay out this late when I planned to sneak over the fence. I still managed that feat undetected. This place boasted a wooden palisade so the sentries weren't that alert. None of them had noticed the coil of rope that dropped to the ground outside. A feral wouldn't think to use a plain rope to scale the vertical wall so it had been safe to leave it dangling. If anyone had found it and pulled it up, I could have used a spare coil in my backpack to lasso the top of a post and climb up. I did a double take as I saw movement in the back of our truck. To my immense surprise, Nicky was already sitting there. A quick sniff made me growl faintly as I changed my direction to head towards her. "What are you doing out here in the dark?" Nicky jumped a bit as I surprised her but shrugged, "I got tired of Nina's complaining and Daniel threatened to toss me outside if I didn't stop singing. I didn't feel like being gagged today, so I decided to come out here." I sighed heavily, at least she had some sense of self preservation. Although considering how she was passing the time, that was up for debate as well. I shook my head, "I am going to go let Daniel know I am back and inside the fence." I slipped silently into the shadows. 
 Daniel's eyes narrowed as he approached the truck. He shot me an accusing look as I approached from a different direction. I shrugged, "I said that I was back, not that I was going to sit in the truck. I have already spent far too much time in that thing." Nicky turned to grin at Daniel as she lifted up his previously white shirt, "In my defense, I was left unsupervised." He growled at her and Nina patted him on the arm in sympathy, "You knew it was probably going to happen when you packed it and it did keep her away from your shoes." He huffed, "I was wearing my shoes. And I am certainly not going to be wearing that shirt now." Nicky looked at him with disbelief, "But it matches Nina's socks!" I tilted my head as I went forward for a better look at the shirt that Nicky hadn't quite finished coloring yet. The blues, purples and pinks did indeed have the same pattern, but something else had caught my eye. I smirked before chuckling and commenting to Daniel, "You should wear it if only for the fact that her purple and blue marker are obviously wearing out." That caught his interest and he took a second look at the shirt as Nicky scowled at me for my revelation. The one sleeve was quite faded despite the fact that Nicky would have tried her best to make the colors vivid. Another shirt or two and she would have no more working markers at all. Daniel got into the driver's seat while shaking his head in aggravation. I sighed before climbing into the truck. John and Logan also took their respective corners as Nicky was still trying to finish coloring Daniel's shirt with markers that were barely leaving marks. Daniel started the truck and slowly drove towards the gate. Nina dug around in the travel bag she had left in the cab before whirling around and glaring fiercely at Nicky through the window, "You did not!" Nicky shrugged as she kept coloring, "I prefer your statement over the truth." Daniel glanced over, "What did she do this time?" Nina actually turned a bit red, "She put a pair of rather brightly colored underwear in here." Nicky grinned, "I dare you to hold them up."

Nina frowned at Nicky, "I certainly will not." Nicky chuckled, "At the very least you should recognize them." Nina gritted her teeth and refused to answer. Daniel looked mystified at their discussion, but clearly was not about to enter this discussion about female underwear. John looked a bit uncomfortable at the topic. Logan was studiously ignoring them as he gazed towards the gate. I turned my head to observe the faintly pink clouds overhead in an attempt to avoid being brought into this conversation. The sunrise was likely quite spectacular towards the east, but my eyes couldn't handle looking towards the sun. A tap on my shoe made me growl faintly as I looked away from the clouds and towards Nicky. Nicky tilted her head as she grinned at me, "Don't you want to know what I did?" "Not really." My wish was not granted. "Remember those clothes that Nina and Daniel dyed pink on me? Well when we came back from burning them I realized that I had missed a pair of underwear. I put them where I wouldn't see them, but that just so happened to be behind my sleeping bag. I couldn't find a pair of bright orange lacy panties to stick in her bag so I had to improvise. Nina had just been so kind as to provide me with them too!" That was an odd twist on Nicky's attempt to get revenge and was actually halfway amusing. Nina's plan had backfired on her in an entirely unforeseen manner. The look that Nina was currently sending Nicky spoke volumes. Nicky didn't see it as she continued coloring. It wasn't easy to annoy the easygoing scientist, but Nicky had really gotten under her skin with this stunt. The truck was silent as we left the gate and once more headed down the highway. It wasn't more than ten minutes later before Nicky groaned, "These felts are so dead. I can't get anything more out of them. Sorry Daniel, but your one sleeve is about to have a makeover." I heard him exhale heavily, but he didn't comment. He had probably already labeled that shirt as a lost cause. Nicky pulled out her other felts and made the blue lines transition into green, and then into yellow while the purple became red and then orange. The one yellow and orange sleeve was quite a contrast to the purple and blue shirt. You can't forget those tiny bits of pink peeking out here and there... Logan watched in curiosity as Nicky somehow made the colors flow smoothly into their new shades. He seemed impressed, "I have never seen something like that before. That is quite unique." Nicky grinned at him, "My counselor said that I had a unique way of lighting up a room. Apparently it was called arson and she was called a witness."  Nicky once more enlightened us into another aspect of her past that was better left unknown for our peace of mind. Logan lacked a response and John was wisely keeping his mouth shut. Neither Nina nor Daniel commented upon this new discovery. I turned my eyes towards the road in front of us. 
 
 I took a deeper breath to ensure I wasn't imagining things. The smell of blood made me growl. I was on my feet and had jumped off of the moving truck before anyone even really had time to register my unanticipated growl. My landing was rough, but my Nightstalker capabilities kept me from falling or taking serious injury as I hurdled myself off of the swiftly moving vehicle. I ran towards the trees full tilt. The truck tires squealed as Daniel braked hard. I could hear the urgent calls as they tried to call me back while attempting to figure out why I had taken off like that. I tuned it out as my mind focused on the smell of blood. I knew that blood. I had smelled it before

We were halfway between two Strongholds and there should not have been anyone out here. Especially this person. The wind had been blowing the smell towards the road and it wasn't that far. I slowed and my footsteps went silent as I got closer. The scents I was detecting were not lining up. At least the smell of blood wasn't any stronger, so I had more time than I had originally assumed. It didn't surprise me to hear Daniel's footsteps moments later. I didn't come out of my half crouch, although I did slow down to allow the blundering idiot to catch up. "Keep the noise down." My voice was soft, but I was pretty sure that Daniel would hear it even though he wasn't close enough to see me yet. He must have heard me since his footsteps slowed and he tried to move more quietly. I had heard deer run more silently and my opinion of his skills sank like the Titanic. He was clearly in dire need of skulking practice. "What are you doing?" Daniel was clearly confused. I glanced back at him as he tried to sneak closer as quietly as he could. "Seriously? Use your nose. Even you should have no problem picking this up." He sniffed and looked confused before narrowing his eyes. He peered in the upwind direction, "How close can we get without being spotted?" I snorted faintly, "I can get extremely close. I am not so sure about your ninja skills though." He growled a faint reprimand at the insult before replying, "Why don't you see if you can sneak in close and then I will just walk in? That way you can take them by surprise if you need to." I nodded and silently slipped through the underbrush to work my way upwind of them. The underbrush was thick and I was almost on top of them before I could actually see what was going on. I watched silently as the rough looking man gently dabbed a damp cloth on Liz's skinned up knees as he cleaned away the blood and dirt. I had never met or seen this man before. What is he doing out here? And why does he have Liz? I had carefully tested the air earlier, but Marissa was not in the area and nor had she touched Liz for days since I could pick up no trace of her afterscent. I was close enough that I could smell that the man was infected with the airborne zombie virus. Footsteps started approaching and I knew that it was Daniel. My hearing was better than theirs, so it took them a bit to realize that they had company. The man rose to his feet and nocked an arrow on his bow. Interestingly enough, Liz hid behind him. Then she sneezed. I had a pretty good idea why these two were not in a Stronghold, but I remained in hiding to see how they would handle Daniel's appearance. Daniel rounded a corner and came into view. The man raised his bow to point it at Daniel. I resisted the urge to slap my forehead at Daniel's stupidity. His eyes were red to let the man know he was a zombie, but he had not spoken so the man had no way of know that he wasn't feral. I spoke quietly, "Speak you fool. He thinks you are a feral." Daniel's eyes flashed bright red at that insult as his eyes flickered in my direction as he stopped walking. He visibly restrained from growling at me before focusing on the man again, "Hello." The man looked completely surprised and plainly had no idea how to respond. Liz peeked out from around the man. "Daniel!" She ran towards him with a squeal. "Liz!" The man desperately called her name, but didn't have a chance to catch her since his hands were full with a drawn bow, "You injure her and you are in big trouble." The man clearly trying to protect her, although he was having terrible success at the moment. He also seemed to think that Daniel was just a Runner and not anything more dangerous.

Liz wrapped her arms around Daniel's legs as much as she could. Daniel made a face at the contact, but otherwise didn't react as he gently patted the child's back. The man had lowered his bow, although the arrow was still nocked on the string. He looked confused and somewhat bewildered that Liz would know a zombie by name and that the exact same zombie simply appeared in the middle of a forest. I slipped silently out of the trees as I walked up behind the man, "Why don't you put that thing away before you injure someone?" The poor man practically jumped out of his skin. I knew sneaking up behind him wasn't nice, but I really didn't care. I was a bit of a jerk in that fashion, although I could blame it on my Nightstalker instincts. He whirled around with eyes the size of saucers as he tried to comprehend how I had appeared out of thick underbrush that a rabbit would have been hard pressed to squeeze through. "Trinity!" The little cannonball of energy released Daniel to run full tilt in my direction. I sighed faintly, "Hello to you too Liz." She slammed into my legs hard enough that she probably had bruises. The lack of enthusiasm in my voice had not impacted her excitement at seeing me once more. She clung to my leg like a paranoid koala in a thunderstorm. I looked down at her as I gently patted her back, at a loss as to what I was supposed to. I never had been very good with children. My instincts didn't like the contact, but it was easier now than it had been when I had also been fighting against my bloodlust. How do I get this child off of my leg? She is the human equivalent of a human suction cup... "You can let go now Liz." Liz loosened her grip. She didn't completely let go, although it was still an improvement. I kept an eye on the worried looking man who held his bow loosely in one hand. Daniel had come closer and I wondered if the man was even aware that the first zombie was only about ten feet behind him now. He was going to be in for another heart attack the moment he turned around. I looked back down, "Liz, where is Marissa? What are you doing out here?" As much as I didn't like that woman, it would have taken force to separate her from Liz. Liz looked sad, "The Stronghold wouldn't let me in because we were sneezing. Something happened one night and she never came back in the morning." I turned my head to regard the man, knowing that he would know more, "And just what are you doing out here with her? You are aware that you are infected, right?" He looked surprised, "Yes, but- How-..." I snorted lightly, "I can smell it from here. Now, what happened?" He shook his head as he tried to recollect his thoughts. I doubted that this man handled surprises well and he was definitely struggling as we simply kept dropping figurative bombs on him. "The woman and the child were turned away from four or five Strongholds. Or so the woman said. The places were scared they were infected since they were sneezing. They were trying to get to some place where a friend of hers was. A Tom, or a Don, or something like that." The guy sighed, "She said that when she got there that the place had been overrun. None of the neighboring Strongholds reported any survivors showing up at their doorstep. I was kicked out around that time since all of the animals started avoiding me. I offered to travel with her until I started sneezing. We made camp in a building about a week ago, but some zombies broke in. I managed to get Liz to safety, but when I came back it was too late for the woman." I took a deep breath to test the air. He told the truth. I relaxed marginally, "I see." As much as I hated to have more company in that small truck, I knew it wasn't right to just leave them. It was also a given that Daniel wouldn't leave them here. I also wasn't sure that I could pry this little limpet off of my leg as I walked back to the truck... I sighed heavily, "We have the cure back at the truck if you want to follow us." That got the man's attention, "There is really a cure? The woman said that they had been researching one in the place she came from."  "Yes." "I'll come. Thank you so much." I nodded and turned to go, or attempted to. With a sigh I looked down at the small weight attached to my leg. She finally let go, only to hold her arms up to me, "Horse ride! Horsie!" I growled faintly, much to the shock of the man, "I will carry you only if you promise to never call me horsie again. Deal?" Liz wasn't at all bothered by my growl. "Okay!" I doubted just how effective bargaining with a child was, but it had worked with Nicky... I gently picked her up before putting her on my shoulders as I had in the past. The man still looked shocked, "You are a zombie." Much to my chagrin, Liz's head was level with his. He had to look down to look at my face. I rolled my eyes, unimpressed with his observation skills, "Good guess. Now let's get going." He nodded in slow daze as he turned around. He jumped and almost fell backwards as he realized that Daniel had gotten closer in his distraction with me. That guy just wasn't getting a break today. Or well, considering he was getting the cure, he actually was. If he didn't die from heart failure first. Daniel turned to head back the way he came at a slow walk. The man was still trying to recover from his latest fright. I shook my head and walked around him. The sooner I got to the truck, the sooner I could get this little monkey off my back.

 

Chapter 109


 I hadn't taken more than ten steps before the man came to his senses and jogged to catch up. He gave me a wide berth of space, which was a wise move on his part. We caught up with Daniel moments later since he had been lagging to allow us to catch up. Daniel glanced at him, "As you probably guessed, I am Daniel. What were you doing so far from the road?" The man was nervous in the company of two zombies, "I'm Joe. Liz said that zombies walk along the roads, but not many were away from it. Turns out she was right. I was heading to another Stronghold and hoping to leave Liz there before I started sneezing. Every place so far has turned her away since she still has that cold. It is a just a cold right?" Daniel nodded absently, "Liz just has the cold. It has been showing up in quite a few Strongholds." Joe sighed in relief, "That is good to hear." He stopped talking as he saved his breath for walking. Liz was quite happy on my shoulders as she looked around with no fear. What took less than two minutes to run at zombie speed, took us at least fifteen to walk at a swift pace that had Joe breathing hard. We exited the trees to see all of the humans anxiously awaiting our return. Nina was in the driver seat in case trouble showed up, but was looking towards the tree line. She did a hilarious double take at the child on my shoulder. Nicky was standing in the back of the truck impatiently waiting for us to get closer, "Shit, girl! You almost gave me a heart attack when you jumped off the truck like that. Give me some warning next time!" Daniel snorted as he added his two cents, "You could have just told me to stop the truck." I rolled my eyes at both of them before picking Liz off my shoulders and passing her up to Nicky, "I wasn't sure how much time I had to get over there when I caught the scent of her blood. For all I knew, a zombie had cornered her. Turns out that she just skinned her knees." Nicky grinned at the child as she helped her into the back of the truck, "Hey Liz! Long time no see! How did you get out here?" Daniel answered those questions for her, "She was turned away from Strongholds since she was sneezing. Marissa ran into the same problem that many travelers face when camping in unsecured buildings." Nicky winced, "Ah. I see." Then she perked up as she turned to Liz, "Well, you can certainly travel with us." Nicky paused as she looked at the rather dirty man, "Wow. I don't think you could get your clothing any dirtier if you actually tried. I know Daniel has a spare shirt in his bag. Probably have to wait until we get to a Stronghold for pants that will fit though." The man looked a bit embarrassed. I climbed into the truck to reclaim my recently abandoned seat. Daniel leaned over the side of the truck to dig in his bag. He tossed the purple and blue shirt towards the man, "You can keep that." Nicky huffed in indignation, "That Terror really needs to work on his gratitude. Just giving away gifts. At least he will actually wear it." Daniel updated Nina while Joe quickly tossed his filthy shirt on the side of the road before putting on the one that Nicky had so carefully colored with Daniel in mind. Nina had a syringe ready by the time he finished, "So do you want the cure or a serum to allow you to remain in control when you turn?" "The cure please." I wasn't even sure why Nina asked after getting the same answer over 300 times. Maybe we would find one crazy person who didn't mind drinking blood for the rest of their life. Liz climbed into my lap and I stifled my annoyance. Why me? There are three humans in the back of this truck. She could have picked any of them. Perhaps I should have stuck her in the cab of the truck with Nina...

Nina injected the cure and gestured to the truck, "Hop in. That cure should remove the infection within 6 hours, so you can stay at any Stronghold we stop at or continue with us." If Nina keeps inviting people along, we are going to need a bus... Joe nodded slowly before getting into the truck, "Thank you. Once I can approach animals, I will stay at that location. I don't want to impose upon you." The smell of his fear when he glanced at me or Daniel told the real reason that he was not planning to come with us for long. Just long enough to ensure that the cure truly worked. Nicky frowned at him before pointing imperiously towards Logan and John, "Boys sit on that side and girls get this side. Girls can cross the line if they want, but the guys could get slashed by Trinity if they try it." Joe didn't argue and quickly took a seat between Logan and John as he put his back against the cab. I raised my eyebrow at Nicky, "I have not slashed anyone yet. You are just trying to hog all of the available room." The sleeping bags had been tied to the tailgate, so there was more room than previously, but we had other supplies such as gas and food that still took up quite a bit of room. Nicky was unrepentant, "It keeps me happy." For Nicky, that was actually a valid argument. Daniel started the truck and we resumed our drive. The smell of the zombie infection in Joe's blood was annoying. Liz sat quietly in my lap and just watched the scenery go by. Logan kept watching Liz in my lap with a perplexed expression. My behavior was so vastly different from those other Nightstalkers he had met that he had a hard time believing what he was seeing. He didn't comment or ask any questions though. Liz sneezed once before leaning back with a yawn as she closed her eyes. Within seconds she was asleep as she leaned against me. 
 I nodded towards Nicky, "Why don't you ask Nicky to show you some string tricks?" Liz obediently looked in Nicky's direction. Nicky was also willing to be distracted from her cloud watching and managed to dig a spare shoelace out of her bag. To my disappointment, Liz didn't leave my lap as she watched Nicky make the string move and twist in various ways. Daniel spoke, "There are two zombies ahead and I doubt I can avoid the Runner. Can you keep it at bay Trinity?" The zombies were on opposite sides of the road and going in the ditch was not an option along this part of the highway. The Runner was almost certain to get his hands on the truck. I nodded as I shifted Liz off my lap, "Yes." I was surprised that this was the first time I had to do this during this trip. Daniel had been able to avoid the previous ones. I moved towards John, "Move over. You aren't going to want this corner until that guy is behind us." After traveling with us for so long, John was aware that I didn't like people in my personal space and he moved to the other side of the truck. I kneeled just behind the cab and waited for us to get closer. Nicky pulled Liz to the middle of the truck bed and made her sit down. She didn't want to chance the normal zombie managing to reach them from the other side. The growls and snarls of Runner could be heard long before he got close. Joe jumped as the Runner banged on Nina's door. I took that as my cue to lean over the side of the truck and snarl viciously at the zombie. It took a couple of steps back in surprise. Then we were past it. I heard Daniel exhale slowly. My challenging snarl would have sparked his instincts just as much as mine would have if a Runner had snarled at me. Daniel had swerved just far enough away that the slower normal zombie wasn't able to reach the truck.

I moved back to my spot. The three men in the back were watching me with surprise and unease. Nicky yawned as she moved to where she had been previously. Liz looked curious as she climbed back into my lap, "How did you make that noise? It sounded like a doggy." Nicky started snickering and I narrowed my eyes at the redhead. This had better not become my new nickname... I turned back to face the inquisitive child, "It is a sound that zombies can make when they choose." "You aren't a zombie." I sighed. I had never thought that I would be arguing with someone to convince them that I was, in fact, a zombie. "Well, I am." She shook her head in denial, "No. Zombies eat people. You have never eaten anyone." Nicky was having far too much fun listening to this debate. I tried to explain things to Liz once more, "Not all zombies eat people. Some still have a human mind. Those ones don't eat people." She tilted her head as she tried to understand, "So you are a good zombie?" I give up... "We'll go with that." "Cool!" I was not the only person to give Liz an odd look. Her eyes were shining with the excitement of her new discovery. "Do all good zombies use a bow? I remember you helped me shoot my bow." Oh boy, what have I gotten myself into this time? I sighed heavily as I resigned myself to answering questions for a while, "Shooting a bow is like dancing. Anyone can do it with practice. Sane zombies are a lot like people. We can learn things." "What is a sane zombie?" "One that can talk and doesn't try to eat you." In theory there could be a sane mute out there somewhere, but I highly doubted that Liz would meet one anytime within the next decade. She nodded seriously, although she was still excited, "Do all zombies have red eyes?" "All zombies have red eyes, but sane zombies can change the color of their eyes if they want." I noticed that all three men looked surprised at that fact. I wasn't sure why it surprised Logan or John, they had both seen Daniel change his eye color. Maybe they had not been aware that it was a conscious choice. Liz nodded eagerly, "Can I see your eyes?" I shook my head, "Some zombies have problems when it is sunny like this and I am one of them. Remind me once it is dark out." I would have thought that Logan knew that Nightstalkers were light sensitive, but it looked like this was new information to him. It wasn't exactly uncommon knowledge, so he was probably just surprised to hear it confirmed. John looked intrigued and simply listened. Joe was listening as well. Liz was a bit disappointed, but didn't argue, "Okay." She looked at the passing trees, "Where are we going?" "We are traveling to other Stronghold to spread the cure for the sneezing zombie virus." She looked confused, "I was sneezing, but I am not a zombie." These questions were grating on my patience as all questions did, "You have a cold. Some colds make people sneeze. It is a different virus." "Are there any kids there?" "I have no idea." Thankfully she fell silent as she got distracted by watching Nicky play with the rubik's cube. I turned towards Joe, "Do you plan to take care of Liz when you find a place to stay?" He shook his head, "No, I only looked after her because I was the only person around. She knows you, and considering she is on your lap, she is probably more familiar with your group." Nicky glanced at Joe before looking at Liz, "Hey Liz, do you want to go with Joe or stay with us?" "I want to stay with you guys." Joe shrugged, "There you go." That had not been my original hope. I honestly knew nothing about kids and I couldn't even foist her off on Marissa now. It was bad enough just trying to keep an eye on Nicky. I did not need to add a fearless seven year old into the equation. 
 I watched as we drove up to the Stronghold gate. I glanced at Joe, "Animals will still avoid you at the moment, but you should really grab a shower and a set of clean clothes while Nina scopes this place out for any who are infected." He nodded silently, although my comment that he wasn't fully cured yet seemed to have disappointed him. I wasn't really concerned about what this man did in the Stronghold or if he was too slow and got left behind. I had a different and more pressing concern. I eyed up Liz and Nicky. So far Nicky had been so well behaved in the various Strongholds that it was making me uneasy that my luck was about to run out in a rather unfortunate way. I knew nothing about how to keep a kid out of trouble either. Is it possible to kill two birds with one stone? I knew that in real life I stood a chance of making a rock do that particular trick, but this was a different type of ball game with some rather unorthodox players who were probably not about to follow the rules. "Nicky, you are in charge of looking after Liz." Nicky nodded, "Sure." I hope that I really do not regret this... I was past having second thoughts about my idea. I was into fifth and sixth thoughts already. Perhaps I needed more backup on this... I glanced at John and Logan, "And you two are in charge of keeping her out of trouble." Logan winced slightly at that unfavorable task. John scratched his head, "I am not sure if I am able to assist in that one. Can I watch the kid instead?" Nicky grinned at the two hapless men, "Oh, you two are so screwed. And no, I am the one who gets to look after Liz." I growled faintly, "Language Nicky. If she starts repeating such words, I will be blaming you." "Sorry." Liz was in my lap once more. She looked up at me as she attempted to mimic my growl. Nicky rolled over howling in laughter. The others were all snickering or chuckling. I shook my head in faint amusement at the irony of who Liz chose to copy, "That was not quite what I had expected." Liz looked around in slight confusion at their reaction before grinning as she realized that she had made them all laugh. So much for Nicky being the bad influence...

 

Chapter 110


 This Stronghold let us in easily enough since they had heard we were coming. Apparently someone had sent a message via homing pigeon several days ago. Someone was guiding Joe to the showers. The man in charge here was happily guiding us on a tour as Daniel tried to track the one infected person present. Liz looked around in curiosity, but thankfully didn't make any attempt to leave the group. Nicky was walking beside her, as bored as usual. I focused on Daniel's arm. His scab must have come off while we were driving since only a red mark showed where the injury had been located. That healed faster than I had anticipated, even taking into consideration that he had discovered how to doctor his injuries properly. I suspected that Terrors healed a bit faster than Nightstalkers, even as Nightstalkers healed a bit quicker than Runners. It was barely noticeable, but it looked like it made a difference if you were a Terror. Daniel didn't have any real difficulty locating the lady we were seeking. Joe caught up to us just as we were approaching the truck. I could barely even scent the zombie undertone on him now. A cat was walking across the road and Liz pointed towards it, "Look at the kitty!" Nicky snagged her hand, "We can go see it if you want, but kitties don't like zombies, or those who have been close to them. The kitty probably won't let you pet it." After sitting in my lap for so long, I could guarantee that the cat was not about to let Liz anywhere near it. Nicky had a better chance of getting close to the cat and her odds were also so small that they might as well be non-existent. Nicky nodded towards Joe, "Why don't we let Joe try first?" "Okay." Liz looked at him expectantly. Joe took the hint and walked slowly towards the black and white feline. The cat didn't seem to notice anything amiss until he had almost touched it. It backed up quickly before slinking away while looking back suspiciously. It hadn't hissed though, or attempted to scratch him. He looked disappointed. For that matter, so was I. Had the cat let him pet it, it would have meant one less person in the crowded truck. I knew I was getting grouchy from being crowded so much, but there wasn't much help for it. The scent had faded enough that he should be able to remain at the next location, although this place would probably accept him if Nina said she had given the cure. The cat made its getaway and it wasn't long before we were in the truck once more. 
 *   *   *         "He headed north this morning, if you move quickly, you can probably catch him." Nina nodded, "We will try to locate him before returning." Nicky passed a spare face mask to Liz, "If someone sneezes around you, hold your breath and put this on quickly." Liz clearly didn't understand the reasoning, but nodded obediently. Daniel started the truck before glancing back at me, "Trinity, can you pick up his scent?" I had already checked the air, "No, so he is downwind somewhere." "Well, that is north..." We knew it had been coming, so coming to a location that had just expelled someone who was sneezing heavily was not a surprise. Nina was quite positive that the cure would work as long as the person didn't turn during the 4-6 hours window that it took for the cure to completely destroy the virus. In theory, they shouldn't be able to turn at all since the cure was reducing the virus below the required concentration.

If they were in that closing window, she planned to administer the serum that blocked the normal zombie trigger since it worked much faster and would allow them to remain sane when they turned. Then she would offer them the cure if they wanted to be human again. The controlex didn't play nice with humans, so it was only available for someone who was already a zombie. I wasn't sure if I could handle a newly turned zombie in the back of the truck. It could come to blows pretty quickly. The odds of them turning into a Runner were in my favor though. If they turned into a Terror, I was walking back. 
 "There you go. Just keep that mask on and hop in the back." I stifled a growl as the current occupants of the truck shifted closer to me to make room for the man we rescued. Nicky glanced at me before pulling Liz into her lap. She knew my instincts were getting worked up and having Liz in direct contact with me for most of the day had them on the fritz. Thankfully we wouldn't be in this truck for much longer today. It only took us half an hour to return to the Stronghold. Only Daniel and myself didn't bother with a mask. Everyone else wore one just in case. The sneezing man had already agreed to stay in an abandoned house outside the fence for three days, so we dropped him off there. Someone from the Stronghold had already left supplies at the front door for him. The leader was waiting by the door, "You found him?" Daniel nodded, "Yes. He will stay at that place for three days just to be sure, but he shouldn't even be sneezing by morning." "Thank you very much. Can we offer you lodgings for the night?" "You're welcome. We will accept your offer." It looked like the tour would wait as we were led towards the guesthouses, but I didn't smell any other infected scent trails, other than what the previous sneezer had left behind. The man looked at our group, "I don't think any single room or house can hold your entire group. Do you mind being split up?" Joe spoke up, "I was just travelling with them and I am actually hoping to stay, if that is possible." The leader looked surprised, but nodded, "Certainly." He waved at a different man, "Bob, can you please help Joe find a room? He is planning on staying, so give him the tour and stuff." Joe must have decided to not even bother the test with the cat after he realized that he would be dealing with possibly infectious people if he remained with us. He had been infected by a sneeze once, so he would remain as far as possible from such another situation. The large cabin would hold the rest of our group since Logan and John didn't mind sleeping on the floor in their sleeping bags. We dropped our bags in our room since a thunderstorm was on the horizon. No sense getting our gear wet if it was easy to avoid it. The leader escorted us for an early supper. I just walked along with the group and didn't bother taking a plate. Liz stood on her tip toes as she tried to peer at the food on the serving table. Nicky was focused on the food and ignoring her charge. So much for my earlier idea... I took Liz's plate and pointed to one bin, "Do you want some rice?" "Yes please." I helped her fill her plate and carried it for her in case she spilled it. The leader ushered us onwards. Thankfully it was a private room he led us to, and not the main hall. If that main dining area got even halfway as busy as Ironwind's did, then I would have been going outside for fresh air. Liz sat on my left side since I carried her plate and Nicky was quick to claim my other side. I took a sip of water as I listened to the others talk with the handful of locals who had followed us on our tour. One of the women across from me commented, "Don't you want anything to eat?"

I shook my head, "No, I am not hungry." I was tired of making excuses or brushing off inquiries every time we had a meal at a Stronghold. As much as I hated to admit, I was beginning to miss Ironwind Stronghold. That thought just irritated me further. "I am sure the cooks can make something if you want something different." The lady was quite concerned that I was not eating. Perhaps she was worried that their hospitality was lacking. "No thanks, I am not hungry." Nicky must have been in a rather observant and intuitive mood since she distracted the lady, "Do you know if the places down the road might have heard any rumor of a group traveling with a cure? It makes it much easier when we arrive." I knew that such details did not really interest Nicky. She considered travel plans and pit stops as Nina's responsibility, so such a question was purely a distraction. It worked though, and the woman was distracted. The meal passed so slowly that it was almost painful. Afterwards we got a general tour. This place was set up like quite a few other Strongholds, but their fence clearly needed an upgrade. I had no clue how a Runner had not scaled it yet. I muttered just loud enough for Daniel to hear, "That fence needs some serious work. I have no idea how it is still standing..." Daniel turned his head and also examined the unusually short fence with a frown. He inquired with our guide, "I have never seen such a short fence before. What do you use to keep Runners and such away?" The man winced, "We have been meaning to build it higher. You can already see where we dug the additional post holes. There is a big river just past those trees, so not many zombies show up. Some of the teenagers lure the zombies off on a dirtbike. They drive across a narrow bridge and the zombies are dumb enough to just walk into the river." This place was a time bomb just waiting for a trigger. There was no way a ten foot chain link fence was going to stop anything more than regular zombies. There wasn't even any barbed wire on top to slow anything down. I had seen better fences around junk yards before the collapse. Sometimes I was rather glad I wasn't human, and being in a situation like this was one of them. I didn't really have anything to fear from feral zombies due to the fact that I was a zombie. We finished the tour and headed back to the cabin we had been given. The locals left and headed to wherever they normally spent their evening. Nina glanced towards the gate, "I wonder if that guy outside the fence wants to come with us? It would be interesting to see how fast the cure worked." I growled, "If you invite anyone else along, then we are going to need another vehicle or someone could get hurt." Nina was surprised by my tone, "I forgot how crowded it was getting in the back. I noticed that you were getting grouchy, is anything wrong?" Nicky rolled her eyes, "We crammed a Nightstalker in the back of a truck for nine days and keep adding people – strangers I might add – into the mix, and you are asking if anything is wrong? I even feel cramped back there. The fact that there have not been any casualties is a small miracle. At this rate we are going to need to hook up a trailer so we can travel in comfort." Nina winced, "Ah, I think we are better off avoiding that. We packed some gas, but the Strongholds have been donating most of what we are using. A trailer would affect our gas mileage terribly." I shook myself off in hopes it would settle my mood somewhat. I had no such luck. "At least I won't have any problem getting over that fence tonight." Logan spoke, "I can't believe this place is standing with a fence like that." He glanced between me and Daniel, "If this place gets overrun in the middle of the night, are you two able to keep our group safe?" Daniel glanced at me uncertainly, "During the day, I would say yes. Then night is trickier. I know you see well in the dark. I assume you plan to stick around close enough to notice if this place runs into trouble? Do you still have the walkie talkie I gave you?" I sighed in irritation, "I suppose I can stick closer. Yes, I am still packing that piece of dead weight." I knew that Daniel didn't plan to mention his weakness while we were on the road. He was letting them assume that his vision at night would be similar to theirs, while hinting that mine was much better. The nightvision and nocturnal preferences of Nightstalkers were quite well known. I didn't appreciate having to stick closer, but with my luck Nicky would start sleepwalking and teleport right through that lousy excuse of a fence before getting into a fist fight with a tree. I glanced to the west, but the sun wasn't going to disappear for a few more hours yet. I remained outside while the others went in to figure out who was going to crash where for the night. A break away from people was all I really wanted at the minute, but inside of a Stronghold, that was next to impossible. My gaze slowly skimmed over my surroundings looking for any place that may provide peace and quiet. The flower trellis against the side wall caught my attention and I wandered over to it. It reached right up to the roof. Good enough for me. I started climbing as silently as I could, which wasn't the easiest feat on a rickety trellis made from old sticks. It was squeaking enough that Daniel could probably hear it if he was paying attention or listening hard enough. Although with the amount they were talking inside, he probably wasn't paying attention to the sound of sticks creaking outside. John had the same manners his brother did, "I can take the floor again. Let Nicky and Nina have the bed." Logan really didn't seem to care where he slept, "Sounds good to me." I reached the roof and silently padded up to the peak before sitting in precious solitude. Too bad I couldn't tone down my good hearing the way I could change my eye color. "Liz, you can have this bed tonight. You must be getting tired." "I'm not tired." Nicky groaned, "She slept almost all day in the truck. Getting her to sleep tonight is not going to be fun." I laid back on the shingles to attempt to relax in the heat of the sun while trying to ignore whatever game of tag had started inside as Nicky tried to tire Liz out on short notice. I was so glad that I was not inside right now with whatever was going on. Several minutes later Nicky still hadn't worn Liz out. "Let's go find Trinity instead." I hope that they don't look up. Perhaps walking several laps around this place will tire them both out. I cracked one eye open as I watched them walk down the beaten dirt path. I am not sure who let those two out without supervision, but I am not volunteering. I closed my eyes and remained where I was. 
 It took them about an hour to locate me. If the sound of the trellis creaking hadn't given them away, then their hushed giggling would have. The locals weren't aware that I was zombie, but they would not have tried to climb onto a roof to bother any guest. I could only think of two people in the immediate vicinity who would try to sneak up on me. Well, if you can call that sneaking... Even if I had been halfway deaf I would know that something was up. The hour hadn't done much for my temper, but my temper being out of sorts was not exactly a new or novel thing. I growled a reluctant welcome without bothering to open my eyes. Nicky whispered to Liz, "Always pay attention to a zombie's growl as well as their body language. Did you hear how that growl didn't seem serious and how she didn't bother even sitting up? That means it wasn't a true warning." I exhaled slowly in irritation, not entirely impressed that Nicky was giving Liz zombie communication lessons 101. "And that sound is one she makes a lot when you start to annoy her, which is quite frequently." I turned my head to regard the two interlopers, "Don't you have anything better to do?" Nicky grinned as she sat down beside me, "Actually, no." I huffed to show my opinion of that. Nicky chuckled before leaning her head back to watch the clouds that were colored pink by the sunset. Liz sat down between us and also watched the sunset in silence.

 

Chapter 111

            I glanced at the Stronghold once more, but everything was still quiet. There were only a handful of normal zombies around. Most did seem to stumble into the river and go downstream. I shook myself off as I considered what I could do the rest of the night. The small elk had taken care of my hunger and leveled my mood a bit, but I still needed to improve my frame of mind or I would end up snarling at someone tomorrow. I kept circling the compound as I moved out further. It was almost a pity that no Runner was around for me to snarl at. Regular zombies had no interest in rank and looked at you like you were an idiot if you tried to challenge them. I wasn't quite in the right pissed off mood to shred a few trees. A wrestling match would suffice, although I didn't feel like an audience and Daniel wouldn't leave the group unprotected to go outside of the fence. I stashed that idea away for tomorrow. Daniel could take a few hits from me, if I managed to connect. I didn't really feel like losing though. I glanced at the sky. The distance between myself and the Stronghold should prevent the humans from getting too overly spooked. If they even heard it. A Nightstalker or Terror could hear the low deep sound for quite a distance. My lungs filled and my instincts shifted before that low creepy owl-like call left my lips. I tilted my head and waited in silence. No call came back within a minute, so no sane Nightstalker was around. It was to be expected since I hadn't picked up any hint of a scent, but I had felt like trying out of curiosity. A wolf pack in the distance started howling. A deadly creature announces it presence and the guardian wolves sound the alarm before hightailing it away. I snorted and shook my head before moving on. I halfheartedly knocked over a few dead trees that were still standing, but it wasn't very satisfying. A familiar echoing call made me whirl around in place with bared teeth. My instincts surged in distrust and outrage. The source was a long ways away, probably close to where I had originally called. There was one gigantic problem though, it was my call. I knew my call and my voice like the back of my hand. Each Nightstalker had a slightly different call. It was unique and like a signature. Generally it was impossible to replicate someone else's call even if you tried. My eyes narrowed as I headed back in that direction. Someone had copied my call. I was not impressed. I was careful to keep to the deepest shadows and out of sight as I got closer. My controlex-amplified instincts made it easier since I knew if I would be visible just by looking at a location. I moved slowly as I tested the air yet again. I was finally picking up some scents, but there was no Nightstalker. Humans. Six of them to be precise. I had avoided being directly downwind, since anyone familiar with Nightstalkers would know that we tended to go downwind to check on scents. I was upwind, so my sense of smell was compromised, but they would not be expecting me to come from that direction. My eyes were camouflaged to hide their glow as I crept in close enough to see them. They had no bright lights turned on, which was a surprise. One was playing with a laptop while talking quietly to his companions. "Look at the cross analysis of these two calls. They are different." "Both were Nightstalkers though, right?" "Definitely, but it looks like the calls might have different meanings even though we can't really hear the difference. We might have just spooked it instead of luring it in." The man frowned slightly before looking around at the surrounding darkness. His eyes skimmed right over my location and my instincts assured me that he had not spotted us. All six were wearing some vest like the FBI did in movies. All had weapons on their belt.

Their weapons were clearly designed for zombie attacks. A can of mace, a baton, and a dagger were present on every belt. The big flashlight that each carried showed that they had likely encountered Nightstalkers in the past. The warning bells in my head were faintly ringing. They had somehow recorded my call even though I was in the middle of the forest. They were also trying to lure a Nightstalker in. They had a second recording as well, although by the sounds of it, that Nightstalker had pulled a disappearing act. "Could it have been that zombie that was visiting the Stronghold?" The man at the laptop shook his head, "No, I am pretty sure he was a Terror. These calls are only made by Nightstalkers. Besides Nicholas walked by the house and saw his eyes glowing through the window, so he is still in the Stronghold." "Is there a reason we didn't approach him? If he was helping spread the cure, I am sure he would hear us out." "You don't mess with Terrors if you can possibly avoid it. Nothing really stops them. I encountered a feral once and I really hope to never encounter one again. It took out half of the army before someone managed to damage the head enough to knock it out." Another man chipped in, "Runners are easy enough to deal with and pretty common. Nightstalkers may be stronger than us, but not by a terrific amount. They can at least be restrained or contained." The first man nodded slowly as he accepted those details. I remained where I was as I tried to figure out what they were up to. These men had my instincts on edge. Very few people would ever consider trying to lure a Nightstalker closer and this group wasn't hiding very well. It was amazing that they were still alive. They clearly knew a lot about zombies, but didn't seem worried about sitting in the dark while trying to find a Nightstalker. These men were not stupid or they would have been dead long ago. That meant I was missing something. Something that gave them an edge even in a Nightstalker ambush. They were from the Stronghold we were staying in, but thankfully they were reluctant to go near Daniel, so that was one less worry. The one made it sound like they just wanted to talk, while the other had mentioned that it was possible to restrain a Nightstalker. The biggest question might be if he had been referring to a feral or a sane one. I didn't know and I definitely was not about to inquire. I was also not about to stick around and find out. My mind skimmed over several plans that I had made for various situations and one of them would work very well. I slowly backed up. My instincts stirred in alarm and I took a better look at the halfway hidden men. A brief glimpse of a very faint green reflective light caught my attention. I had thought it was odd that the one man had been playing with a video recorder, but now I saw that it was in fact an infrared camera. And it was pointed right at me. I bared my teeth in a silent snarl as I instantly ducked down and ran off in silence. "Wait! Come back! We just want to talk!" "Did you see it?" "Yes! It was right over there. It just took off full tilt." His voice was laden with frustration as he knew he had no chance of catching me. I didn't slow down as I fled further away while zigzagging. My instincts hated fleeing, but they knew it was some sort of trap. I headed further away from the Stronghold as I put them behind me. I paused and let out that odd proximity call again. I bared my teeth silently before taking off in a different direction. Let them try to track me in that direction. The call and misdirection had been deliberate. I made a huge circle as I worked my way back towards the Stronghold. I had no intentions of going anywhere near where they had been before. As I neared the Stronghold my instincts shifted lightly. I slowed down as I peered through the trees.

A snarl left my lips as I saw that the entire perimeter of the fence was lit up. There was absolutely no way I was going to be able to sneak inside. They must be making sure that the Nightstalker they saw can't infiltrate the Stronghold. No wonder their fence was so short, they probably left it like that on purpose. I wasn't getting in without them knowing about it. The group in the forest must have contacted someone here since the lights had not been on until I had circled out that far and made that call. Now that I knew about their infrared cameras, I wasn't sure I would travel the open area around the fence even if they did turn the lights off. I had never had to deal with infrared cameras before. Most fancy technology hadn't survived the collapse or they required batteries. Batteries were rare objects nowadays and most such gadgets required a lot of power to charge those batteries. Solar panels were often not sufficient or a good long term solution for these techy gadgets. I reluctantly pulled the walkie talkie out of my backpack. This was the first time I had used it and I was radioing the one person who I had intended to avoid starting a conversation with. I ensured the volume was quite low. Neither Daniel nor I had problems hearing. He better have that blasted device turned on. "You guys will be picking me up along the road. The entire fence is lit up like a maximum security prison. They know a Nightstalker is out here and that place knows about zombies, so watch yourself." Daniel's quiet voice came back over the radio, "What happened? Will you be okay out there?" He was asking if a Nightstalker would be okay in a forest at night. Normally such a question would have been insulting, but this group had technology on their side, so I wasn't going to make a snarky reply. "They had infrared cameras and a group had no qualms about wandering in the dark when they knew a Nightstalker was in the area, so something is up. They also have a sound recorder and managed to record my proximity call in the middle of the forest. It sounded like they were going to try to avoid you, but keep an eye out. I will be fine out here. Closer to dawn I will head south along the highway and you can just pick me up." "Keep your radio on. If you need help, contact me." I wasn't sure what he thought he could do, but still replied, "Alright." I took one last look at the fence before heading deeper into the underbrush. My instincts were unusually high, even for nighttime as they scanned everything around me as I traveled through the darkness. Something caught my interest and I cautiously went over to investigate. It was a small microphone with a wire attaching it to a transmitter. It had been sheer fluke that I had been at the correct angle to spot it considering how it was attached to the underside of a large branch. I was silent as I looked at it. It was small enough it would almost fit in my one hand and it would have been easy to miss or hide. It had been here long enough that the human scent had faded. No wonder they had been able to record my call from so far away. I must have been near a microphone. This tiny thing was powered by batteries, so there were no long wires leading to more easily spotted solar panels. I was going to have to keep my eyes out for solar powered devices as well. This group probably had some of those around as well. My feet silently carried me away from the device as I carefully noted its location and kept my eyes out for more such objects. Two hours later I felt like throttling those men. They had this forest littered with microphones in all directions. I didn't see any remote cameras though. I wasn't sure if they had originally set them up to listen for zombies or raiders, but it was a moot point at the moment. I ducked behind a tree so I was completely out of sight. The six men were walking back. I had not expected them to come this way. They were ignoring the road in favor of a deer trail. Their voices were soft and disappointed. "None of the mics are picking anything up other than the usual crickets and stuff." "Those Nightstalkers seem oddly quiet. We noticed that last time. Listen to that recording, there was complete silence until the call, then silence again. You never hear anything from them except when they want to be heard." "This means it is probably going to be another four months until another passes through." "That stinks. This one was sane too. You can't work with ferals or even talk to them." "I wonder if that Nightstalker came in because the Terror was here?" "Possibly. I find it hard to imagine that it just passed through and the Terror was here by coincidence." "It was quite a ways out though. I thought the Nightstalker would have been closer when it called if it was curious about the Terror." "The Nightstalker might have been worried about the Terror going after it, so it didn't want to get too close to it in case the Terror took exception to its presence. That call was loud enough that he probably heard it inside the fence." "Was there any sort of response or reaction from him?" "Not that anyone recalled seeing, but we weren't really watching. Everyone was in bed at that time, other than the sentries." "I kind of wish we could approach that scientist, but I have never seen the group split up other than when that redhead and the kid went for a walk. I am not going near that Terror either. Those things scare me. Sane zombies have a low tolerance for ferals, so they would probably kill Gary. We might be able to restrain the Nightstalker if it tried to hurt him, but we don't stand a chance with a Terror." "Judy asked the scientist and she said that the cure doesn't work on ferals. They just go comatose when they tried." "I really don't want to leave him locked up in that barn forever..." "We will figure something out. We can probably even send a letter to Ironwind once they are back and see if we get a response. That might be a safer avenue to pursue." One of the men sighed heavily, "As much as I want to ask this group if they can help while they are here, I don't want to take the chance since the Terror might kill him." "We have time. He never touched a human and zombies can't starve to death, so there is always hope." "He is my brother. I won't give up hope." Their voices faded as the distance grew too large for me to eavesdrop and I silently walked out from behind the tree to gaze thoughtfully in the direction they had gone.

 

Chapter 112


 I carefully approached the barn. I had passed it earlier and had noted the scent of a Runner within, but had assumed that someone had locked a feral inside to keep it from attacking the Stronghold. The scent trails showed that one or two people visited this place daily. After what I had overheard, I doubted it was to solely ensure that the creature locked inside hadn't gotten loose. The windows were easy to look through. A large wooden cage held a red-eyed zombie. I warily opened the door in case cameras or microphones were present. I looked around intently before stepping through the doorway. No cameras were to be seen. I didn't see a microphone either. I examined the Runner who was growling at me. It looked and acted feral. I dropped into a light crouch and snarled lightly at it as I flashed my eyes in warning. The Runner backed up a few steps before falling silent as it realized that I was not a human. I had spoken to other sane zombies in the past, but I had never attempted anything like what I was about to do. In theory, if a zombie hadn't eaten raw meat, human flesh, or drank human blood, then the human mind within was still present even if they were a snarling mess that resembled a feral. I sniffed the air, but no scent of blood was present. If he hadn't been drinking animal blood, his bloodlust would be unmanageable to the point where the human mind was dormant and the body just ran on instinct. I was curious to see if I could help reverse this process. This was a situation that Luke or another sane Runner could end up in. I had to be careful how I went about this though. I put the bucket of deer blood down on the floor and pulled out the plastic cup I had scavenged from an old house. I filled the cup no more than a quarter of the way full before putting it inside the wooden bars. The Runner had backed up as I approached, but the smell of blood brought it forward when I didn't snarl at it. Runners had no qualms about sharing kills. Nightstalkers were more finicky and tended to keep others off of their kills. If I wasn't about to drive him away, he would see how close he could get. Especially with the bloodlust driving him on. I made a face as he grabbed the cup and tried biting it, before realizing the liquid was inside. Half of the contents within ended up spilling over his face and dripping onto his clothing as well as onto to the floor. He attempted to lick the cup clean. I swiftly reached through the bars and snatched the cup from his hands. He snarled at me, but my growl shut him up. I filled it quarter way once more and put it back inside. It took him almost a minute to approach after I had taken the cup. I continued the process. Feral Runners may be slow to catch on, but even a feral wasn't exactly stupid. They could learn and adapt. He had figured out that the cup wasn't edible, but the stuff inside was. He still slopped a lot, but was gulping down far more than was wasted. I poured the last of the blood into the cup and left to go track down another large animal. It took me only minutes to locate a deer. I bled it out and left it hanging since the humans were bound to come this way. I glanced at the sky, but I still had at least four hours before sunrise. The Runner approached the bars with a low growl. It looked like it had come to associate me with food. I continued the process. It wasn't as if I had anything better to do and the blood would help him if he did require the controlex after all. About halfway through the current bucket the Runner's behavior altered slightly. He was starting to gulp in a more coordinated way and he no longer slopped. Four cups later there were more signs of improvement. A human wouldn't have been able to manage what I was doing since the smell of the human would override the smell of the animal blood.

I filled the cup with the last of the blood and passed the mostly full cup through the bars. The Runner had started taking it from my hands the last few rounds. My instincts detested it, but I overrode them. I got to my feet and headed to the door, "I will go get more." My words were soft, but he would hear them. If the human mind was intact, it might help. I went in search of the deer herd once more. It had several young bucks and their absence wouldn't impact the population long term. I wasn't sure how much more this Runner could possibly drink. Less than five minutes later I returned with another bucket. I tilted my head as I examined the Runner. He was sitting on the floor with a dazed expression. His head jerked a bit and he gave a surprised growl as he realized I was here. I flashed a canine tooth at him, but I wasn't sure he could see it in the dim moon light inside. I set the bucket down with a clunk that got his attention. The Runner got up and tentatively came forward while putting the cup through the bars. He may be mostly out of it, but his body knew what it wanted and he was just trying to satisfy the need, like a dehydrated person seeking water obsessively. Well, well, well. It looks like he is regaining control. I took the cup before scooping it full of blood and passing it back. He drained several more cups before he finally attempted to speak. His voice was shaky and raspy, "Wh-what happened?" I passed him another cup of blood, "I am not entirely sure, but the bare facts are that you are a Runner and lost control for some time." He looked worried as he took a deep drink, "I didn't hurt anyone, did I?" I shrugged, "Not sure, but if you had managed to drink human blood, you would not be talking to me right now." He was confused and looked down at the cup, "What is this?" "Deer blood. Zombies require animal blood to remain sane and in control." He swallowed hard and looked a bit conflicted, "Uhhh...." I snorted, "Get used to it unless you want to become a mindless zombie again. It is your lucky day though since there is a scientist nearby. Now that you are talking, you have the option of getting a drug that helps you with control in regards to the human bloodlust, or you can get the cure and become human once more." "These feelings... I think I want to eat humans... I can't stand the thought of that." I sighed gustily, "That is the bloodlust. Don't ever give in to it when it comes to humans. I know that the scientist will be leaving the cure behind, so when your brother comes, you can ask for it. Within six hours you will be human again as long as you avoid putting anything human or raw meat in your mouth." "My brother is around?" "He claimed to be your brother, so I assume so." The questions were irritating me although I was trying to be patient. My first week as a zombie had not been fun. I was positive that he would be asking for the cure the moment someone walked in. I put the bucket within his reach, "Drink as much as you can. It will help when someone comes." He turned his confused gaze to me, "Who are you?" I shook myself off lightly, "A Nightstalker that was just passing through and overheard a couple of conversations between some idiots who were wandering around in the dark." "You're a zombie?" I snorted, "I thought my red glowing eyes would have given me away." I turned and headed towards the door without waiting for a response.

He called, "You are leaving?" I glanced over my shoulder, "I gave you all the help within my abilities. You will be fine until your friends come tomorrow and you can ask for the cure then. In the meantime, I have places to go and people to annoy." I went out the door and closed it behind me before disappearing into the night. 
 
 I jumped a bit as the radio suddenly came to life. "Where are you located? We are just starting to pack up." I grabbed the radio, "About 10 kilometers down the road. I will come out of the forest when you approach." "This is going to be fun then, since they are insisting on sending an escort with us." I growled in faint frustration before pressing the button again, "I will lean against a tree within sight and once you stop I will come over. Hopefully that will keep them from thinking that I am out to get you guys." "If you wait where I can drive the truck into the ditch, then I will drive off of the road to pick you up." I glanced at the flat ground, "The ground here is flat. I will pick a place with no logs or boulders hiding in the grass." "Sounds good. See you soon." How they were going to explain my absence was a mystery to me. An escort... With all the dozens of locations we have been to, this place decides to be the first to give us an escort... What are the odds... Most places knew that feral Nightstalkers didn't stir during the day and assumed the same was true of sane ones. I wasn't entirely sure if this group knew otherwise and thought that I might have set up an ambush or if the escort was a common courtesy here. Regardless, my appearance was going to surprise our escort. I headed to the side of the road to check the long grass for anything that might damage the truck. I heard the three trucks long before they came into sight. Our truck was in the middle. I was half-way obscured by the underbrush as I leaned against a tree. I doubted the humans would easily spot me since they wouldn't be peering into the undergrowth. This was one situation where Daniel's phenomenal eyesight would come in handy for me. I stood up and took a few steps forward to the edge of the undergrowth as I crossed my arms and waited. The rear truck held one of the men from last night. I guess he isn't about to make the big discovery in the barn, but he is about to make another discovery... Daniel was looking at me as he slowed down and steered the truck to the side of the road before going into the grass. The other two trucks hit their brakes and slowed down as they tried to figure out why he was pulling over. Perhaps they thought someone needed to duck into the trees to use the washroom. I came forward a few steps as the truck came up beside me. I vaulted into the back to take my customary seat. Nicky grinned at me, "The men behind us have eyes like saucers." I snorted faintly, "Doesn't surprise me. One of them was from the group in the forest last night." Daniel drove back onto the highway before picking up speed. Liz clambered out of Nicky's lap and into mine. Daniel was looking at me in the rearview mirror, "What were they doing in the forest?" I leaned my back against the tailgate, "Trying to locate a sane Nightstalker." Nina turned around to look out the open window, "Any idea why? You said they knew about Daniel." "They were avoiding Daniel because he was a Terror and they didn't have a chance at stopping him if he became violent. They figured they had a better chance at restraining a Nightstalker if I got unpredictable. Turns out they locked up an out of control Runner before he ate any raw meat or human blood. They were trying to find a way to bring him back." Nina frowned, "I am not sure if the cure will work if he is out of control. I know it wouldn't if he was truly feral. There is no real way for us to tell if the ferals we tested on had eaten raw meat or human blood. Most manage to find some sort of dead animal or hunt something down, so it wasn't something we had ever really anticipated. The controlex is probably their best bet, but I didn't leave any of that there. You should have mentioned it." I shrugged, "They had him in an old barn. After a bunch of deer blood, he regained control. So the cure should work now. If it hadn't worked, I would have radioed Daniel again." Nina relaxed, "If he was in control, then I am positive it will work. I left a few vials there." She glanced at the truck behind us before commenting, "Your appearance has caused quite a stir with our followers." "One was from the forest and knew a sane Nightstalker was around. Chances are they have connected the dots." Like most Strongholds, they had not known I was a zombie when they let me in. Nicky crossed her arms, "Are they going to cause problems later? I really don't care if they try to throw a net over Daniel or not, but I could lose my cool if they try to mess with you." I considered it for a moment before shaking my head, "I don't think they will, simply because they don't want to antagonize Daniel." Nicky sighed in relief, "At least he is good for something other than driving." Daniel's growl echoed out of the cab at that insult. I had been in the truck for less than two minutes and they were already picking on each other. And we even had them separated. They were worse than kids. At least Liz was just sitting quietly. John and Logan shared a look. The growl made them uneasy, but they were already getting accustomed to it. Nina looked a bit exasperated as the bickering was already starting, "I think you need your head checked considering how often you insult Daniel like that." Nicky grinned at Nina, "Don't worry. You don't have to be crazy to hang out with me. I'll train you." Nina closed her eyes tightly, torn between laughter and frustration, "You don't antagonize Trinity like this." "Trinity is close enough to clock me upside the head and I don't doubt her willingness to do so." Nicky shrugged, "Besides, I wouldn't be such a smartass if you people didn't give me so much to work with. So it is really all your fault." I smirked, but remained silent. Nina gave up with a sigh as she faced forward again, "I somehow doubt I am going to win this argument." Daniel remarked, "Don't argue with fools. They drag you down to their level and then beat you with experience." His jibe was clearly an attempt at revenge for Nicky's earlier comment. Nicky chuckled, "And boy, do I have experience!" Daniel gritted his teeth. I muttered under my breath, "And just why did I climb into this truck again?" No one responded to my grumbling.

 

Chapter 113


 We pulled up at the Stronghold gate behind the truck in front of us. This also allowed the truck following us a closer look at the back of my head since I refused to turn around to face them. It only took the lead truck a few words before we were all waved in. Most people within sight were either wearing masks or had them tucked in a pocket somewhere just in case. Daniel parked and we all got out of the truck. The guys from the truck behind us kept sneaking glances at me. The ones from the truck ahead looked at me in confusion, recognizing me as the person who had come into the Stronghold with our group, but they had no clue why I had been so far from the Stronghold. The leader of this Stronghold came forward, "They said you had a cure. Will it work if they already turned into a zombie?" Nina came forward, "If they are still in control, then yes. What did they turn into?" "The two men turned into regular zombies. They act like the other zombies do." Nina sighed, "Sorry, the cure won't work if they aren't sane. I have never heard any rumor of a regular zombie managing to remain in control either." The leader looked disappointed. The two from the truck behind us also looked a bit disappointed. They were probably thinking about the Runner back home. The leader sighed, "It was worth asking. We do have someone who is still sneezing though. She is staying at a place outside the fence." Nina nodded, "Take us there. If we are in time, then we can help." The leader led us off on foot. Right back out the way we came. I trailed along as per usual, along with the rest of our group. The men from the truck that had been following us also tagged along. The ones from the other truck gave them a confused look, but remained behind. They must not have suspected that I was actually a zombie, let alone the elusive Nightstalker from last night. It took five minutes of walking to get to the small house. I could hear the person sneezing, so they were still human. Nina put on her face mask as we got closer. Just to mess with the minds of those following and the leader, I also put on a face mask.  Nina knocked on the door and the woman opened it. She was also wearing a face mask, but sneezed twice before she could even manage a hello. Nina quickly explained that she wanted to give her both the cure as well as the serum to prevent her from turning into a regular zombie since she was already sneezing and the lady immediately agreed. Even if she turned, the cure would still work and she would become human again. I watched as Nina finally used the very first vial of serum. We still had not used a single vial of the controlex. From the corner of my eye, I watched as the man from the forest slowly edged his way closer to me. I wasn't the only one to notice though. Nicky yawned before taking one step to the side and pointedly stomping on his foot with the heel of her shoe. We had been near the back of the crowd, so the locals didn't notice a thing. The man grunted faintly in pain as he gave Nicky a disbelieving look. The redhead either didn't notice, or didn't care. I bet the latter option. Daniel turned his head to eye up the offending man with a faint frown. His eyes weren't camouflaged and the glow increased momentarily as a mild warning. That made the man quite uneasy. He had been the one who had been scared of Terrors. Nina finished up and put her backpack on once more. It was odd to see her wearing a facemask, but it was even stranger to be wearing one. The only person without a mask was Daniel. The woman would stay here for another three days just to be on the safe side, but it was a small price to pay for living.

We headed back to the Stronghold for the leader to give us the tour. Liz was holding my hand and pointed at some playground equipment, "Look! Can we go play?" Nicky stretched, "I can join you two. The last time I was on a set of monkey bars I was wearing a gorilla costume." Some days I think Nicky could write a few very unusual novels that even fewer people would understand.  I reluctantly nodded, "Sure." Liz cheered and released my hand to run ahead of us. The man from the forest lingered behind silently as the group continued in the tour. Logan surprised me by volunteering as well, "I think I will join you as well." He dropped out of the ranks to join our growing crowd. His presence didn't sit well with the man from the forest. Daniel looked back at Nicky and me, "If you need anything, give a holler. I should be able to hear you from anywhere inside this place." I nodded as I acknowledged his offer of assistance if something got out of hand. The leader looked impressed at Daniel's claim, but I knew that if Daniel was outside and trying to listen that he would probably even hear our voices if we barely raised them above normal level. It was also a subtle warning for the man. I walked towards the park as I pretended to mostly ignore the two men. My instincts were up and keeping close tabs on both of them. Logan was still mostly an unknown entity. The man from the forest also had me on edge. Someone who had no problems walking through a dark forest with no fear was not to be disregarded lightly. I leaned against the side of a shed as I watched Liz climb up the playground equipment. Logan went to join her, which also surprised me. I would not have pegged him as a person to play around with kids. Nicky attempted a cartwheel on the sand. Attempted being the keyword. She somehow managed to combine a cartwheel with kickboxing. I made a mental note to never stand anywhere near her when she did stuff like that. The man from the forest was watching her dangerous feet and gave her plenty of room for her unpredictable actions. He kept glancing between me and Nicky as he slowly walked towards me. He gave me plenty of space as he also leaned against the shed. It did not surprise me in the least that he was trying to get me alone to speak with me. What did surprise me was that he finally seemed uneasy or nervous. I exhaled in annoyance before glancing sideways at him, "What do you want?" My low irritated voice should convey that I was not happy that he was following me around. He inclined his head respectfully as he tried to mollify my temper, "Simply to ask questions." I snorted and was unimpressed, "Questions annoy me." "You are the Nightstalker we saw last night, aren't you?" "And if I was?" My voice was faintly challenging. "I meant no offense. It just took us by surprise. We had no clue you were a zombie before nightfall." My tone was dry, "I was human not that long ago. There aren't many physical differences between zombies and humans." If my words and tone irritated him, he didn't show it as he remained steadfastly polite, "I would like to ask a question." I rolled my eyes, "You have already asked several questions and my patience is as short as my stature." He took a few moments to organize his question before tentatively asking, "If someone was bitten and turned into a Runner, but they never touched human flesh, is it possible for them to regain control?" I had foreseen this, but people digging for information always got my hackles up, "If they never ate raw animal flesh, human flesh, or human blood, then yes. They should be able to regain control if they can override their bloodlust and instincts."

"If they have not regained control since turning, how can we help them?" I shifted my weight in annoyance as the questions dug into my composure like thorns, "Animal blood." "Thank you." His tone was grateful. My tone was still flat, "Delete that recording of my call." I sensed his reluctance when he didn't immediately answer. I turned my head to look at him with narrowed eyes, "I am serious. Delete it. Some Nightstalkers would kill you if they caught you recording their calls. We do not like people stealing from us, even if it is just our calls." He didn't meet my stare, which was a wise move on his part. Trying to stare down a Nightstalker was a bad move even on a good day. He carefully inquired, "Why did you make such a call?" I growled a low warning that he was touching dangerous ground with his questions, "Answer this first, why were you not scared of a Nightstalker in a dark forest? What backup plan did you have?" My question didn't sit well with him either, but he answered slowly, "We had been wearing a special vest that had an electrical current running over it. It would have affected any attacking zombie like a taser." I snorted in disdain, "Foolish. All it takes is a blow to the neck to take down a human and you probably wouldn't have survived the tackle even if it did make a feral back away for a bit." He shrugged, "It has worked so far against Runners." He didn't press me, perhaps waiting to see if I would let more information come to light on my own accord. I had no intention of doing that. "That call was just to see if any old friends were in the area." Nicky came over and flopped down on the playground sand in front of us, "You two look like a couple of lovers having a spat." I growled as I crossed my arms, "If you were this annoying as a child, then I am amazed that you survived to adulthood." Nicky grinned, "It was a close call. My mother ended up moving to the other side of the world to avoid ending up in jail for murder." I shook my head before looking back at the man. I still didn't know his name, but I didn't care. "Delete that recording." He gritted his teeth, but still didn't reply. My displeasure was practically visible as it came off me in waves. My instincts rose higher as they demanded his blood in exchange for the act of copying our call, not to mention his passive defiance. Logan came over and eyed up the man unfavorably, "Is there a problem?" Logan may have been trying to help me, but he was inadvertently pressing the wrong buttons as he intervened. My instincts didn't like people intervening. Then again, they didn't like me resisting the urge to take a few good swipes at the nameless man from the forest. Nicky rolled her eyes from her seat on the sand, "We were having a tequila party and we ran out of tequila. Do you happen to have another bottle? We need something to cheer us up before the hangover hits." Logan was confused as ever by Nicky, "No, I don't have any tequila..." Nicky sighed in disappointment, "Drat. How about a hammer?" "A hammer?" Nicky sat up and looked pointedly at the nameless man, "Yeah, a hammer. Apparently there is something I have to smash into itty bitty pieces." "No, I don't have a hammer either..." Logan's serious outlook on life simply couldn't react quickly enough to someone like Nicky. Nicky turned to look at Logan, "Than what do you have in that backpack?" "Survival supplies." "If you are not carrying coffee, tequila, or a hammer, then you really need to do an inventory check. Are you at least packing soap and tomato juice?" "Uh... No..." Nicky groaned in exasperation, "What about a rutabaga?!" "What's a rutabaga?" Nicky flopped backwards into the sand with a groan, "You are clearly not equipped to survive a zombie attack. Oh, and a rutabaga is a gigantic turnip the size of a baseball. They are really fun to blow up." Logan had no clue how to respond and just stared at Nicky as words failed to come to him. The nameless man on the other side of me looked confused, but intrigued and curious. I glanced to the side, and for the first time ever, I was actually glad to see Nina and Daniel approaching. Nina came over, "This place is clear, so we are good to go unless you need anything." Nicky got up and dusted herself, "I have an entire shopping list actually. Tequila, fireworks, and a rutabaga. Preferably in that order. A sledgehammer wouldn't go amiss either." Nina shook her head, "How about none of the above and you go fetch Liz from the playground?" Nicky groaned as she went to go get the child, "You really know how to ruin a party." Nina didn't dignify that with a response as we waited for Nicky and Liz. Once they returned we started heading towards the truck. The strange man remained where he was as he watched us leave. If he was wise, he would delete that recording. When he returned and found out I had already helped the Runner, that knowledge may prompt it. That entire group would probably demand a word by word relay of our talk and that would work just fine as repayment. They also had no more need to try to lure in another Nightstalker. If he didn't delete it, then their odds of luring in a feral Nightstalker were quite high if one was within hearing. Now that I knew how their vests worked, I also knew that such a deterrent would barely slow a Nightstalker. Their refusal to comply would likely mean their death.

 

Chapter 114

            I covertly watched Logan and John as we rode in the back of the truck, but was mostly focused on Logan. I still wasn't entirely sure of this man's angle or why he traveled with us. John was easy to figure out. He was coming for his brother and figured that it was safer traveling with two zombies. The various stops were almost like a tourist trip for him. Logan was a different story, especially considering how he and I had met near that pit. He had claimed that he wanted a transfer from where he had been, but we had stopped at well over a dozen locations since picking him up and he had never shown any inclination of remaining there. As a general rule, humans were not at ease with zombies. There were a few exceptions like Nina, Nicky, and Liz, but they were few and far between. After what Logan had gone through with those Nightstalkers, it surprised me that he even considered coming anywhere near Daniel or myself. Logan had managed living on his own away from a Stronghold for weeks, so the thought of traveling alone wouldn't bother him. Neither did zombies. He had lain in ambush for days waiting for those three Nightstalkers. His fighting skills were also good enough to win against a feral Runner or possibly even a feral Nightstalker. Yet he claimed he wanted to travel with us for protection. Needless to say I was not exactly buying his story. He had surprised me when he had vouched for me at that Stronghold gate as well as when he tried to assist me earlier today when the other man was angering me. It had not crossed my mind that he would try to help me. He had no reason or motivation to do such random acts of kindness for a zombie he barely knew. This trip was very boring and many such thoughts rolled through my mind. In the end, I was no wiser and was still unsure why Logan had decided to travel with us. It just didn't line up. I regarded the silent man who was watching the scenery in boredom. I may have to get him alone and get to the bottom of this... That was easier said than done though. I didn't want the others to be aware of my intended interrogation and Logan rarely went off by himself. I will just have to watch for my chance. 
 
 Nina sighed as she dropped her stuff on the bed in the back room. I stood in front of the living room window as I examined the evening sky. The others were unpacking their sleeping bags and such. Daniel had predictably taken up residence in the armchair. Tiny footsteps behind me alerted me that Liz once more found me the most interesting person to hang around with. I had no idea why the child found me so fascinating, especially when I never encouraged her, or even smiled at her. I was a pessimistic lump on a log and just about as exciting. Apparently Liz thought differently. "What are you looking at?" Her voice was soft and curious. I glanced down at the small child as she took and held my hand, "Nothing really. Just watching." I tried to subtly free my hand from hers without her noticing, but had no success. This child reminded me more and more of an octopus all the time. Why on earth was she so clingy? Or more specifically, why did she have to be clingy towards me? My instincts detested the contact. I pushed my instincts aside as I reluctantly let her hold my hand. We would probably be back at Ironwind within four days and someone would be more than happy to adopt her. I heard John talking to Logan, "Feel like taking a stroll around the Stronghold? The evening is too nice to sit around indoors." "Sure." 

Both of them walked out the door. I didn't blame them. After sitting in a truck all day, I didn't want to sit either. It would be at least an hour before sunset though. Nina came out of the back room and sat in a smaller chair. Nicky was sprawled across the threadbare couch that she had claimed the moment she saw it. Nicky yawned and inquired, "We have another day, maybe two where those who are infected might still be human, right?" Nina sighed, but nodded, "Yes, at least in theory." "So why are we finding so many who were turned already? I thought the sneezing lasted for three days?" Nicky had a good point. Other than that one woman at the first Stronghold this morning, we had not found a single infected person who had not turned. We had managed to stop at two other Strongholds, but any who had been sneezing had already turned or been kicked out. I turned so I could watch the two women more easily. This was more intriguing than anything outside of the window. Nina furrowed her eyebrows in thought, "That is actually what I have been thinking about all day." She pulled out an old and battered notepad, "Here are my notes from comparing the first and second wave. The first wave had a solid two or three day sneezing window before the people turned. Most in the second wave usually had two days, but some were turning sooner. Not a single one sneezed for three days." Nicky sat up in realization, "The sneezing duration is getting smaller with each wave?" Nina nodded slowly, "Yes. I plan to send some letters to further Strongholds to ask what times they have seen, just for more data, but here is my current chart and numbers from what we have seen the last couple of days. We flattened the sneezing virus in nearly a hundred Strongholds this trip, but it looks like the airborne strain is going to wipe itself out. If the decline in these durations holds true, then the sneezing trait will disappear around wave six or seven. It will simply become like the regular virus, just with a longer incubation period." Nicky looked stunned, "Wow." Wow indeed. That tidbit of information is a huge discovery if it turns out to be true. The sneezing phase was the reason that the virus had hit the human race so hard, although people were already learning how to avoid it during those critical few days. Nicky blinked, "But today was day two from the first person we found sneezing, does that mean..." Nina's shoulders slumped, "Yes, chances are we are too late to help anyone else this wave. I still want to keep going tomorrow, but if we come up empty handed, then we are just going to head back to Ironwind Stronghold." Nina pulled out her pen and paper and started writing things down. I turned back to the window in thought. Nina already had plans or arrangements to send the formulas to a few Strongholds with a properly equipped lab, so the cure, serum, and controlex would spread. The waves had their days numbered from several angles. Within two years, the waves could possibly have completely disappeared. I had met Nina about two months ago and in that time she had created a cure, the serum to prevent someone from becoming a normal zombie, and the controlex drug. She also had a promising lead on a vaccine. The world was changing before my very eyes. I began to wonder about my place in it. What would this planet be like in five years? Ten years? I wasn't sure. Heck, I wasn't even sure if zombies aged. I was pretty sure we did, but I had no hard evidence. My thoughts were interrupted by a bored Nicky, "I think those guys had the right idea. It is pretty stuffy in here. Hey Liz, want to go for a walk?" "Sure! We can invite Trinity too!" I think Nina needs to make a drug that makes me invisible. That would help me very nicely. Why couldn't that have been a Nightstalker trait?

Nicky sat up, "That sounds like a good plan. Come on Trinity, if the air is stuffy for me, then it has to be bothering you." The air was indeed stuffy, but the lack of the bloodlust was a definite perk in this situation. I really had no idea how Daniel didn't even look bothered by his bloodlust in this tiny house. No wonder he never considered the controlex, he really didn't need it. Even so, I didn't feel like being left alone with Nina and Daniel. I headed for the door as Liz continued to hold my hand hostage. Nicky followed us outside, "We can walk around the inside of the fence until we get to that playground we saw." I shrugged wordlessly as I headed in that direction. I also failed to see how she had called that slide and set of monkey bars a playground. Nicky walked beside me while Liz happily trotted along on my other side. I am surrounded... How do I constantly manage to end up in these situations? Liz finally let go of my hand as she spotted the slide and ran ahead. I shook myself off lightly, glad she had finally let go. Nicky and I followed at a more sedate pace. Nicky and Liz were soon playing on the monkey bars. I leaned against the slide as I watched them idly. I should have known that those two simply wouldn't let me watch from the sidelines. "Come play with us Trinity!" Did Liz have any idea how many years it had been since I had last played on monkey bars? It was probably back in intermediate school. I didn't even remember how to play games on monkey bars... I was 28, not 8. I snorted faintly, "And just what do you want me to do?" I did not see how three people could play any sort of game on a simple set of monkey bars. Liz was actually ahead of me though, "Chase Nicky up the slide!" That I can probably manage. I turned my gaze to Nicky whose jaw had already dropped at Liz's words. "Traitor!" A quick glance around showed that none of the locals in this small place were around. I slowly eased into a crouch while silently and gradually stalking forward. She hadn't noticed how close I had gotten since she was still mock glaring at Liz. I growled lowly. Nicky glanced back at me, "Oh shit!" She bolted. I had not known that Nicky could run that fast. But I was faster. I managed to cut her off, while still in that slight crouch. I kept my gaze directly on her face, if we hadn't been playing around, such a direct gaze would mean that the person was in a world of trouble. "Uh oh." Nicky started backing away from me. She tripped over a mound of sand to fall on her rump, "Liz, a little help here!" "Grrr!" Liz's small growl was remarkably close to one a zombie could produce. I kept careful control of my instincts as I heard her run up behind me. As I halfway expected, she attempted to jump onto my back. I was short, but not quite short enough for her to easily manage that. I swiftly crouched down. Liz had not been expecting that and fell forward, right onto my shoulder. I stood up with my new captive. I snagged both of her ankles before dangling her upside down in front of me. I smirked at the grinning child, "So now what are you going to do?" She reached out her arms, but couldn't quite reach my legs, "Tickle you!" I snorted once more, "Unlikely. I am pretty sure Nicky is ticklish though." The giggling girl tried to twist to spot the redhead. Reassured that she was appropriately diverted, I slowly lowered her to the ground. Liz put her hands down and once her shoulders were on the ground I simply let go. The bit of a drop didn't faze her and she swiftly scrambled to her feet as she ran towards Nicky with a grin. I knew Nicky was ticklish. The two darted all over the sandy ground as Liz tried to catch Nicky. I glanced up at the darkening sky. We had about half an hour before the sun touched the horizon. That time went fairly smoothly as Liz occasionally tried to ambush me, just for me to send her after Nicky again. I took a deep breath as I felt the sun touch the horizon. My instincts rippled as they started to slowly awaken from their daytime torpor. My instincts never actually disappeared during the day, but they were far more alert and active at night. "Grrr!" Liz's small weight hit the back of my legs again. She was getting better at those growls, although it might distress other people if she kept it up. I glanced down before giving a bored growl in return. She looked up at me and tried to modulate her growl to be closer to mine. Nicky started laughing, "I have no idea what conversation you two are having, but could you switch to English so I can participate?" I snorted and tilted my head as I observed the slowly tiring redhead. I looked back down at Liz, "Why don't you go steal that flower she put in her hair?" Liz was as suggestible as ever and took off again. Liz was less tired than Nicky, although that may be due to the fact that she had napped or just sat quietly during the road trips. It was a good thing she was so well behaved. I would not be able to tolerate a screaming child having a fit. As a Nightstalker, I simply did not possess that kind of patience unless it came to hunting, an ambush, or hiding in the shadows. Liz veered towards me once more. I sidestepped her open arms before snagging an ankle again. Liz didn't care that she was hanging upside down as she giggled like crazy. I turned sideways and pointed to the horizon with my free hand, "Do you see the sun Liz?" She stopped giggling and nodded, "Yes." "Always know when the sun is setting. When the sun sets, the Terrors tend to sleep, but the Nightstalkers come out. Rules change depending on where the sun is in the sky. Once the sun sets, you won't be able to jump on me like this, do you understand?" She nodded slowly, "Okay." I put her down with the half-drop as I had the previous times. She sat up and gazed at the sun before glancing back at me. She didn't say anything though as she thought about the new rule I had put in place. My control was sufficient to avoid harming her since even my instincts knew that she was too young to be a true threat, but she would likely get snarled at with my instincts so high. Liz looked at Nicky, "Does the sun change things for you too?" Nicky chuckled, "I prefer to sleep, but you don't have to avoid me." The mention of sleep immediately prompted a yawn from Liz. Nicky dusted her pants off, "Why don't we head back and claim the best bed?" Liz got to her feet and headed over to Nicky, "Okay." She paused and looked back at me since I hadn't moved. Nicky took Liz's hand and tugged her gently onwards, "Trinity doesn't need nearly as much sleep as we do so she stays up much later." I watched the two of them head back and carefully looked around. Oddly enough, I still didn't see any locals watching us. This place was smaller than average and the playground was far away from the buildings meant for housing, so that might be why. I shrugged and dismissed it. I glanced once more at the darkening sky before heading in the opposite direction.

 

Chapter 115


 I decided to walk around for the short time it would take until the darkness would be able to hide me. We had been given the tour earlier, but another circuit past the fence never hurt. As I had determined earlier, this place had average defenses and would be child's play for me to get over. No wonder a feral Nightstalker could wipe out a Stronghold so easily. It was a good thing that light or fire would keep the deadly creatures at bay. That is if they could turn on a light or get a fire going quickly enough... I felt the sun completely leave the horizon. It would get darker much faster now. I walked slowly beside a garage wall in the shadows as I bided my time. I paused as I heard voices not that far away. John yawned, "I am going to grab a shower before heading back." Logan responded, "Fine by me. I had one earlier." "Meet you back there then." John's footsteps headed the other way. Well, well, well... I tilted my head as my instincts geared themselves towards some sort of ambush. It wasn't dark enough to easily stalk him. Logan's footsteps were headed in this direction, which made sense since I was between him and the small house. There was no possible way he could have known I was here either. I leaned casually against the wall and crossed my arms as I waited. Sometimes simply appearing where people did not expect to see you was more effective than an actual ambush. Logan rounded the corner, but didn't see me in the deeper shadows along the garage wall. This is too priceless... "Enjoying the evening, I presume?" His jump and inhale of surprise as he spun to face the direction of my voice had been well worth using a faintly bored tone. I didn't let my amusement show on my face though. It still took him a few seconds to spot me in the growing shadows. The smell of surprised fear and adrenaline was normal when startling someone like this. He exhaled in relief as he realized who had surprised him, "You surprised me. Must you attempt to scare the living daylights out of anyone who crosses your path?" This was the second time I had startled him so badly. I actually found it amusing. I chuckled faintly, "In theory no, but in reality I find it intriguing to see how people react." He shook his head at my opinion as he relaxed a bit more and glanced around, "I suppose you are waiting for it to get darker before heading out?" I kept a sharp eye on him although I kept my posture relaxed, "Yes, but since you are here, I have several questions for you." He looked confused, "What kind of questions?" "Why exactly are you travelling with us? What is your angle?" My question was not what he had been expecting. He shifted his weight a bit uneasily, "I want to go to Ironwind. If they accept zombies, then they can't be as bad as the place you found me at." "You could have gone with a few other groups, yet you continued on with us. Why?" He shrugged, clearly uncomfortable with the topic I had picked, but he still replied, "They might have stopped elsewhere on the way. Between you and the Terror, I know that feral zombies aren't much of a risk on this trip, so it is safer to travel with you." I snorted in clear disbelief, "If you are claiming that those details truly concern you, then I call bullshit. That group we cured was not going to stop anywhere else in case the cure didn't work. You were alone for weeks in the middle of nowhere, so I know that feral zombies don't really scare you when you could easily escape with so many slower people around."

His scent was shifting as I spoke. Now I could definitely tell that he was trying to hide something. He was uncomfortable, but didn't reply as I shredded his argument seven ways from Sunday. He knew it was true too. I growled a warning to let him know that he shouldn't try such a lame excuse again before I continued beating his explanation into dust, "Most people wouldn't want to travel with zombies. That guy with Liz bailed before he had planned. After the last batch of zombies you encountered, I have no idea why you would have even considered traveling with us." Logan cleared his throat uncomfortably, "If you had wanted me dead, I would have been dead that first night and I would have not even known what happened. In an odd way, I know I can trust you. Most of the time I can't even tell Daniel is a zombie." That was not answer I had expected. I tested the air, but he only spoke the truth. He didn't truly feel threatened by me or Daniel, even though we occasionally made him nervous. But that still made more questions than it answered... When others asked me questions it tended to annoy the hell out of me, but interrogating someone else was a different sport and simply tied into my suspicious instincts as they looked for answers. I was still sharply focused on Logan and my keen nighttime instincts were observing him closely. "Why Ironwind?" He was once more quite uncomfortable. My instincts were swift to point out that he had no problems talking about zombies in general, or even me and Daniel specifically, but he became reluctant as soon as the topic turned to our group and our destination. He sidestepped my question, "I am curious to see what a Stronghold is like when they welcome zombies. It must be quite different and I normally don't like Strongholds." The first half was a partial lie. The second part was mostly the truth. It was part of the reason, but not the main one. Something else was clearly on his mind. Something he didn't want to talk about. He fidgeted in my skeptical silence. I tilted my head very slightly as I noticed that the back of his neck was going red and his scent had traces of embarrassment in it, as well as a few other odd scents. My instincts caught those small signs and various others ones, but my instincts didn't understand them. My human mind did though. I swiftly went through his behavior the last few days and it clicked now that I knew what I was looking for. Logan had a crush on Nina. Now I knew why he always seemed intrigued with what she was doing and why he wanted to travel with our group specifically to Ironwind Stronghold. It was because of Nina. I relaxed and started chuckling faintly, "I see." Logan's face proceeded to go beet red, "Ah... You see what?" "That you are attracted to Nina." He winced slightly, "I didn't think anyone noticed. How badly is Daniel going to react? That guy is never far from her..." I shrugged dismissively, "Zombies can't feel love in that fashion, so you are safe in that regard. He is more her bodyguard than anything else, so if you remain courteous and Nina doesn't object, then I doubt he will care." "You don't mind?" "I have zero interest in people's love lives." He sighed as relief became prominent in his scent, "Thank you. Any advice?" If he thought I was going to play the matchmaker, then he was sorely mistaken... I snorted, "Talk to her. She loves long discussions, particularly about science."

Besides, if she was talking with Logan, she wouldn't try questioning me. Although to be honest, she hadn't really tried to question me on this trip. He nodded, "Anything else?" This conversation interested him now that he didn't have to hide anything. It was one thing for me to interrogate someone, but a conversation on how to impress a woman was definitely not on the list of things I wanted to even think about discussing. I crossed my arms in distaste of where this chat was going, "I will leave that one up to your imagination." I decided to reroute this talk to a topic that did interest me, "On a side note, back when I first stumbled across you, what were you using to tone down your scent?" I didn't mention that it had been completely hidden. I had proven that I could find him even with it on, so he would assume I had picked up his scent. He blinked at the sudden change of topic, "It was some sort of scent masker that my grandpa used to make for when he went hunting." "How did he make it?" Logan shrugged, "It was his secret and I don't know how he made it or what he used. I don't think he ever told anyone actually. He turned in the first wave." I tested the air, but he spoke the truth. In a way it was both a relief and a disappointment that no one knew how to make it anymore. A relief since chances of someone sneaking up on me were now reduced, but I could think of a few times when I wanted to cloak my own scent. Admittedly half of those plans involved infuriating Daniel and then running off. I had to check one more thing though, "Do you have any left?" He shook his head, "No, I ran out. That was another reason why I didn't particularly want to travel alone to a different Stronghold. It is different when zombies can easily smell you." He spoke the truth once more. I nodded slowly in agreement with that statement. Logan sensed that my questions had run out. He glanced down the path, "Well, I better get going while I can still see." The night was quite dark now and just a few solar lights here and there lit up the path. He was waiting to see if I was fine with him departing. I decided to go easy on him since he had cooperated, "See you later." He nodded as he continued on his way. I remained where I was for a bit as I contemplated our discussion. I definitely had not expected that outcome. It was a relief to know that he had no real plans to try to attack us later. I wondered how long it would take Nina or Daniel to realize what I had just uncovered... It was dark enough for me to sneak over the fence now, so I started walking towards the fence. A quick glance around told me that no one was watching, nor was anyone even visible other than the sentries who were gossiping amongst themselves. I easily slipped over the fence and into the night. A quick circle around the Stronghold didn't even turn up any zombies. Quads had led the regular zombies off before sunset, but some would undoubtedly return before dawn. Regular zombies were dangerous enough in numbers or in close quarters for a human, but it was the higher ranks that were to be feared. Many a Stronghold had fallen when a Runner got over the walls. The Strongholds that were still standing were lucky that Nightstalkers were quite rare and Terrors were almost nonexistent. Those two ranks were not thwarted by much if they had time. I tested the air, but only scented mindless zombies and a myriad of wildlife. My mind turned to the hunt as I traveled soundlessly through the darkness. 
 
 Nicky groaned as she flopped on a couch after another long day of driving, "Please tell me that we are heading back tomorrow... We didn't find a single infected person still human." Nina nodded, "Yes, tomorrow we will start heading back to Ironwind Stronghold. The third wave is clearly over. It will take us two days to get back though." "Ugghhhh...." I appraised the redhead. Playing with Liz was keeping her energy in check, but I wasn't sure how much more boredom Nicky could take without becoming a nuisance. I may have to raid an abandoned house tonight for another toy. I glanced pointedly at Liz, who caught my look, before gesturing towards the sprawled out Nicky. Liz grinned mischievously before tip toeing over to the couch to jump on Nicky's back. "Ack! Where did you come from?!" Liz just giggled at Nicky's question. A tickle war soon broke out. I made sure to remain where I was on the far side of the room as the two started to run out of breath. I had no desire to get pulled into such a game. On one hand, I was much too stuck-up; on the other hand, you did not put a Nightstalker into a tickle war. Eventually the two were panting tiredly. Nicky yawned, "Well, I think you and I had better both go to bed." Nicky guided Liz into a back bedroom. I glanced around a bit. John was unrolling his sleeping bag on the floor as per usual. Logan and Nina were still deep in some conversation about native plants that had been going on for most of the day. Nina knew the names and many of their properties, but not what they looked like. Logan knew what they looked like and even where they tended to grow. Nina was jotting down the details and names of plants she wanted him to collect upon our return for her experiments. Daniel was lounging in the armchair while listening to the conversation with a rather bored look. It didn't look as if he was really following their conversation or even attempting to. I suspected that one green leafy plant was much the same as any other piece of vegetation to him. I shook my head before heading to the door and going outside. I took a deep breath and found the cool evening air relaxing. The sun had set some time ago. I headed out for my normal nightly excursion. I caught the first deer I came across. After that I turned my attention to the scattered rural houses in the area. I was mindful of my earlier observation and started checking them for anything that might occupy Nicky or Liz for two days. Liz had been shockingly well behaved, but she was a child and I wasn't counting on it to last. I checked a few drawers in one house, but didn't grab anything there. I glanced around another room, but also came up empty handed. I would be tempted to get the skipping rope, but knowing Nicky she would try to tie someone up with it... The next house yielded a wooden stick and ball toy. I was certain that Nicky would obsessively try to get the ball into the cup or onto the stick for at least several hours. The string on the ball ensured that she couldn't lose it either. I kept hunting for other things though. It wasn't as if I had anything better to do. Another house had a small box of those IQ puzzles made out of metal. I put that in my backpack as well. Those things would probably drive Nicky nuts and hopefully she wouldn't turn them into miniature missiles. You could just never tell with Nicky.

 

Chapter 116


 Nicky regarded the new items that were in the back of the truck, "Ohhh... What are these?" I shrugged, "Something to help pass the time." To my surprise John wasted no time in grabbing a couple of the IQ puzzles. Daniel started the truck and the locals opened up the gate for us. Liz slowly picked through a shoebox filled with toys that I hoped were more suited to her age. It contained numerous objects such as tiny toy horses, a few small containers of playdough, some little binocular color kaleidoscope thing, wax crayons and paper, and more such odds and ends. Nicky became fascinated with the hammer shaped ball and cup game as I had hoped. Nina opened up the back window and once more started discussing plants with Logan. It looked like Logan had hit the jackpot with his knowledge of plants from his days of living off the land at his father's remote cabin. I snagged one of the IQ puzzles and idly tormented it. It was hard to believe that I was actually looking forward to getting to Ironwind just so I didn't have to sit in the truck anymore. We weren't going to get there today though. We were still too far out. Closer to noon Daniel spoke, "We can either stop for the night and get there tomorrow evening, or I can drive all night and we can get there by noon. We have all day to decide." John looked over at Daniel, "That is a long time for you to drive. We can help. No sense crashing because you get tired." Daniel chuckled, "It would take a lot more than simply driving for two or three days to tire me. That isn't the question. The question is if you guys want to be stuck in the back of the truck overnight." Logan shrugged to indicate that he had no preference. John was still trying to absorb what Daniel had said. Nina looked back at us through the window, "I think I would rather sleep in the truck, but it will be more crowded back there for you. Nicky, what do you think?" "I think we need an airplane, but since that option is likely not possible, then I say we stop for a longer supper and just ride it out." Nina nodded before looking at me, "Trinity?" I had done it once before when we had captured that feral Nightstalker. It wouldn't be pleasant, but after eleven days in this truck I was seriously tired of traveling. I couldn't sleep at night anyways. I shrugged, "Either is fine by me, although the sooner this truck permanently stops moving the better." Nicky snickered, "Careful now, talk like that might turn this trip into something like our first one. How many trucks did we go through? Four? Five? I forget..." I growled faintly at her, "Don't you dare jinx us..." She pretended to zip her lips and throw away the key. I huffed in skepticism at her. She had probably jinxed us already... Nicky grinned at Liz, "Hey Liz, feel like having a slumber party in the truck tonight?" Liz perked up, "Sure!" Nina grinned, "Well, it looks like we have a long night ahead of us then." Oh goodie. Neither option sounded like fun and I really just wanted this trip to be over already. I was being a grouch and I knew it. Almost two weeks of not getting enough sleep will do that to you. I could go a day or two without sleep, but only catching fifteen minutes or so in the morning was slowly affecting my mood. I turned my head to watch the scenery passing in boredom once more. 
 There was no way I was taking off my sunglasses even though the sun had set long ago. Someone had upgraded the lights on this truck before this trip and also added a lightbar to the bumper. There was enough light that I was pretty sure Nina could read inside the cab easily enough if she had been awake.

It was also bright enough that my instincts detested how visible I was in the back of the truck. Nicky was sprawled out across the middle of the truck bed with Liz curled up beside her. Thankfully neither one was in contact with me. The two men were making the best of the room left over on their half of the truck. All were asleep other than Daniel and myself. He was watching the road and I was sulking in the back. The night was almost over at this point. My instincts wanted to hunt, but it wasn't anything unmanageable. I was having more issues with the amount of light that somehow managed to light up the back of the truck despite all of the lights pointing forward. I could see perfectly fine even where the light didn't reach, but I didn't need to see to know where I was. My instincts had an excellent sense of direction and the scents on the air told me exactly where we were. We were not following our original spiraling path, but heading straight back. I knew each time we crossed an area we had previously passed. By scent. In a way it was interesting and handy, but on the other hand it was almost exasperating. Even if I tried to ignore the smells on the air, my instincts would take note of them and share bits of information that they found interesting. What my instincts found relevant and what I considered important were occasionally two very different things. My instincts recalled that I had hunted a rabbit just to the east of our current location. With the amount of wildlife in the area, I didn't consider that a relevant piece of information. I was more interested in the scent of the Stronghold. My instincts now considered humans irrelevant and didn't really pay attention to those distant scents since the humans had no way of spotting me from so far away. "How are you holding up?" My eyes flickered in Daniel's direction. His voice had been very quiet, but there was only one person he could possibly be speaking to at the moment. I could also tell from the way he was peering into the rearview mirror that he couldn't really see me back here. He probably saw my silhouette though. That detail irritated my instincts. "Better than I expected. I am so tired of this road trip that I am ready to bury it like old roadkill." He snorted faintly in amusement, "I have never heard it put quite that way before, but I think I agree. I am looking forward to getting back." A silence fell once more as the truck continued to take us closer to Ironwind Stronghold. 
 
 "Finally! We made it!" Nicky was relieved to see the fence in the distance. Liz tried to peer in that direction from her current seat on my lap. I took a slow deep breath as I checked the scents. Luke was still here and I didn't smell anything out of place. I looked over at the men who were also trying to look at our destination, "John." He looked back at me in surprise, "Yes?" I gave him a level look, "Keep in mind that even though he is your brother, the virus now runs through his blood and that will change his reactions slightly. Especially towards direct contact. Watch his body language. If he is open for a reunion hug, then go for it. If he avoids such things, then it is only because he is worried about possibly harming you." John nodded slowly, "Thank you. I will keep that in mind." I turned my head towards the Stronghold that we were rapidly approaching. Part of me was curious to see what their reunion would look like, but I also knew that Luke could still feel the bloodlust much more strongly than I currently could. The controlex had reduced it, but it had not removed it.

If nothing else, Luke has spent all this time creating more vials of the cure, serum, and the controlex. If an accident occurs, we have something to help with any collateral damage.  I didn't mention that thought aloud. It could possibly make the two men riding in the back quite nervous. The truck slowed as we approached the now open gate. The guards had clearly recognized the truck and its occupants. Well, I guess if a familiar man and woman were in the front while a redhead and a grouchy looking lady wearing sunglasses rode in the back, it should be quite obvious. The truck isn't exactly unknown to them either. A small welcoming crowd had gathered by the time we slowly drove through the open gates. All of the attention was annoying the hell out of my instincts. All of the faces had smiles or grins though. They were happy to see us. The feeling was not quite mutual. I had not magically become a people person during this trip. No surprise there. A certain red-eyed man came into view as we drove around a corner. John spotted him in the same instant that Luke spotted the brother he had spent so long searching for. John waved enthusiastically as Luke broke into a sprint to meet the approaching truck with a grin on his face. I sighed and passed Liz over to Nicky, "Hold her just in case this meeting has unforeseen results." "John! You're alive!" "Can't get rid of me that easily!" The truck came to a stop and John jumped over the side to jog towards Luke. I vaulted lightly over the truck tailgate as well. John was hesitating slightly, but Luke had no qualms about opening his arms up for a hug. John took that as a good sign and wasted no time in mirroring his brother's actions. I should have figured that this family would be the huggy type. I kept a close eye on Luke. His jaws were held tightly shut against the bloodlust that still somewhat plagued him and I could tell that his instincts did not appreciate the contact. Luke was in control though, and happy to see the brother that he had searched so long and hard for. A few seconds later Luke twisted his arm to rub his knuckles over John's head in a quick noogie. "Ack!" John twisted away from Luke while sending a light playful punch into Luke's ribs. Luke stepped back out of reach with a wide grin on his face. I shook my head at the two of them before grabbing my backpack. I had no worries about the brotherly reunion at this point. If Luke could hug his brother without losing control, then I had no worries unless John cut himself badly in close proximity. Some other people were watching them in surprise. I knew it wouldn't be more than a couple of hours before almost everyone in this place knew who the newcomer was. Luke seemed to recall his manners as he looked over to the rest of us, "Thank you for finding John. Lunch is almost ready if you want to relax with a warm meal." Nina smiled, "I think it would be nice to catch up over lunch. Then you can give John a tour if you like." Luke grinned, "Sounds good to me." I trailed along as Luke led the way to the dining area while he pointed out buildings for his brother. I wasn't hungry, of course, but catching up meant gossip and my instincts always wanted to know what was going on. We had been gone for almost two weeks after all. I also knew that Nina was itching to get to the lab, so she would probably disappear in short order. Daniel would probably go run the perimeter and do a bit of hunting. Luke would be showing John around while Logan was given a tour either by Luke or another person. I wasn't sure what Nicky or Liz would be doing, but someone would likely take Liz off for a proper bath and Nicky would do whatever it was Nicky did when I wasn't around. 

I planned to take a nap and catch up on some seriously needed sleep. I may be a Nightstalker, but we still needed sleep. Luke pushed another table and bench towards the one that still sat isolated in the corner so we could all sit together. As a Runner, he was stronger than a human so it didn't give him too much difficulty. Besides, the humans all had plates in their hands. Once we sat down Luke wasted no time in bringing Nina up to speed, "That back storage room is full of vials containing the cure, the turning serum, and the controlex. I did a bit of experimenting with the vaccine as well. My notes aren't as thorough as yours but I did try to follow your original plans and I did manage to get the effectiveness rate up to 85%." Nina's eyes lit up, "Really? That is amazing!" Luke shrugged nonchalantly, "I didn't really have anything else to do. Unfortunately, some of the more uncommon blood types just refuse to work with the vaccine." John commented, "85% is still a huge deal considering that at the moment almost any bite or blood exposure practically guarantees that the person is infected." Luke nodded, "That is true. I just wish we could make a vaccine that was 100% effective." John had more medical and science knowledge than I did since I quickly became lost as the two brothers and Nina swiftly went into a deeper discussion of genes, catalysts, inhibitors, and more weird terms. I had a feeling that Nina had just gained another lab assistant. Daniel turned his attention towards Nicky and I, "After lunch, can you go locate Cynthia? She will know who would be the best candidates to adopt Liz." At least he didn't think that I should be in charge of a human child. This task shouldn't take long so I shrugged, "Sure." I listened as Luke went back to updating us to any changes that occurred while we were gone, but it sounded like nothing had really changed. Luke was fitting in much better than he had anticipated. The locals were making it as easy for him as they could and made sure to never crowd him. Luke had helped hold a feral Runner at bay outside the fence until someone lured it into an empty shed. Daniel was assigned the lovely task of getting it out and properly contained in the barn. John seemed surprised as Luke said this, perhaps he kept seeing his brother first and kept forgetting that he actually was a zombie. Luke's rabbits had come in and everything in the rabbit shed was working smoothly. That large group of cured people had made it here safe and sound. They were fitting in very well and more than willing to work. They had found a handful of other infected people on their way back and Luke had given them the cure as well. There were plans to expand the fence and build more housing. Since there were now three resident zombies as well as cures and other drugs, they were planning a huge fence expansion. Normally the more fencing you had to guard, the more chances there were for unwelcome company to get over it. The biggest problem was at night if a feral Nightstalker showed up or if a feral Runner got over the fence unseen. They were going to put solar led string lights all along the top of the fence. Those lights were bright enough to keep Nightstalkers at bay and allow the sentries to see if anything was climbing the fence. Most places didn't use that many lights since it could attract zombies. The light would also lure in zombies that were upwind and hadn't caught the scent of those taking refuge here. Luke turned to look at me, "They are also going to build some small cabins along the fence as well as just outside of it in case other sane zombies want to stay, but can't handle being inside apartment complexes like the main building or the secondary building." I nodded slowly as I thought, "That makes a lot of sense. It would definitely be easier on them if they were not used to crowds." "That is what I pointed out. Several will be reserved just for zombies. They will air out those ones so the human smell fades. I have been driving a quad along that border Daniel made several times a day and I actually met another sane Runner. We had quite a long talk. He wasn't comfortable going anywhere near the Stronghold, but he was interested in the controlex. I gave him a handful of vials with the controlex as well as some with the cure in exchange for him mentioning Ironwind and the various drugs to any other sane zombies he comes across." That was surprising, "I will have to keep an eye out for sane zombies then. Such rumors are very likely to bring others in closer just out of curiosity." Luke nodded, "He was intrigued by a place that welcomes zombies and somehow convinced a Nightstalker and a Terror to remain." I responded in a dry tone, "That fact still confuses me." Luke bared his teeth in a grin before turning his attention once more to his brother.

 

Chapter 117

            Nicky asked someone passing by, "Do you happen to know where Cynthia is?" The man pointed, "She is usually in the daycare." "Thanks!" She turned to me, "Well, that was easy. Let's go." I refrained from rolling my eyes as I walked beside her. Liz had once more taken possession of my hand. That little detail was gaining several startled looks from people who recognized Liz. Liz pointed, "Look at the kitty! Can we pet it?" We had told Liz at the last Stronghold that cats probably wouldn't like her, but it looks like she had forgotten. Nicky made a face, "Kitties don't like zombies. In fact, most animals don't. People who hang out with zombies usually have problems with most other animals as well." Liz looked at her with big eyes, "Can I try?" Nicky shrugged, "I don't see why not, but if I can't get close to a cat, then I doubt you will." Liz let go of my hand and walked over to the cat. The cat had no problem as it watched her approach until she got closer. With a suspicious look and flattened ears, the cat darted under a shed and out of sight. Liz looked crestfallen as she came back, "Animals won't like me anymore?" Apparently kids had a hard time if they thought someone or something didn't like them. Nicky looked thoughtful, "You aren't a zombie, so some will let you get close. Let me think for a moment. Horses and sheep are a no-go. Goats don't seem to care. Chickens and turkeys are oblivious to smell, although turkeys are just evil... Hmmm..." Liz watched Nicky with a hopeful expression. Nicky perked up, "Ah! I know! Trinity's dog is still around with the groups that go out every day. It was fine with Trinity, so it shouldn't have a problem with you. Most dogs won't let you close, but some will and I think this one is our best bet." Nicky turned to me, "Those hunting and gathering groups often return to drop off whatever they collected at lunch. Do you think you can pick up Chloe's scent?" I sighed in resignation before taking a deep breath. I jerked my head slightly in one direction, "She is inside the fence at the moment." Nicky grabbed Liz's hand, "Let's go!" They took off at a jog. I shook my head before following at a more sedate pace. It had been a long time since I had last seen Chloe close up. I had seen her a few times here or there, but it had always been at a distance and she hadn't seen me. We had never been close, not that it was a surprise considering that I was a zombie and she had been some random stray that had just stuck around and kept her distance. Still, she had stuck around and had been my only company in the wilderness for several months. I eventually caught up, but kept my distance lest I disturb them. Chloe evidently had no problem with Liz or her scent that was contaminated by contact with me. The girl was thrilled with the big fluffy dog and Chloe apparently loved children. Now that I thought about it, Chloe had spent a fair bit of time with Liz on our original trip to this place. Chloe would remember her. Others were watching them in amusement. I recognized a couple of them as being from that bunch we had cured and directed here. Two of them wandered over in my direction. "Thank you once again for what you did." I hadn't done anything. It had been Nina handing out the cure. I had simply sat there and watched. I shrugged, "You're welcome." The woman glanced over at the child and dog, "Why were they worried about the dog not letting the girl near her?" "Most animals will not allow people near them if they have been in close proximity with a zombie. They can smell it."

The man scratched his head, "Well, Chloe had no problems with her." I nodded wordlessly. They gave me plenty of space as we silently watched them play. Liz looked around and spotted me. She patted Chloe's shoulder, "Chloe come!" She started walking in my direction and Chloe happily walked beside her. Liz got closer and told me, "Chloe is a nice doggie." I didn't reply. Everyone was watching in curiosity to see the outcome of this. Chloe helped this hunting and gathering group everyday as she kept a lookout for zombies while they worked. She would remain silent and pointedly stare at them. If they got too close, then she would start barking. Chloe sniffed the air and looked at me. I held out one hand a bit, "Hey Chloe. Remember me?" She tilted her head before slowly wagging her tail. Chloe slowly walked over to my hand before allowing me to touch her. I gently scratched her behind her ears for a bit before stopping. She shook herself off before heading back to lick Liz's face again. Those watching seemed quite surprised that Chloe had come close to me. The woman looked at me, "You knew Chloe from before?" I blinked slowly, "She found me several months before I came here." "Interesting." I didn't bother replying. After ten minutes or so Liz tired of playing and we once more went in search of Cynthia. She was indeed in the daycare. There were not many young children in this Stronghold, so only six children were in the room. All were under the age of 5. It wouldn't surprise me if some parents were able to keep their children with them during the day. Cynthia recognized Liz, but didn't seem surprised to see her. The gossip vine apparently hadn't wilted any in our absence... "Hello, how can I help you today?" Nicky apparently knew that I didn't feel like talking today and replied, "We somehow stumbled across Liz on our travels and brought her back with us. I am certain that someone wouldn't mind looking after her." Cynthia thought for a bit, "I can think of several people, although we do have to see how well they get along. I don't want to pry, but what are the odds of Marissa or Tom showing up?" Nicky made a face, "I highly doubt they will ever be seen again, and if they do manage to appear, they will have red eyes." Cynthia took the subtle hint that Liz was truly an orphan and nodded, "I can look after Liz. It isn't any problem at all." "Thanks. Have fun Liz!" Liz was eyeing up the toys in the far corner, but distractedly answered, "Okay. See you later." We left the building as Cynthia went over to Liz. Nicky stretched once we were outside, "So, what do you feeling like doing now?" I snorted faintly, "I plan on relaxing in my room in solitude." Nicky chuckled, "I guess that means that I am not invited?" I growled at her, "Solitude does not include company." Nicky just grinned at me, "I think someone told me that once. In that case, I think I will go see which groups missed me the most." I somehow doubted that they would be as thrilled to see her as they were to see me. I shook myself off lightly as I turned towards the secondary building. That is their problem. They were the ones who originally tried to keep her here so I would stay. They have to face the consequences of their actions at some point. Besides, that lady practically doubles as a zombie invasion drill. It is all about seeing how fast you can escape unnoticed...

My door still had that sun and moon paint job. I shook my head before opening up the door. It did not surprise me that no one had entered my room while I was gone. It was a bit dusty, but nothing too bad. I put my backpack on the floor and closed the blinds before sitting on the bed. I backed up until my back rested against the wall. I slowly relaxed as I waited for sleep to come. 
 
 I woke to the sound of footsteps and voices coming down the hallway. "There is a spare room on this floor. My door is that turquoise one. Trinity's has the fancy scene painted on it. If you want a certain color, we may be able to get Nicky to paint your door, but it may have unexpected consequences. She isn't exactly easy to keep focused unless it was her idea." That about summed up Nicky's occasional obsession with art. John replied, "I won't bother her. It is fine as it is." I could hear a door open as they checked out the last vacant room on this level. I stretched as I stood up. I checked the clock on the wall and was mildly surprised to see that it was late afternoon already. Somehow I had managed to sleep for four hours. I did feel much better for the rest though. In fact, I felt good enough that tormenting Luke sounded like fun. I headed for the doorway and unlocked the precautionary locks before opening up the door. I wandered down the hallway silently. They were looking out the window and didn't notice me, so I leaned against the doorframe and waited. They were talking about different things, but it sounded like John had no intention of leaving this place while his brother was happy here. John was also going to be working in the lab with Luke and Nina. Luke turned around. My presence must have startled him pretty badly since he instinctively dropped into a crouch and snarled at me. I bared my teeth with a deep growl of warning. My instincts were insulted by the Runner snarling at me, even though I had expected such a reaction. Runners did not react well if you startled them. I remained where I was though. It only took Luke a few seconds to recover and stand straight once more. John's eyes were fairly wide with shock at his brother's reaction. That was the main reason I had not alerted Luke to my presence in a more courteous manner. John had to remember that a bloodthirsty and vicious virus lurked in Luke's body and mind. This way, if Luke started to lose control, John would realize it and be able to get away. Luke exhaled heavily and shook his head as he apologized to me, "Sorry about that." I could tell he was irritated with me, but he didn't say so or let it come through in his tone. I shrugged, "I thought you had caught my scent." It was mostly a lie. The air had been coming in through the window, so he wouldn't have noticed my scent strengthening. Likewise, he could not smell my lie. I wasn't sure his nose was keen enough to detect a lie though. "You have been up here long enough that the entire hallway has your scent floating down it." Fair enough. A Runner had a good sense of smell, but it wasn't anything like mine. Nor was it even comparable to Daniel's. I moved my gaze to John, "There is one hazard on this floor that Luke failed to mention." John was still a bit off balance, "Ah... May I ask what that would be?" I snorted faintly, "Nicky." John looked confused, "I am not sure I understand..." Luke made a face, "There isn't really any way to explain it. Some days she just... goes a bit overboard." John looked no wiser, but still nodded, "That is fine." I snorted in faint amusement as I backed into the hallway so Luke wouldn't feel so cornered. Luke inquired, "What are your plans for the rest of the day?" I shrugged, "I plan to make myself scarce. After being stuck in a crowded truck for so long I will probably head out into the forest and just wander around until dawn. He was not surprised, "Feel free to raid any of my traps if they caught something that interests you. The one to the west has been catching the same silly fox every single night." That fox was not going to live long if it didn't learn. "Thanks, although I doubt I will take you up on your offer. If you feel like a deer, let me know and we can track one down." He nodded, "Thanks, but I am good for now. Perhaps next week I will take you up on your offer." I nodded at Luke before heading down the hallway. I had known that Luke wouldn't accept my offer today. He was far too polite to do such a thing when I had just returned today. If he had released the fox so many times, then he was probably catching quite a variety of wildlife and was full by the time he got to that trap. It was still polite to offer though. The other reason I had asked was to once more subtly hammer home that fact that Luke was no longer human. John's slow blinks proved that I had managed that task to my satisfaction. Luke hadn't noticed it either.

 

Chapter 118

            It did not surprise anyone that I was heading out early. I did make sure to tell them to not expect me back until dawn. My footsteps were silent as I moved through the forest that was growing darker as the sun approached the horizon. I felt the instant the sun touched the horizon. It was like an invisible shiver as my instincts once more stirred and started to strengthen. I remained in the shadows of the trees as I gazed at the silent forest around me as the light dimmed and the shadows grew darker. It was sometimes interesting to just stand and watch the night come. There is a unique stillness that comes certain evenings when no trace of breeze can be felt and one can literally feel the air getting cooler. It was almost peaceful even with my instincts rousing to their full strength. I remained in that spot until I felt the last of the sun disappear below the horizon. My instincts picked through every scent they could locate. They were particularly interested in the wildlife after not hunting last night. The sun had set and night had fallen. The night belonged to me. I started moving through the trees silently. 
 
 I slowly headed back towards the fence. The sun had cleared the horizon, so I had been out later than I ever had before. It was almost time for breakfast and people were starting to stir. I tossed the radio to the guards above and headed towards the secondary building. Luke spotted me as he and John came out of the building, "Good morning Trinity. I assume nothing exciting happened last night?" "Pretty quiet. One less elk though." I kept a subtle watch on John and was entertained by the range of emotions that crossed his face as my words and their meaning sunk in. Sometimes messing with the minds of humans was endlessly amusing when they were once more reminded that someone was a zombie even if they looked, and mostly acted, human. Luke didn't see his brother's face, "Oh, good. I heard the cooks were hoping to make more elk jerky." I shrugged, "I put it by the road and flagged it. The gate sentries know I left it there and they were going to send someone off to collect it." John was somewhat disturbed and confused. I was positive that the moment I was out of sight that he was going to be getting his brother to explain a few things. Like why someone would eat meat from a zombie kill. Luke was about to speak before a shout from above interrupted him. "We are going to have a party today!" Luke paled slightly, "Was that Nicky?" I narrowed my eyes at the open window that the wild voice had come out of. I knew that tone of voice. "Unfortunately. To make things worse, the chains on her mood swing just broke. Run." I made good on my own advice as I darted down the street into an open garage where I could more easily hide in the shadows. I peered out of my hiding place in the shadows along the back wall. John was still standing there looking confused. Luke looked faintly worried, possibly as to why I would pull such a disappearing act, although he hadn't connected the dots yet. That's right. He has never seen Nicky take a trip to the wildside before. Other people down the street needed no additional explanation. Most had heard Nicky's announcement and were already making themselves scarce. They knew what was coming. How the hell can she pull an insanity blitz the first morning after we return? Was she trying to remind people that she was back? I growled faintly with my growing irritation. My morning had been going so well until now.

The front door flew open to reveal a wild-eyed Nicky. Her untamed hair had clearly not been brushed yet and she still wore her pjs. She grinned crazily at the two unfortunate men who had not been fast enough to move away from where they had been standing in front of the building. Luke took one look at the big bottle of dishsoap in her hands, "Shit. Run!" I had never heard Luke swear before. Apparently it was a rare event since John gaped at his brother's language. Luke's words and urgent tone sunk in just before Luke grabbed his brother's hand and started running. Nicky wasted no time in starting her pursuit. They ran past the garage and I heard Luke tell John, "The second we get around the building, immediately go around the next corner where she can't see you. I will lure her off." "But what about you?" "I can run for longer than she can." It didn't take long before I could no longer hear Luke's or Nicky's footsteps. John was shuffling uneasily around the outside of the garage. I slowly emerged from the garage before going around the corner. John jumped when he saw movement, but relaxed as he recognized who I was. "What just happened?" I snorted, "Nicky just jumped off the deep end. Currently I am counting my blessings that she managed to mostly hold off this long. I am not sure what I would have done if she attempted this on our road trip." "So what do we do now?" I glanced in the direction that Luke had gone, "First off, we have to ensure the area is safe." I pulled my communication radio out of my backpack and set the dial to Luke's personal radio. I had seen it on his belt earlier. I pressed the button as I radioed Luke, "Lead her outside the fence and head towards the forest with that cave. Let her tire herself out there where she can't get into mischief. Over." Luke's growl came back over the radio, "You owe me big time." He was not impressed that he was currently the target and I had been the one to tell her about soap. His instincts would also not appreciate my order or the fact that he was running from something his instincts would rather eat. I was not sympathetic, "I gave sufficient warning, but you didn't take heed. Be glad you have Runner stamina. Have fun!" I didn't bother adding over to the end of my parting comment. I could imagine his snarl on the other end easily enough. As a Runner, he could run full tilt for hours. Nightstalkers were built for stealth while Runners had dogged persistence on their side. I glanced at John, "Welcome to Ironwind Stronghold. Home to zombies and maniacs." His expression was priceless at this point. I shook myself off, "I think I will take some food out to Nicky. Once she runs out of steam, of course." John was speechless as he watched me walk towards the breakfast hall. I grabbed one of the cardboard to-go containers as I looked at the breakfast spread. Her favorites were put in the box and I packed about twice the amount that she usually ate just to be certain that she would mellow out. One of the men from the archery group commented from a nearby table, "Rumor has it that someone gave Nicky coffee." I turned around to examine the brown haired man, "I am not sure. I wasn't in the vicinity until the last second." He shrugged, "I just so happened to overhear that one of the newcomers from that last group thought they would be kind and take coffee to everyone in your group so they didn't have to come down just for coffee." I tilted my head, "And just where did you hear this?" "The man in question was surprised that you weren't in your room this morning, despite how early it was. He asked me where you were. The damage had already been done by then though."

I growled in faint annoyance. The man seemed to realize that it wasn't directed at him and wasn't overly bothered by the growl. "As punishment, I am tempted to let Nicky pick out his wardrobe for the next 3 days and color it if she so chooses. I thought that everyone in this place was warned upon entry to not give that woman coffee." He shrugged, "He knew that someone called Nicky wasn't supposed to drink coffee, but he didn't realize who Nicky was. We are warning the others, although it is a bit of a moot point right now." I had forgotten just how bizarre of an effect coffee had on Nicky. She was not going to be a fun person to have around today. I shook my head as I took the box of food and headed outside. I picked up my radio again, "It turns out that someone gave her coffee, so it really isn't her fault." If that didn't get Luke going, not much would. His dry voice came over the radio, "That does not change my situation." "Is she tired yet?" His voice was frustrated and he was slightly out of breath, "I have no idea how she hasn't collapsed yet. She had been running the entire time." "Once she starts to slow, she should crash pretty quickly. Bring her back about that time, but radio me so I can meet you at the gate to take her off your hands." He didn't bother responding. I waited by the north gate since that was the one they had run out of. Several minutes later the radio came to life once more, "We are coming back." "Which gate?" "North gate." My guess had been good. I waited and it didn't take long for them to come into my sight. Nicky was slowly walking as Luke took care to remain out of her reach as he guided her back. Luke bared his teeth at my previous betrayal as he approached. I flashed a canine at him before grinning. He snorted and shook his head, "I will leave her with you." "Fair enough. John is still waiting by the garage in shock." Luke started jogging as he put as much distance between himself and the lunatic redhead as possible. I scrutinized the infamous lady, but Nicky had pretty much well exhausted her energy in that long distance high speed chase. "And just what did I tell you about coffee?" I could smell it on her breath now that I was close enough. She sighed, "I figured one cup couldn't hurt and it was even room service! Honest, I didn't call down for it either. He was such a nice man too." I growled wordlessly. I was not impressed. Nicky shrugged sadly, "I didn't realize just how fast Luke could run. I couldn't even get close enough to use the soap!" I snorted as I turned to walk away. Nicky plodded along tiredly beside me. The sentries above pretended to ignore us. Perhaps they didn't want to draw attention to themselves. Nicky always seemed to forget about the people up there in her rampages. I passed Nicky her box of food and she started eating as we walked. We rounded the bend and Nicky frowned at the secondary building as she realized that a group of people were on the roof. She was indignant, "Hey! That guy is sitting in my seat!" I rolled my eyes, "Suck it up princess, unless you want me to fetch Daniel to save you?" Daniel would probably tie her up or lock her in a room somewhere just to be sure that the population was truly safe. I also knew that she would never ask Daniel for help unless it came to nominating him to move some heavy object or undertake an unpleasant task. Nicky didn't overly appreciate my sarcasm either as she stuck her chin in the air, "I am not a princess and I don't need saving. I got this shit handled. By the way, you're my backup in case he doesn't agree to my first attempt at persuasion." I growled faintly as I snagged her sleeve. Where had this burst of energy of hers come from?! Luke clearly did not do a thorough job of tiring her out. Apparently he needed practice... "No, we will go eat at that bench by the archery lane. No one is ever over there in the morning, so it will be nice and quiet." Nicky gave in with some grumbling, but followed me to our new destination. "Since when is peace and quiet a good thing? This is the first I have heard of that statement." "Then you haven't been listening hard enough. I normally quite enjoy peace and quiet." She grinned, "Then having me around must really make you think that you are at a summer carnival." I muttered under my breath, "More like an out of control rave party..." Nicky somehow heard me, "Those things have some really freaky drugs. Even I wouldn't try those drugs again." I had never fooled around with such parties or drugs. Those things often led to more trouble than they were worth. If Nicky refused to touch them again, then I was doubly glad that I had never dabbled in such antics. Although such drugs may explain a lot when it came to Nicky...

 

Chapter 119

            We sat on the bench while Nicky somehow managed to wolf down everything I had packed in that box. She sighed in satiation, "That was good. I feel much better now. On a side note, how bad is the collateral damage?" I glanced at her, "What collateral damage?" "Did I scare John, Luke or Logan out of the Stronghold?" "No. You severely confused them though." "I tend to be really good at doing that for some reason..." I didn't bother responding to that comment. Nicky stretched, "So what is on the agenda for the rest of the day?" "First off, I think you should change and brush your hair so people don't think you slept in a cave. Then you can think of what tasks you feel like attempting. I already spent all night patrolling, so I did my due diligence." "Braggart. Just because you finished working doesn't mean that you can rub it in." I snorted, "After what you just put me through, why not?" "Because it reminds me that I haven't even started my chores yet." By this time we had reached the secondary building and Nicky went inside. I decided to wait a few minutes to give Nicky a head start before going in so that she wouldn't realize that I was in my room. Someone else could deal with her for the rest of the day. After sleeping so much yesterday, sleep didn't want to come. I did manage to nap a bit on and off though. It didn't take long for me to get bored and give up. I headed downstairs and looked around once I was outside. Before our trip, I had usually chopped wood around this time, so I made that my destination. As per usual it was deserted. Wood chopping must not have been a popular chore since no one had really done much since I left. They had hauled the pieces here to be split, but had not taken the axe to them yet. I had nothing better to do, so I kept chopping wood through lunch and well into the afternoon. Luke eventually showed up, "Well, you certainly put a dent in that pile." I swung the axe again, "Someone else gets to stack it. That is an easy enough job." He shook his head in amusement, "I doubt they will argue. But I was sent to fetch you while the others went to grab some food." I put the axe away and walked back with Luke as we headed to the secondary building. We reached the rooftop just in time to see the others exit the mess hall and headed in this direction. I was somehow not surprised to note that no one other than our group planned to eat up here tonight. They were either nervous about having three zombies in one spot, or they were giving us our space. It was almost certainly the second option. I slowly blinked as I noticed that Liz was also tagging along with them. Nicky was carrying her plate for her. I sat down in a chair to wait for them to climb all those stairs. I looked at Luke, "What have you been up to all day?" He grinned at me, "I played in the lab, of course. John, Nina, and Daniel were down there as well, although Nina and Daniel were often in different rooms. Logan came back just before lunch with some weird plants that have Nina pretty excited." I rolled my eyes, "If it involves science, then it is pretty easy to get her excited." Luke was silent for a moment, "Is there something going on between Logan and Nina? He never took his eyes off of her..." Luke was much more observant after the controlex removed the haze from his mind. I chuckled, "He has a crush on her, but don't tell her that. I am waiting to see how long it takes her to notice."

He bared his teeth in amusement as he changed the topic. "What are your plans after supper?" I shrugged, "Probably some archery, since that is what Nicky and I did in the past after supper." Luke gave me an odd look, "After how she acted this morning, you are letting her shoot a bow?" "As long as it isn't pointed at me, I don't care. She hasn't killed anyone yet." "That does not particularly reassure me. I will not be going anywhere near the archery lanes while she is in the vicinity." I snorted faintly, "Her aim is getting better, although you want to make certain that you are never in front of her." I heard footsteps and nodded towards the door to let Luke know that the others had arrived. Daniel was the first through the door as he held it open for the others. He wasn't even breathing hard, although that wasn't a surprise. It would take more than several flights of stairs to tire any zombie, even the normal ones. Liz was panting, but eager to keep up. Liz went over to a corner to grab a much smaller chair and proceeded to drag it between Nicky's chair and mine. Once she was sitting, Nicky passed her the plate. I examined Daniel, but I doubted he had heard our quiet comments about Nina and her admirer. He would have been near the bottom of the stairs with noisy people around him and our voices had been quiet. Luke was sitting on my other side while his brother sat by him. I took a long drink from my water bottle as I listened to the various conversations. Luke and John were debating about what to do after supper, but seemed to be leaning towards a game of chess with some people that Luke had been hanging out with. Logan and Nina were still talking about plants. Nicky nibbled on a carrot slice, "Cynthia asked if we could watch Liz for the evening. I agreed since it isn't the first time we took her to the archery lanes." Daniel glanced over, "I am surprised that her foster parents didn't want to spend the evening with her." Nicky shrugged, "They haven't decided who gets to adopt her yet, so she will sleep in Cynthia's room for a week or so. By then it should be apparent who Liz has bonded the most with and there are three sets of couples who are interested in adopting her. In the meantime, Liz kept going on and on about wanting to do archery with us, so Cynthia dropped her off with me." Liz smiled up at me, "Can we play pin the tail on the donkey again? That was fun last time!" I was surprised that she even remembered that. "I don't think it is set up at the moment." "Can we set it up? I will help." Liz was practically begging with a hopeful look on her face. I shrugged, "I don't see why not." It was just a big piece of plywood with a painting on it. I may be short, but my Nightstalker strength made carrying it no problem. The bigger problem was that Liz needed a lot of help to get her arrow that far with a ribbon on it... Nicky chuckled, "I bet you want to shoot the arrows with ribbons too, don't you?" Liz grinned at the redhead beside her, "Yes! It was really fun when Trinity let me aim her bow." Luke looked amused, "You think Trinity is fun?" He just found it too ironic that she considered a Nightstalker fun. He knew that I was a party pooper. "Yep! She is really fun, even if she never smiles. She reminds me of my Mommy, but Mommy and Daddy went on a vacation right after Mommy crashed the car. They haven't come back yet." I wasn't sure who had told Liz that, but to me it was clear that Liz had been the only one to survive that car crash. It also explained why she ended up at the orphanage in the first place. The others didn't say anything either as they realized the same thing. Liz turned to me with a beaming smile, "I really like spending time with you! Can we be friends?" I regarded the child steadily for several moments. I slowly and somewhat reluctantly responded, "That might be possible." It wasn't a yes and it wasn't a no. This wasn't exactly a topic that I wanted to discuss, but I also didn't want to hurt her feelings. She was just a child after all. I turned my gaze across the Stronghold to avoid looking at the child who was far too happy about my response. Daniel was watching me in curiosity, as was Nina. Neither of them spoke though. I probably would have growled at them if they had inquired about my unusual response. And then Daniel would probably put me back in my place... I knew he would. Any higher ranking zombie would respond to such a challenge or insult. I had bared my teeth or growled at Luke more than a few times when he had growled or snarled at me in surprise. Liz was happy and lost interest in the discussion while trying to fork some peas on her plate. Nicky picked through her salad before flicking a piece of onion at Daniel. It bounced off his knee and he lifted his head to eye up the annoying redhead, "And just what was that for?" He did not sound impressed. Nicky shrugged, "Some idiot put onion in the salad. You should really have a talk with them about that." He growled faintly, "If you don't want to eat it, then put it at the side of your plate. You ate it yesterday without any problems." "That is because I saw them dump cow poop on the onions in the garden today. They said it was organic, but I just call that gross." Daniel snorted, "Well it already touched the rest of your salad. Besides, they would have washed and peeled the first layer of the onions off." Nicky gave him a look of disbelief, "It was cow poop. And they dropped shovels full of it on the onions! How can you not care about this?!" Daniel shrugged without worry, "Fertilizer is fertilizer. If I can't smell it, then they were cleaned thoroughly." He knew as well as I did that they only fertilized the half-grown plants, not the stuff they were just about to pick. He was not fussy when it came to food and really didn't care what kind of fertilizer they used when growing it. Nicky turned to me and held out a second piece of onion, "Does this smell clean to you?" I ignored the piece of vegetable in her hand. Raw onion had a strong smell when I had been human and it was pretty potent as a Nightstalker. I crossed my arms, "Perhaps the better question would be how many of those squirrels and rabbits peed on the berries you picked in the forest when we went berry picking." It was a lie, plain and simple, but I hadn't been able to resist taunting her. I kept a straight face though. Her jaw dropped, "And you didn't warn me?!" I shrugged, "Surely you noticed that I was fussy about which patch I would eat berries from." "Traitor! And to think I trusted you!" Nicky was starting to go off the wall once more as her voice climbed up an octave or two. She threw the onion at me. She missed, but I still snarled lightly at her, "Cut it out. I was joking." My mood was not back on par yet and I did not have the patience to deal with her antics. Nicky blinked and took it all in stride, "Oh, that is fine then. Do you smell any cow poop on that thing though?" "No." I was not about to sniff a piece of raw onion either. She relaxed, "Oh, good. Then it is edible." Just like that she started eating her salad without picking out the bits of onion. I simply shook my head. 

 

Chapter 120

            "I am going to tie a rock to that ribbon of yours yet." Nicky scowled as my arrow once more hit the target perfectly even with the wind. I stepped back to let the next man have his turn, "You are just jealous." "Of course I am. How could I not be?" Liz was practically bouncing beside Nicky. I had let her aim my bow once, but convinced her to use her own bow without the ribbon after that. Nicky watched the man shoot before hefting her bow, "My turn. Cheer me on Liz!" Liz clapped excitedly, "Go Nicky! You will hit the target if you keep trying!" I snickered at Liz's innocent comment. Nicky winced, "I am not sure if that was encouragement or an insult." Quite a few others were grinning, but this game was often accompanied by bantering and joking. Nicky fired and managed to hit the piece of plywood, but was nowhere close to where it should have hit. She groaned, "Okay Luke, your turn." Despite his earlier objections, we had managed to convince Luke to come into the archery area while Nicky held a bow. Luke and his brother were intrigued by the game and had joined in. Luke's aim was better than Nicky's, but not by much. A wind gust made his arrow hit the donkey's front leg instead of the rump. He shook his head with a faint growl of disappointment. The sound didn't bother anyone and only a couple even glanced over when they heard it. Nicky scratched her head as she looked behind me, "Well, that is a new one." I turned around to see what she was looking at. She had a right to be surprised. I hadn't noticed since the wind wasn't in my favor, but Nina and Daniel were coming over. Once they got within easy speaking range I tilted my head as a silent inquiry. I had already given Nina three vials of blood yesterday, so I couldn't see her needing more already. We must have looked curious since Daniel enlightened us, "We figured that Nicky's aim had improved to the point where it was safe to stand somewhere behind her." The jibe hit home with Nicky. "Hey! I only managed to hit something behind me once! And that was an accident!" Nina was looking at the giant donkey with a grin, "It looked like fun, so we thought we would join as well. If you don't mind that is." I shrugged, "Go for it." Turning them away would have been ten stages past rude even for a zombie. We would just have to separate Daniel and Nicky. Nina and Daniel went to the shed to acquire a bow. Nicky and Daniel predictably sent a few jibes at each other as the game progressed. It was mostly comprised of Nicky complaining about his far-too-perfect aim while he inquired about where she was actually aiming. The wind sometimes grabbed the ribbon and took Daniel's arrow for a ride, much to my silent amusement. Nicky cheered as she finally hit the donkey's rear end. She tried to playfully elbow me in the ribs and I used my arm to block her while growling idly. Liz peered up and tried to mimic my growl again. Many chuckled at that. I snorted faintly, "Keep that up and most Strongholds will think you are infected." Liz just smiled up at me before turning to watch the next person firing their bow. She clearly did not understand what that meant or the implications of a human trying to act like a zombie. Nicky grinned at me, "You have sure mellowed over the last few months." I growled wordlessly at her. Nicky smirked, unaffected by my growl, "Just do all of us a favor and don't become as humanized as Daniel."

I glanced at the Terror as he rolled his eyes. I shrugged, "I highly doubt that there is any chance of that." Nicky chuckled and rubbed her hands together, "I plan to stick around and make sure of that." Daniel muttered, "Lucky us..." Nicky either didn't hear his mutter or was ignoring him. Sometimes I hated it when Nicky was observant. Had I been dropped in a group like this on the day I first met Liz, I would have been snarling at those around me. Now it barely bothered me enough to take note of it unless someone got too close or otherwise irritated me. John fired his bow and missed the target as a wind gust took the ribbon for scenic tour. He shook his head before coming over to our group. He stood beside his brother, "You know, if I told people from most Strongholds that I played an archery game with three zombies, they would probably think I was crazy." Luke was amused by his observation, "Very likely. I don't think I have heard of another Stronghold with a zombie in it before either." He glanced at me, "Have you ever heard of a Stronghold welcoming a sane zombie?" I considered it for a moment. I had never visited any such place, but I had talked with a few sane zombies who traveled a lot. "Two." One of those was the place that had Runner in the barn. If he was even still a zombie at this point. If only the controlex had been available, then I was positive that they would have welcomed him in. They had kept him nearby in that barn the entire time and checked on him daily after all. I glanced at the sun. It would be setting in another hour. It wasn't long before it was my turn again. I hit the target, although the wind kept me from managing a perfect shot. I watched as another woman took her turn. Distant eerie calls echoed out of the forest to the north. Two of them, one right after another. My head whipped in that direction as I took a deep breath before releasing my own proximity call. That spooked most of those around me. My instincts detested being the center of attention as nearly 50 people stared at me or glanced towards the north where the similar sounds had originated. Luke was watching me alertly, "I don't suppose that was someone you know?" I nodded, "Actually yes. That was Kelly and Travis, although they were supposed to be heading towards the coast last I heard." I glanced at Daniel, "Did you pick up their scent on your last patrol?" Luke relaxed at the sound of those names. He hadn't met them, but I had spoken about them in the past. I passed him my bow and arrows. Daniel took a few steps closer, "No. Your scent was the only Nightstalker around. I wonder how they got so close this swiftly since I did that last patrol only a few hours ago. Do you need any help?" He seemed a bit reluctant to go and I knew it was because the sun was so close to setting. He didn't see well in the dark and he had been ambushed by Nightstalkers before. If they were aggressive, he could easily defend this place if they lit it up. He would then wait for morning before going hunting for them. I shook my head, "No. I know them. You even caught a glimpse of them along the road that one day. I will go out and greet them, but don't expect me back until morning. Oh, and let people know to not worry about the sounds they might hear." He raised an eyebrow, "And if you run into trouble?" I snorted, "I doubt I will encounter any trouble. I know them fairly well. If something goes wrong I still have that communication radio you gave me." I moved swiftly through the crowd as it parted for me. The guards on the gate were on alert, but didn't seem terribly worried. Once I was out of the gate I started jogging. The moment I hit the trees I began running towards where I had heard their calls.

Why did they come here? They were supposed to be on the coast. How did they even know I was here? I wasn't sure, but I would find out shortly. I made the proximity call again and they answered swiftly enough. They had been coming closer, but like I had expected, they had gone at a bit of an angle. It was a typical thing for a Nightstalker to do. We preferred to come in from behind or from the sides. I altered my path, knowing that they would also alter theirs again just in case the local Terror was trailing me and was hostile. I slowed when I was pretty sure I was getting closer. I called out, "Kelly? Travis?" I slowed my pace even more and it wasn't long before my sharp eyes caught a hint of motion. I stopped and grinned in Kelly's direction. She was the more outgoing one. Travis preferred to linger behind. If Kelly triggered a trap or another sane zombie was aggressive, then he would come roaring in like a tsunami and usually take anything by surprise. I growled a low welcome greeting and she responded likewise. I glanced around, "Come on out Travis. It is just me." I caught a glimpse of movement to my left and bared my teeth in acknowledgement. Kelly was closer by now, "I think I should have ambushed you like you surprised me last time. You are lucky I caught your scent that time or I might have done some damage." My zombie body language was more prominent around these two since they also used it. I grinned ferally at her, "I made sure to wait until you caught it." She snorted in an unladylike fashion, "I will have to return the favor one day." I bared my teeth in a playful response. I had missed wrestling with these two. It was very different to wrestle with zombies of your own rank since the instinct-driven desire to subdue those under your rank didn't interfere. The outcome could vary more easily as well. I would always pin Luke unless I let him win, which was rare with my overinflated pride and instincts. Just as Daniel would always pin me. Travis inquired, "Is that Terror likely to show up?" I shook my head, "Unless I use the radio to call for help, very unlikely." Kelly glanced in the direction of the Stronghold, "How badly would a few cries freak them out if we get carried away out here?" I chuckled, "I warned them before I left." Kelly bared her teeth, "Good." She shifted into a low crouch and growled at me. I growled in return as I also prepared for the play fight. Our last match had been interrupted when her sunglasses had fallen off, but in another hour we would probably tuck our glasses into their hard protective cases. Then all bets were off. With a low snarl she lunged at me. I ducked out of her way and struck the back of her shoulder with a light blow. She snarled at the strike and the instant her feet hit the ground she whirled around to come at me again. Kelly was fast. Not as fast as Daniel, but unusually quick for a Nightstalker. Her fighting style was about as good as Nicky's aim though. Some things just couldn't be salvaged. This time I met her head on and we went rolling into the leaf litter. I was glad I had dropped my backpack onto the ground when she had altered her body language. It would have hampered me otherwise. It took a bit, but I managed to pin her. She stilled with a low growl and I released her before springing to my feet. I offered my hand and she took it as I easily pulled her up. She shook herself off and the movement sent a small rain of dirt and leaves to the ground, "Your technique has changed a bit." I shrugged, "All I have had to wrestle with is a Runner or a Terror. I either have to hold back or get my ass handed to me. I will be glad to have someone else to wrestle with, although I am confused as to why you are here and not on the coast." Travis sighed, "We did go to the coast, but a hurricane or flash flood must have occurred because everything was washed away. The house isn't there and the trees will take years to regrow. We started heading towards the mountains, but you clearly had not come back to your cabin. We stayed there for a bit before heading south to see if we could locate you." Kelly picked up the story, "We came across a sane Runner who spoke about a cure and some sort of drug that lowers bloodlust. Considering he spoke of a place with both a Terror and a Nightstalker, we were pretty sure that you were at the Stronghold he spoke of. He gave us directions. It has taken us some time to get here, but here we are!" She waved her hands in a flourish. Travis rolled his eyes at his sister and glanced at the sky, "The sun is starting to set. Is there any place we should avoid or areas we should know about?" I shook my head, "You can go anywhere. I advise avoiding the barn since they have some feral Runners locked up in there. There is a cave not far from here if you feel like spending the night. Only one bed though. On a side note, how did you get so close so quickly? Daniel didn't pick up your scent on his last patrol." Kelly tilted her head, "Daniel is the Terror? Yeah, we knew the moment we came close to the edge of his territory. He must run laps on that thing for it to smell like that. We found a working car. It is parked a bit further away since we wanted to be on foot when we called." Travis sniffed the air, "Speaking of scent, your scent is strengthening as if your instincts are rising, but the sun has not set." I sighed, "That is due to a drug called controlex. It almost eliminates bloodlust you feel towards humans, but it strengths your instincts from the moment the sun touches the horizon until the sun rises above it once more." He nodded slowly, "I am surprised you took such a drug." I growled faintly as I recalled Louise's trick, "I didn't take it intentionally." Kelly gave me a long look, "Why don't you give us a tour and fill us in on what has occurred since we last visited in the cabin." I bared my teeth in agreement before I started walking. This story could take quite some time to retell...

 

Chapter 121


 Kelly gazed up at the sky thoughtfully. She didn't bother to camouflage her glowing red eyes, but none of us were hiding our eyes either. There was no need. Travis was silent as he also contemplated what I had told him. About the only thing I hadn't told them was Daniel's inability to see at night. I counted that as his secret. I didn't spill my secrets to him about how I masked my scent trail or otherwise tricked him when he tried to track me. I classified that as a Nightstalker secret. Kelly spoke slowly as she examined the small stars that twinkled through gaps in the tree canopy, "I honestly don't think I would want to be human again." I shrugged, "That is why I am still a Nightstalker. I really like having the extra strength and speed, not to mention how fast I heal." I had spoken at length about the cure and the controlex, so they knew all of the details. Travis watched his sister, "I agree with you Kelly. I know I wouldn't want to be human again, although I think things might be easier if I could get near humans without having to run away in fear of losing control." His control around humans had always caused him a lot of difficulty. For some reason it affected him more than other Nightstalkers and caused him no end of grief. Kelly didn't seem overly surprised, "You are thinking of getting the controlex?" "I think so. What are your thoughts?" I was silent as I listened to them. Kelly considered it for some time, "Considering it didn't really have any negative effects, it does seem to be more beneficial than harmful. We won't have to worry about food at any rate." Like most sane Nightstalkers, these two traveled with the bare minimum of supplies such as cooking implements and relied on raiding stores that were getting emptier and emptier. Not having to worry about your next meal would be a relief for them. Hunting was pretty easy and normally quite reliable. We had also discussed Luke's rabbit shed as well as other domestic animals that a Nightstalker could get fairly close to. These two really weren't the farming type though. Luke loved it, but it wasn't for everyone. Kelly looked at me, "It seems as if you have no real plans to leave this place even though they now have a cure and a decent vaccine." I sighed heavily at her question, "I really have no idea about what I plan to do, but I don't see any real reason to leave. I never was one for traveling, which is why I settled down in that cabin in the first place. I just don't see any real point in returning there now." In truth, I was completely undecided and was just going along for the ride at this point. Kelly nodded in understanding, "I can see that. At least you have people to talk to here. I would probably be quite lonely if Travis wasn't around. We never could figure out how you lived in that remote place by yourself even if you are a Nightstalker." I really didn't have an answer to that. Travis shrugged as he dismissed the matter, "We have plenty of time to think about it. But I smell quite a few rabbits in the area and I doubt anyone would miss several of them." I chuckled darkly, "Help yourself to as many rabbits as you want." He grinned as he ducked under a tree branch and darted out of sight. Kelly perked up, "Hunting sounds good to me. Regroup in a bit?" "Sure." I let Kelly get a head start before disappearing into the shadows myself. It didn't take me long to track down my rabbit and make my kill. The other two were probably either done or just finishing up. I moved silently through the undergrowth as I circled the area to determine where they were. I knew they were likewise attempting to track each other as well as me. It was a game, of sorts. Like cat and mouse, only you could be either depending on your level of skill.

The controlex had boosted my nighttime instincts, so I had the edge over their instincts. That brought the field down to our personal skills. I wasn't too worried about Kelly, but Travis was a wicked tracker. So as long as I could keep him from getting behind me, I should do fairly well. Right. As if I ever managed to lose Travis once he became determined to track me and located my trail... Nonetheless, I still tried to use plants and other tricks to break my trail, even as I had with Daniel. I kept my ears and eyes peeled for company. Both of them were in the immediate area after all. I was trying to evade them even as I tried to sneak up behind them to ambush them. I found Kelly's trail once more and went to the side before following it from a distance. She would notice if I followed her trail while staying right on top of it. My instincts were high since they knew I was attempting to set up an ambush while trying to avoid two who were trying to hunt me down. I finally spotted Kelly moving slowly ahead of me. She was well hidden, but not hidden well enough to avoid my keen senses. I carefully scanned the area around her. It was not unusual for Travis to wait nearby to see if I would go after Kelly since it would also give him a perfect opening to take me by surprise. I bared my teeth as I spotted the nearly motionless man. Even with my nightsight, he was almost impossible to spot in the dense undergrowth. I slowly began to make my way around so I could sneak up behind him. I had to keep an eye on both Kelly and Travis in case they decided to separate in their pursuit of me. Just a bit closer... I moved each foot carefully, watching for anything that might possibly give me away. I snarled playfully as I lunged at Travis' back. He jumped in surprise and started to whirl around, but I hit his side before he could face me. His instinctive snarl also split the night as it became our turn to end up in the leaf litter in a wrestling match. Travis wasn't much bigger than the average man, but he was marginally stronger than me. I just had the element of surprise on my side. I tried to pin him several times, but he managed break free using various tricks. He attempted to pin me, but I blocked him as well. A second snarl informed me that Kelly had no qualms about making this a two on one match. I am so screwed... My reflexes were no match against two Nightstalkers and I had known that they would join forces during this round. It took mere seconds for both of them to manage to pin me. I growled faintly as I stilled. They let me up with victorious grins plastered across their faces. I shook myself off and narrowed my eyes at them, "That was cheating." Kelly smirked at me, "No, that is survival of the fittest." "You wouldn't fare so well one on one." If I caught her by surprise, I could usually win such matches against her. Occasionally she got lucky though. Kelly snorted and took a deep breath before releasing a true Nightstalker cry into the night to proclaim her victory. Travis wasn't about to let her be the only to brag and he let out his own call ring out. The loud shrill noises hurt my ears, but I pushed that discomfort aside. My already-elevated instincts surged at their cries, this was my territory and they had cheated. My own cry pierced the night as I refused to admit defeat. It is a good thing that I warned the Stronghold that there would be some noise... The sentries certainly won't doze off at any rate. Travis gave me an odd look, "You said your call had changed, but I kind of forgot about that detail until now." Kelly took a step closer and peered at me, "That was kind of creepy. My instincts were all triumphant and the instant you screamed they suddenly backed off. It was almost as if they recognized that this was your turf. I have never felt them do that before."

I shrugged, "The controlex caused it. All I can think of is that my call changed because my instincts are much higher than they used to be." I rarely called much. It just never really interested me and I didn't like giving away my location in such a fashion. Kelly tilted her head as she examined her instincts, "That might be it." Travis commented, "I was pretty sure that no feral Nightstalkers were around and this also proves it since none answered." I raised an eyebrow in amusement, "You think a feral Nightstalker would come this far into a Terror's territory? That isn't counting the fact that my scent is scattered all over as well." "If the wind was right and they scented the humans, nothing would stop a feral except for a direct attack." I conceded that point to him, "True enough." Travis shook himself off lightly to dismiss the matter. "Will the locals have any issues with us sticking around for a bit? We won't go near the Stronghold. I am interested in the controlex, but I want some time to think about it. I can't see us staying more than a week or so since both of us like traveling, but we will definitely stop by whenever we pass through the area if no one minds." "They won't mind. They seem to like having sane zombies around. Planning on staying in that cave to the north?" He shook his head, "I think I want to try that really small one near the border. I don't feel comfortable trying to sleep with that Terror around unless I know he can't get in easily. That narrow entrance won't be quick to crawl through." I chuckled, "He won't even attempt it since he doesn't like tight spaces or small caves." "That reassures me even more." I tilted my head as I examined Travis, "Will you even fit into that tunnel?" The tunnel had looked pretty narrow the one time I had glanced into the entrance. I had no idea how big it might be further inside. Travis bared his teeth at my slight challenge, "If you traveled more often, then you would know that Nightstalkers can get into some very tight spots." I snorted in amusement, "I will take your word for it." I had never needed to take shelter in a cave since I had mostly remained at my cabin. Rain storms may not bother me, but attempting to sleep outside under the stars was likely not going to happen and even if it did, the exposed location would not allow a decent sleep. Kelly started jogging, "Let's go check it out!" Travis and I followed her as we moved through the forest like the deadly predators that we were. It took us about half an hour to get over there. Kelly crouched down to peer into the tunnel before crawling inside. She was smaller than her brother so she was first to check it out. I glanced at the shadowy forest while waiting for Kelly to reappear. She looked far too comfortable squirming out of that small entrance. She brushed herself off as she stood up, "Once you go around that bend, it gets much bigger. There are three larger caves further in. One is so big that I can't touch the ceiling." Travis nodded, "That is good." He glanced to the east, "We still have half the night to do as we please.  What do you usually do at night?" "I normally help patrol and keep an eye out for feral ranked zombies, but considering that you probably don't want Daniel to know where you are staying, we should probably leave a few false scent trails near the other cave as well." Travis narrowed his eyes, "I would rather that he has no clue where we may be sleeping." I bared my teeth as something occurred to me, "In that case, I have a few ideas. Let's go." I turned to head back into the forest as the other two swiftly followed me. 
 
 Daniel sat down with his plate of food as he looked across the table at me, "What on earth did you do out there last night?" Nicky yawned and seemed disinterested, although Nina's intrigued look showed that Daniel's question had caught her attention. I shrugged as I pretended to not know the real reason behind his question, "We wrestled a bit, then we had a screaming contest, although you probably heard most of that one. After that, we hunted a bit before having a few games of hide and go seek." Daniel made a face, "From the trails you left, I think you three ran down every road and along every major trail. And what on earth did you do along the border line? The smell of Nightstalker was so strong that I had to breathe through my mouth." I chuckled darkly, "They wanted to make sure that anyone passing through knew that they had stopped by." There were ways to weaken one's scent, but there other ways to make that same scent far more potent. The three of us had decided that he wouldn't be able to figure out which scent was more recent since he would have no idea which trails had the amplified scent, which ones were unaltered, and which trails had been somewhat masked. Luke inquired, "Are they still around or did they keep on traveling after your visit?" I transferred my gaze to Luke, "They are around and will probably remain in the area for a few more days." I gave Daniel a pointed look, "They did ask that you two not try to discover where they are staying. If you want to talk with them, we plan to meet again this evening." Nina looked quite excited, "I would love to meet them." Logan looked faintly worried. I could understand his concern, Daniel could possibly be outmatched by two Nightstalkers, especially if they were heavily armed. I had expected Nina's reaction though. I gave her a level look, "They are willing to talk with you, but the one has problems with bloodlust. Any humans that tag along are going to have to cloak their scent as best they can. That means a shower with scented soaps and shampoos, clean clothes, and you will have to rub on that herb mixture that I gave Nicky when we were travelling with Luke. You should also share that perfume with anyone who comes." Nina eagerly nodded in acceptance of my terms, "Of course." This lady was far too enthusiastic about getting to go and see zombies. I snorted, "Don't look so excited. These two have never been close to humans and they aren't exactly thrilled about testing their control. You can bring two vials of controlex since they may take those with them, but don't bother packing the cure." Nina schooled her features so she didn't look like a kid before Halloween and nodded in a more diplomatic fashion, "Duly noted. Do we know what time they will be ready?" I shrugged, "Probably just after supper." Nina's eyes still betrayed her excitement. I refrained from sighing with effort. This could get very interesting...

 

Chapter 122

Daniel parked the truck in the small forest clearing and everyone got out. I nodded towards a narrow quad trail, "We will have to go on foot from here."
 Nicky glanced at the trail, "You might as well lead since you know where you are going." She had a point. I started walking towards the trees as they all followed. Luke and Nicky followed behind me while Nina and Logan took up the middle. Daniel took up the rear since he claimed his rank might bother the two visiting Nightstalkers and he didn't want to spook them. He had a valid argument, but I suspected that he was also acting as rear guard in case of an ambush. His caution was wasted though. With so many strangers present, Kelly and Travis would be far too uneasy to mess with a Terror. I didn't bother announcing our approach since they would undoubtedly hear us coming. We were downwind and I could smell that they were waiting at the prearranged location. We rounded another bend and came to a small clearing. Travis and Kelly were standing on the far side watching us approach. I could tell that they were testing the air, but I had made sure that the humans with us had their scents almost obscured. Although Logan may never forgive me after almost suffocating him in a cloud of Nina's perfume... Between my herb mixture and the perfume, their human scent was quite faint. Neither Luke nor Daniel could detect it, but a Nightstalker could. Their scent was faint enough that it shouldn't cause Travis too many problems. He would also be upwind, which would also help some. Nina looked eager to meet them, but was remaining behind me as she let me set the pace. I stopped when I was halfway across the clearing as I began the introductions, "Kelly, Travis, this is Nina, Logan, Nicky, Luke and Daniel. This is Kelly and Travis." Kelly and Travis nodded a wary greeting. They had not been this close to humans since they had turned, but they were curious to meet the humans who were supposedly not scared of zombies. Nina took a step forward and spoke softly, "It is very nice to meet you. Thank you for taking the time to speak with us." Kelly examined the slender lady in curiosity before slowly coming closer. Travis came forward as well, although he lagged behind his sister. He was taking his time as he was likely keeping close tabs on his level of control. Kelly had always been more outgoing and her control didn't worry me as long as no one cut themselves. Daniel kept a sharp eye on them, but remained relaxed and simply watched. At least he seems to be hiding his usual guard dog act. Which is a really good thing, otherwise these two would disappear like the wind. They wouldn't tangle with a Terror. Nicky and I were the only ones foolish enough to do that. Kelly stopped well out of reach, but close enough that she wouldn't have to raise her voice to be easily heard, "We were curious to meet the people who Trinity had been travelling with. Most humans run the moment they find out that we are Nightstalkers." Nina was courteous and welcoming, "I always liked meeting new people and zombies. I find it quite refreshing to learn about other people's perspectives." Travis had stopped further back, but was watching and listening. I didn't really expect him to join in this conversation. He preferred to observe, although I knew that no detail of this meeting would be forgotten by him. His mind was like a steel trap, nothing that he wanted to remember was ever forgotten. Kelly looked intrigued despite her caution, "We have heard a bit from other sane zombies about this place and I must admit that I have never seen a group quite like this in one spot before. A scientist, a Terror, a Nightstalker and a Runner?"  "And a cockatoo in a pear tree!" Nicky sang along in a singsong voice. Nina sighed and explained in a patient voice, "Partridge, Nicky. It was a partridge in a pear tree." 

Nicky turned to face the scientist, "No, it was a cockatoo! I had to climb almost all the way to the top of the giant Christmas tree in the city square, but the stuffed bird was definitely a cockatoo." Nina had no response for that one. I didn't blame her. Travis and Kelly exchanged a glance before looking at me. I shrugged, "Don't look at me. Not my circus, not my monkeys." Daniel growled mildly, "I object to being compared to a monkey." Nicky perked up, "Oh! I want to be monkey!" I rolled my eyes, "I am putting Daniel in charge of the bananas..." "Hey! That's no fair! Give them to Liz instead. She loves sharing." I snorted and proceeded to ignore her as I glanced back at the Nightstalker siblings. Travis didn't seem to be entirely sure about what to make of Nicky. Kelly was watching Nicky with bright excited eyes. She was obviously enjoying the show. Nina had been dubious about me letting Nicky come along, but Kelly had a better sense of humor than I did and I was pretty sure that she would get a kick out of Nicky as long as she wasn't the target. Nicky noticed Kelly's expression and grinned at her, "I assume Trinity warned you about me?" "She said that she failed to understand how you still lived and I think I already agree with her. You don't seem bothered by the Terror's presence either." Nicky chuckled and rubbed her hands together, "Nah. He is fun to torment. I lost count of how many times he has snarled at me, although his temper is a bit touchier when it comes to other zombies so you may not get away with some of the stunts I pull." Daniel sighed at Nicky's attempt at reassuring them before addressing the two Nightstalkers directly, "You two don't need to overly worry about me unless you try to attack a human. Even then I would only pin you until you calmed down." Travis was watching the Terror closely as he tested the air. I knew that both siblings could detect no hint of a lie in Daniel's scent. Kelly tilted her head to one side as she examined his words. Nicky clapped her hands together in excitement, "You three can now tag team Daniel! Awesome! I have been wanting to see him pinned for a long time!" Kelly shifted uneasily, "I am not sure that such a wrestling match is wise. I am not sure what his control is like and a solid blow from a Terror can cause a lot of damage." Daniel wasn't surprised by their unease, "I may not like getting pinned, but as I said, I wouldn't hurt you if you attempted it." I knew that he was completely against losing a match, but I also knew that he was trying to put them at ease as much as he could, even if it meant losing a wrestling match. Kelly and Travis likely reminded him of the first flighty Nightstalker that he had encountered. They were cautious and untrusting around the higher ranking zombie, ready to run if he became aggressive. As most Nightstalkers would be. Our instincts knew what a Terror was and they wanted no part of a fight with one. It was the main reason I hadn't gotten into more fights with Daniel when I was angry, my instincts were completely against such a suicidal move even if I rationally knew he wouldn't try to hurt me. Nicky piped up, "I brought the soap! That should even the odds a bit!" Travis was always one to size up any potential foe and he glanced between Nicky and Daniel. He knew his sister was a terrible fighter and would figure that into his calculations as well. Travis spoke contemplatively, "You wouldn't be able to get near us when we wrestle like that. Even without taking into consideration how your proximity would affect us, I am not entirely sure we can pin him long enough for you to get the soap in his mouth. Terrors are quite strong. I am not taking the blame for such a stunt either."

Daniel's eyes flashed slightly as he focused on the key hint that he had just overheard. Nicky saw it too and groaned. Travis looked at her in confusion. Luke smirked as he filled the Nightstalker in, "Nicky had been tormenting Daniel with the soap, but he wasn't sure how she planned to use it as weapon." Kelly surprised us by laughing. She plainly found the accidental slip hilarious. Travis realized that he had unintentionally spoiled the long-standing joke, "Oh, sorry. I wasn't aware that he didn't know." Nicky shrugged, "No worries. He was bound to figure it out sooner or later. Besides, it is all shits and giggles until someone giggles too hard and shits – and I ain't cleaning it up!" Daniel snorted, "Well, you already admitted that you were the one carrying the soap." Nicky sent him a dumbfounded look. Nina tried to turn a laugh into a cough in an attempt to remain polite and professional. Kelly wasn't so inhibited and snickered freely. I chuckled as well, it was too priceless to see Nicky's upper hand backfire on her with her own words. Nicky recovered and huffed as she stopped gaping at Daniel's comeback. He was definitely getting better at dealing with Nicky. She shrugged as she glanced at Kelly, "I can still taunt him with the tomato juice and rutabaga." Kelly and Travis exchanged a confused look. Neither one knew was Nicky was talking about and they certainly were not about to admit to not being aware of a potential weakness. It looked like those two items were safe for now. Although chances were that Nicky would never even see another rutabaga in her lifetime unless the world recovered much faster than was feasibly possible since I had never seen them growing at any Stronghold we visited. I intervened, "Let's leave that for another day." I glanced at Nina, "You brought the controlex, right?" Nina nodded and dug into her pocket to produce the two vials. I held out my hand and she passed them to me. I lightly tossed them one at a time towards Kelly. She easily snagged them out of the air and put them in her pockets. Kelly looked at Nina, "Trinity figured that any syringe would work. Is that correct?" Nina nodded once more, "Yes. It doesn't have to be injected into a vein either." "Easy enough." Kelly had told me that she used to help her grandma with her insulin needles, so she wasn't bothered with the thought of injecting either herself or her brother. They probably could have even drank it. Nina had never really tested the oral application though, so they were going to go with the more traditional injection method. Just in case of unforeseen side effects. They wouldn't use it here, but they had already decided to take it once they had left this area. Predictably they were going to take turns so they weren't left vulnerable at the same time. I was pretty sure that they would hole up in some remote piece of forest where people and zombies didn't roam to wait out the aftereffects. Travis was watching Nina in curiosity, "You seem to have accomplished a lot in the last few months here. I hear you developed a cure, a serum to prevent a human from becoming a regular zombie, the controlex, as well as that you are making progress on a vaccine. I am quite impressed." Nina smiled kindly at the Nightstalker, "Thank you. Trinity has been a huge help. We really needed the blood samples from a Nightstalker to accomplish it. We are still trying to improve the vaccine, but even as it is, it is a huge discovery. If you ever want or need any of these drugs, always feel free to come visit. We also have guest houses available both inside the fence as well as outside of it for any visiting zombies." Nina's hospitality was to be expected, but there was no chance of these two accepting it anytime soon. They really were the nomadic type, although I was positive that they would stop in several times a year. Travis responded, "Thank you for the offer, although we will pass. We will probably head east in a few days to go visit some other acquaintances." Nina nodded in slight disappointment, although I had told her that they wouldn't accept. "You are always welcome to visit for as long as you like." Travis acknowledged it with a nod, before backtracking to the topic that interested him the most, "Trinity also mentioned that this last wave was shorter. We noticed that as well when talking with a couple of Runners up north. Have you heard anything else?" Nina sighed, "I have had word from some other Strongholds that we never had enough time to visit, but this last wave was definitely shorter. I did a bunch of calculations and it looks like the airborne strain will continue to have shorter and shorter sneezing durations." Kelly took another step forward as she watched the scientist with interest, "Does this mean that the sneezing strain may eventually disappear?' "Yes. Probably within another three or four waves according to my current calculations." Kelly blinked and seemed stunned by that revelation, "So there is a cure, a vaccine, and the waves themselves are going to disappear on their own accord. The virus has nothing really left to stand on. Does this mean that it is over?" Nina blinked slowly, taken back by the question. Kelly's wording had made the revelation really hit home. The virus that had levelled most of the human civilization was on its last legs. It could still be spread through a bite or blood contact, but the new drugs could prevent the infection, stop it once it started, or even control the virus so the person could remain sane. Nina responded slowly as if in a daze, "There is still work to be done, but, yes, the worst is over." Nina looked around at all of us in surprised shock while softly murmuring, "It is over. It is really over." We all looked at one another wordlessly as we all realized the significance of that accomplishment.

 

Epilogue


 *  *  *   Epilogue   *  *  * 
 I sniffed the wind before heading towards the east gate. Luke noticed my change of direction and came over to walk beside me, "I assume Kelly and Travis are finally coming?" I nodded, "That is their scent on the wind." We had been expecting them for the last couple of days. They were a bit late, but I could finally pick up their scent, so they wouldn't take long to arrive now. I heard familiar footsteps come running up behind me and glanced back as I growled at Liz. She ignored my mild growl as per usual as she launched herself onto my back. She was big enough to manage it now. I growled at her once more, and she growled right back in a playful manner. Her growls were much better after practicing for well over a year. She could hit the exact tone and note that she wanted. She also knew what they meant. It was hard to tell hers apart from an actual zombie's growl at this point. I snorted faintly in mild amusement, "Why don't you go bother Nicky? She loves any excuse to get out of working." Liz wrapped her arms more tightly around my shoulders in an attempt to not fall off as I resumed walking, "She is currently hiding from Daniel at the moment." I sighed heavily, "What did she do this time?" "Ummm... She somehow managed to sneak soap into his food and used a herb to cover the scent." Luke shuddered lightly as he recalled his own encounter with soap so long ago. I turned my head as I eyed her up suspiciously, "Why do I suspect that she had help in this one?" Liz ducked her head sheepishly, "Can I blame Logan?" Liz knew that lying was futile and only got her into trouble. She probably found out about the herb from Logan or Nina, and judging from her comment, I was going with Logan. I narrowed my eyes, "I think I am going to have to report your behavior to your mother at this rate." Liz started giggling so hard that she almost fell off my back, "You know that she would never discipline me in a way that would satisfy you." Liz had been adopted by a couple that happened to spend the evening practicing archery. For some reason, they were unable to have children and were very lenient with Liz. But the rest of the Stronghold also had a say in discipline if she overstepped a boundary... I bared my teeth in a silent threat, "But I bet that Logan would not be impressed with you abusing such knowledge. He would tell Daniel who the real culprit behind all of this was." "Uh oh." She had a right to worry. Logan would make sure that Daniel would know the scent of that plant for the future so that they couldn't do such a thing again. He also did not like people using his knowledge to harm or bother others and he would likely give her some rather unpleasant chores as punishment. Daniel would also likely find some sort of fitting punishment since she had helped Nicky with such a prank. Luke opened up the gate for me and my passenger. The sentries on top saw nothing odd about Liz dangling from my shoulders. I wasn't helping her stay on and if she fell off, then that was her problem. Liz peeked over my shoulder, "Where are we going?" "To greet Kelly and Travis." She had been waiting for their arrival eagerly the last few days, "I can't wait to see them again! They haven't stopped by since last month. Did you tell Nina or Logan?"

I smirked, "Not yet. Why don't you go let them know that we have company?" She was still as suggestible as ever, "Okay!" She dropped off of my shoulders before turning to run back inside the fence to locate the two lovebirds. Luke grinned at my underhanded tactics, "You did that just to get her off of your back." "I am sure that the little monkey will figure it out eventually." Luke just shook his head and chuckled. It wouldn't take her long to locate those two. What Nina and Logan saw in one another baffled me, but they got along admirably well. It had taken Nina almost two months to realize that Logan had a crush on her. Well, technically Daniel had figured it out first, but that was beside the point. Daniel had actually been amused with his discovery and he was happy for Nina since she also liked the quiet man. Logan turned out to be pretty decent with the lab equipment and often helped create large batches of the cure, serum and controlex which were sent to other Strongholds via the trading routes. All of the places we had stopped at during the third wave were more than happy to send the boxes of precious vials to more distant Strongholds on their next trip. In fact, Kelly and Travis should be bringing back news from several remote Strongholds. Most places were unaware that they were actually zombies and thought that they were just traders who were so claustrophobic that they couldn't stand the thought of going inside of a Stronghold fence. Movement in the trees caught my attention and I grinned as the two Nightstalkers emerged from the shadows. Luke growled a low greeting and they both growled in response. I bared my teeth in a welcome, "We were beginning to think that you got lost." Nightstalkers simply did not get lost, especially over terrain they had traveled through several times. Kelly snorted, "You obviously need to get out more. Honestly, when was the last time you spent more than two days away from the Stronghold? You are going to turn into a human at this rate even without the cure." I rolled my eyes, "For your information, I took off for a four day vacation two weeks ago." Usually about once a month or so I took off for several days just for some alone time. I could only handle people, zombies, and Nicky for so long before I simply needed a break from it all. Kelly grinned, "And Nicky managed to survive for that long without you?" Luke chuckled, "She survived while Trinity was gone that time, but whether she lives to see the sunset tonight is a different story." Kelly was endlessly amused by Nicky and the things she did, "Oh?" Luke gazed at the sky with a grin on his face, "She put soap in Daniel's food and added a herb to cover the scent of the soap." Travis made a face and Kelly started cackling. Kelly tried to get herself under control, "Oh, I wish I had been there to see his face!" I grinned, "Well, she is currently in hiding, so you may have to go rescue her." Kelly nodded enthusiastically, "Why don't we go do that? The poor misunderstood thing. I know that Daniel won't bother her if she is with us." I shook my head as I turned around to walk back. Kelly's view of Nicky was completely irrational. Perhaps she needed her head checked, or to actually be present on the now-rare occasions that Nicky went off the deep end. Kelly walked beside me, "We stopped at quite a few Strongholds and also stopped to visit some zombies, but we have found no trace of the sneezing with this last wave." I wasn't exactly surprised. The wave before this one had only reported two infections and both had been given the cure in time. I shrugged, "We can keep tabs on it, but it really looks like the seventh wave was the last one. The new radio towers relayed information from as many Strongholds as possible for Nina, but there were no reports of anyone sneezing or showing signs of infection in the eighth wave."

Travis commented, "Between the sneezing period being so short that last time and the number of people now vaccinated, it doesn't really surprise me." The vaccination had a 90% success rate and, to the best of my knowledge, the vast majority of the surviving humans within a three week drive were now vaccinated. They knew it wasn't guaranteed to be 100% effective, but that just made the reckless idiots a bit more cautious. Luke was once more the gentleman as he held the gate open for us. Kelly gazed around. She wasn't entirely thrilled to be inside the fence, but it didn't bother her like it used to. This was the only Stronghold either sibling would even consider coming into. The residents knew them on sight and gave them space so they wouldn't feel crowded. Kelly sniffed the air, "There is a second Runner here?" I nodded, "Yes. Her name is Davina and she arrived about a week after you left. She is staying in one of the cabins by the fence." This was still one of the very few places that had no problems with sane zombies and we expected more might show up. We had word that sane Runners had been approaching various Strongholds for the cure or controlex. Those who became human usually remained there, while those with the controlex tended to keep traveling. Kelly and Travis packed both of those drugs with them in case they met a sane zombie while traveling. Kelly tilted her head, "I will have to go meet her afterwards. We actually found a tiny village with a dozen sane Runners in it to the east. All had taken the controlex, but they had quite the interesting setup. I even brought sketches of their pigeon coop for Luke." Luke looked intrigued, "Thank you." Kelly nodded and looked around, "You're welcome. Now, back to our original rescue mission. If we were Nicky, where would we hide?" Travis thought for a second, "Someplace that Daniel either couldn't or wouldn't go." I considered various places that fit within those criteria. One in particular stood out. I growled faintly, "She better not be where I think she is..." I altered my path and the other three followed in silent curiosity. Luke realized my destination when I approached the secondary building, "I can't see her getting into your room. You lock the door when you leave." Kelly bared her teeth in amusement, "A lock wouldn't stop me, so I highly doubt it would stop Nicky." I pulled out my key as we climbed the stairs. The door was still locked, but my keen nose knew who was hidden inside. I unlocked it and glared at the intruder who was sprawled out on my bed, "And just what do you think you are doing in here?" "Well, I was attempting to nap, but that plan is out now." Nicky spied the latest arrivals behind me and sat up, "Kelly! You're back!" Kelly tilted her head, "I am back, but I am trying to find out how you are still alive." Nicky chuckled and grabbed several cans of tomato juice from where she had put them on my dresser, "Some days are harder than others and I think I may need your help with survival today. Can you please hold these for me? I am hoping Daniel will hesitate to approach if you are carrying them." I caught the can she had gently tossed my way. Kelly caught hers as well. Nicky didn't bother tossing one towards Travis since he didn't humor her very often. Both now knew the age old joke about the tomato juice cans. Luke picked up a can and examined the mostly harmless object, "I am awaiting the day that Ben tells Daniel that you only use them as airborne missiles." Nicky made a face, "We have a deal and he promised to uphold it. He has permanent immunity in exchange for his silence. If he speaks of it and Daniel realized the truth, then that immunity goes bye-bye. I have an energy drink stashed in my room for that day and he knows it."

Luke made a face, "Give me warning and I will take a long hike with Trinity in the forest." Kelly grinned at Nicky, "Let me know as well. I want to sit on the rooftop and watch." Nicky chuckled and rubbed her hands together as she imagined that scenario. Kelly and Nicky could be a bad combination at times. I mock scowled at them, "You two should be separated. For my peace of mind, if nothing else." Travis inquired, "Why are you in Trinity's room anyways?" Nicky gave him a look that clearly said how dense she thought that question was, "For starters, with my room next door, Daniel would not be surprised pick up my scent in this hallway. The biggest reason is that he won't enter Trinity's room even if he realized that I am in here. He knows that Nightstalkers are easily pissed off is someone invades their personal domain." "And yet you enter her room?" Travis thought she was nuts. Had anyone else tried it, I would have snarled at them for invading my room. Nicky was pushing my patience as well... She shrugged, "I am pretty sure that Trinity prefers me alive. Besides, I was well behaved. I didn't snoop through her drawers or color anything." I growled faintly, "You might have died had you attempted that." "That is why I didn't even consider it. But that reminds me," She turned to look at Kelly, "I managed to get my hands on a new package of markers. Can you slip the empty wrapper under Daniel's door when you head out? The suspense will kill him as he waits for me to strike." It was official, Nicky liked to live life on the line. She wasn't even out of the woods after her last stunt and she was already busy digging a deeper hole... Kelly shook her head, "I will pass on that one. He will pick up my scent on it and I don't feel like having him blaming me for being involved in this fiasco." Nicky sighed as she accepted defeat, "Fine. I assume you are going to the roof for a visit?" Kelly nodded, "That was the plan. I am sure Nina will find us before too long. She is as curious as any cat and has no fear of zombies either." "I'll tag along then. I am pretty sure that three Nightstalkers and a Runner can make a Terror think twice. Or maybe he has calmed down by now." I rolled my eyes and grumbled irritably, "Get out of my room already." Nicky headed into the hallway and I made sure to close and lock my door. At this rate I was going to have to look into locks that took zombie strength to unlock. Luke shook his head before heading for the stairwell. I took up the rear as I followed the others to roof. Liz, Logan, Nina, and Daniel had guessed our destination and beat us up here. Daniel eyed up Nicky before growling, "Is there perhaps something you wish to explain?" Nicky put her hand over her heart as she pretended to be shocked, "You are blaming me?!" Daniel's eyes never left her face, "Yes." He had no doubt whatsoever. "I feel so wounded that you suspect me of being guilty for soap somehow appearing in your salad." Daniel was unimpressed, "And yet you somehow knew exactly what I was talking about." Nicky shrugged as she flopped into her chair, "Of course I knew. I did it, but someone else put me up to it." Daniel sniffed and realized she was telling the truth. His eyes narrowed in thought before skimming over to me as he tried to think of the second culprit. He didn't even consider the other two Nightstalkers, then again, they would never taunt him so. I made a face at him, "You can't blame me for this one. You might want to ask the little monkey over there for the details if you want them." Liz started fidgeting guiltily as Daniel looked at her. He frowned at the child, "You and I will be having words later on." Liz ducked her head repentantly, "Yes Daniel." I knew that Daniel would go easier on Liz than on Nicky. Liz at least had the excuse of being a child. Nicky was more like a stray marble rolling down a hill when all you do is stand there and watch in bemusement as it rolls out of sight. Nina started talking with Kelly and Travis as they told her of where they had went and that there had been no trace of anyone sneezing. I halfway tuned them out as I gazed absently at the Stronghold below. It had been a long year and a half since I first stumbled across Liz and the other three with her. As crazy as it sounded, I counted everyone on this rooftop as my friend at this point. There had been ups and downs, bumps and bruises, but we had all pulled through. This was a strange place. One where sane zombies walked among humans freely and they were glad to have us here. A place where there was mostly harmony, provided we could keep Nicky away from the coffee. The old cabin up north no longer interested me. As much as I hated to admit it, I had gotten accustomed to the humans here and tolerating them was easier than I would have ever imagined. Daniel and I still had minor clashes on occasion, but that was to be expected with stubborn zombies of different ranks. Strangely enough, I was actually happy here. In an ironic twist of fate, the Stronghold that I had originally sworn I would never enter had somehow become my home. Perhaps I actually had more luck than I had ever realized.

 

             