The Last Nebula: Scourge of the Legion
by Chrisjohnsorge

Stars are decaying across the cosmos, and any one could be the last. 

Cal Cabor rose from his begins on the Grav mining world of Luxarus. At first chance, Cal sailed off to the Capital world of Empria and became Captain of the Legionnaire's guard. But when the Legionnaire is murdered by a beast born of shadows, Cal is fixed as the only suspect. 

Fleeing from the traitorous new ruler of the Galactic Legion and psychopathic Paratores who do his biding, Cal finds himself stranded on the desolate world of Karkken-- a planet inhabited by the monstrous Mulvain warriors, strongest the galaxy has ever known. With an alliance between the fierce race of aliens as his last hope, Cal begins to rally a group of unlikely beings to his cause.

Cover Designed by GretchenBearer



 

Authors Note

The first book in The Last Nebula series is officially completed! That being said, I am currently preparing the book for publishing. As such, I have left half of the story available to read on here for my loyal supporters. I hope to have the final version of the story available for all to read and enjoy some day soon.

 

Prologue

 In space, little of the truths of the natural world apply to every humbling occurrence. When light itself becomes a miraculously conceptual privilege and no longer a basic right, the essence of reality is questioned. In those days, the night sky was filled with an ever-fading luminescence as stars blinked out in the sky one by one. Haunting in their wake, only the dark of space remained. The vast cosmic nurseries unexplainably disappeared throughout the ages, making Nebulas a growing rarity across the universe. A galaxy once littered with the sparkling clouds of celestial power grew into a dotted landscape, the gulf between the solar beacons drawing ever greater. With no new stars born, each remaining sun burned to its core, shining as brightly as it dared before its light was forever snuffed out. For the select, educated few who understood the real weight of their situation, most chose to live in blissful ignorance. If the galaxy had maintained itself without their intervention for this long, then surely it would continue its regulation however fit. For all the Galactic Legion's advancements throughout history, their place in the universe remained unfathomably small. And so, there they rested underneath their sun that shined a little dimmer with each passing day. But soon, a storm from the cosmos would make the truth, and for some, their destiny, impossible to ignore. An incessant rattling echoed through the hull of the starship as it sailed ahead through space. Trev leaned forward, seated in the cockpit of his ship. The dim lighting made little visible beyond the various buttons and monitors lit up over the center console. Trev tapped a button on the navigator to set their course. One look at the ship's readings, and Trev buzzed down to the engine room on the evocom. "Hey Dack, run one more rotation on the Grav engine scrubbers. Want a smooth landing on reentry," Trev ordered through the device. "Got it, boss," Dack's voice replied. Next to him in the copilot's seat, Reg slumped over in his chair, fast asleep. Trev looked over, rolling his eyes at the kid incapable of remaining focused on a task. He kicked the chair, making Reg shoot up to attention. Scanning around in a daze, he finally made eye contact with Trev, still wearing a smug expression on his bearded face. "Morning, kid," Trev said. "Sorry, dozed off again."
 "Yeah, I noticed. Let's not have a repeat of the Althean monk heist, shall we?" Trev joked. He pointed to the center console. "Check the scanners. Don't want any trouble this time."
 Reg nodded and sat up in his seat, studying the console monitor. "Nothing on the scans. Should be smooth sailing to the Ark," Reg reported.
 Trev nodded and pressed forward on the sticks. He smiled. "Luck's on our side once again." Reg puffed a light stream of air out his nose. Trev turned to him. Reg's stare went on for miles past the cockpit's viewport.
 "Had that dream again, you know," Reg began.
 Trev nodded. "Yeah, figured. But hey, life's got a funny way of making people from your past pop up now and then." He looked with a half smirk. "We'll see him again."
   Reg pivoted the corner of his eyes, a look of reasonable doubt. People didn't come back to this life. Not once they found their way out. "Either way, won't be the Cal I knew," Reg replied.
   Trev turned away, welcoming the silence for a while as the starship accelerated past a cloud of space debris. An asteroid rolled around their field of view, and the Ark appeared clear as day. A metallic half-cylinder stretching out into space, the Ark was one of the Faen's technological marvels. 'Sample planets' by design, the Arks were programmed with climate controls and an artificially introduced ecosystem—a reservation for an entire planet.

             Trev piloted the ship into the mouth of the space station, rocking up and down as they entered past the atmospheric shield. Below, the land was a sea of purplish plants and twisted, dark vines. The artificial light beat down weakly on the wildlife. Small creatures scurried for cover under the boulders. Patches of water scattered across the terrestrial surface, umbrellaed by dark blue foliage. It was a place foreign to Trev's eyes.
 He landed the starship down in an open field at the edge of the violet jungle. Reg turned to him as the landing gear engaged and the ramp extended. "Navpoint says the cache is just in the middle of that field." He double checked the navigator. "That can't be right, can it?"
 Trev stood up, tossed on his jacket, and strapped his plasmer pistol to his hip. "If that's what it says, that's where we're going."
   Trev ventured out of the ship into the grassy field. Reg and the rest of the crew knew only to follow. As they strode down the starship ramp, Reg held the breacher under his arm. He pulled it further up into his armpit as the weight of the device barred down on him.
 Trev pointed to the ground once stopped at the exact position. "Set it up right here."
 Reg took the prism shaped machine and anchored it into the dirt. The legs retracted out and dug into the strange soil. He pressed a button on the digital screen and the base of the prism began to glow a bright orange. Reg backpedaled away. "Alright do your thing, breacher."
 The bottom opened as plasma grenades plopped out of the machine. A steady volley of plasma spheres dissolved the dirt, eating away all organics with a barrage of orange flame. A hole slowly formed before their eyes and spread into an expansive cavern. Reg tapped the button on the breacher and the plasma grenades ceased. He strapped on his Grav boots and walked down perpendicular into the glowing hole. "See it down there?" Trev yelled down below.
 The shifting of rocks and soil muffled Reg's response. "Got it! Toss down the cable and let's pull it up!"
 Trev motioned to Dack. The cable dropped down into the hole and Reg attached the end around the rusted crate. He smoothed his hand over the peculiar metal, feeling the container crack open. Curiosity drove his hand inside. Reg grabbed hold of a diamond shaped relic. Ancient symbols, ones he could make no sense of, decorated across the copper plating. Colorful smoke poured out from inside. Stars speckled in its haze. Reg tucked the diamond away into his pocket and closed the crate. He banged twice on the lid. "Send it up!" Reg yelled.
   Reg hung onto the cable and together they lifted into the open air. Trev and Dack took hold and dragged the crate along the ground.
   Trev sighed in exhaustion. "Thing's heavy. Better be worth the trouble."
   Like the changing of the tides, immediate nightfall fell on the Ark. Instantly, they were basked in darkness.
   Trev's eyes shot to his evopatch. "Nighttime wasn't programmed for another few hours." He tapped on his evocom. "Lerana, get the ship running. Might need to get outta here quick."
   Her voice came back gargled in static, "...you on the ship? There's someone... cargo hold. What the? Carth! No!" Her shouts turned into curdling cries, and then dead silence. "Lerana! What the carth is going on over there?" Trev looked over toward the ship. A dark figure strode down from the ramp in the shape of a man. His face laid hidden beneath a black hood, but his solar eyes burned clean through—the richest yellow Trev had ever seen. And those clawed, fur covered hands down at his sides... the sight shook him to his core.
   Dack drew his plasmer and fired two bolts at the beast. The creature dissipated into black smoke and wisped away, rematerializing to the side. Orange streaks of plasma sailed off into the darkness. The figure stared them down as a glowing white blade extended from metal circled around his wrist. Trails of vapor poured off the milky blade like an encroaching storm of fog. The beast pounced, teleporting into a cloud of mist yet again. Trev made a mad dash to escape as the glowing blade slash across Dack's chest. His body fell limp to the floor. A frozen hole burned into Dack's sternum, venting smog above like a chimney. "Reg, let's go!" Trev yelled behind as he stormed into the maze of exotic vines.
   Reg sprinted after him. Immediately, the dense blue foliage confined them. Moments later, they could no longer decipher which way was out. Shufflings in the brush, chirping rising from the trees, a roar in the distance. Trev and Reg stood still in the middle of a small clearing. Through the blue veil, those yellow eyes returned. Trev took a step back and a vine wrapped around his leg. He tugged, and the virus tangled around him. He struggled against its pull as the plant immobilized him. Trev reached for the plasmer on his hip—just out of reach.
   The figure materialized through the foliage, his luminescent blade still drawn. Reg slid the artifact out from his pocket. He peered down at the diamond shape. And he knew. Reg tossed the relic away into the jungle. The beast roared in outrage and came for him in a blinding assault. They stood there, face to face as the blade cut into him. Slash after slash at his abdomen. So much fury.
   "Reg!" Trev yelled in terror.
   Reg dropped to his knees. He held his stomach for a moment. No blood, only dry burns and shock. He looked down, his mouth parted as if to speak, and fell to the jungle floor. Trev merely watched in horror as the vines held him in place. The figure turned to him, taking slow steps towards the nest of blue tentacles. Like rodents scurrying away from their predator, the vines retreated in a lighting motion.
   Gravity ripped Trev backward as he tumbled down the slope. Head over feet he rolled for what felt like minutes. His body chugged along, hitting every rock and tree in his path. He came to the base, abruptly landing in a patch of moss. Trev reached out for a log and pushed against it to steady himself. Sitting in the center of the mossy patch was that same diamond shape—that same beautiful swirl of shades. Trev grabbed the artifact and rose to his feet.
   The shadow thundered down the slope like a landslide of black smog. He appeared beside Trev with a swipe of his blade, cleaving his hand with a single flick. The hand flew off, fingers still wrapped around the relic. Trev screamed in agony and collapsed to the mossy floor. He grabbed the stump with his other hand. The wound shined the pale blue of frostbite. He rolled side to side in a state of panic.
   The beast knelt down and pried the artifact from Trev's missing hand. He rubbed the edges of the device—a content nod from beneath his hood—then he was gone in a cloud of smoke.
   Even in the panic, with adrenaline flowing through him, Trev found time to be disappointed in his lost riches. He suspected he might very well lose more than a hand now. Reg. I'm so sorry.
   But missed opportunity would be the death of him long before anyone else got the chance. Trev closed his eyes and prayed for a dream—prayed this was but a nightmare. He hoped, and he pleaded that luck had not forsaken him yet.

 

Chapter 1: Waves

        The weight of the plasmer rifle rested in Cal's hands. Smooth edges and a technologically advanced aesthetic described the weapon physically, but the lasting impression anyone who fired a plasmer bolt into the air would recount, was of the heat. The way the warmth radiates through the hands like a sheet of metal lying out in the sun after firing the first shot. The second shot shoots free and the slight burning sensation lingers in the fingertips. Scaled metal fragments on the side flare out, venting off the excess heat in rays of steam. Scales retract back inside the chamber, and the weapon is left cool to the touch once again, leaving the cycle to begin anew. Cal's plasmer bolt hit its mark. The giant Mulvain toppled backward as the molten hole burned clean through his chestplate. The orange glow of encapsulated plasma stood as the bane to life many times over. The virus spread and dissolved whatever substance dared to challenge its resolve. No matter, past or present, could escape that heat.
   Cal stood over the monstrous creature with a satisfied grin, though admittedly they were wide targets to hit. His head jerked over to the bolder boulder poised above. Two red leafed trees, their bark paler than the Emprian sun, stared back. Mara burst out from the underbrush and jumped down off her perch.
 "Nice of you to join," Cal said. She was a pretty girl, with a slender frame and an olive skin complexion that drew out the green of her eyes. Young, at only fourteen galactic years of age, but she carried herself with an unwavering degree of confidence and intellect only arisen from years of worldly experience. She pivoted around, taking in the natural surroundings of the Althean forest. The signature red and white trees went on for miles in every direction across the hilly landscape. The sky too wore a crimson glow. And beyond, the burning of an engineered star. Mara smiled back. "I like this place."
 Cal rolled his eyes and tapped on the evopatch strapped to his wrist. "Next wave coming in five."
 She nodded and they both drew their rifles. Two Mulvain warriors, broadswords in hand, rushed out from the tree line. Their clawed feet tore up the dirt as they stormed toward them. Cal rolled to left as a sword narrowly grazed his arm. He popped up and fired a charged bolt with a release of the trigger. The Mulvain stumbled back against a tree, sheets of white bark rained down as his scaly armor slid across the surface. One more shot for good measure, and the Mulvain went still. Mara was less equipped for this scenario. The Mulvain knocked her onto the ground with a powerful check across her chest. Air vacated her lungs as she absorbed the shock, laying stunned on her back. The creature loomed above her, mandibles twitching with excitement. His night shaded sword swung down. Mara rolled to the side in the nick of time. Her body shuffled across the red blades of grass. The warrior slashed at her again. Another narrow dodge. He brought the sword over his head, prepared to strike his killing blow. An orange streak rocketed across the forest. The Mulvain faltered back as his scales crackled and burned. The sword slipped from his grasp. Another plasmer bolt struck him, this time scorching the entirety of his face. He bellowed a thunderous roar and collapsed—silent. Cal offered his hand. "Still a lot of work left to do on you."
 She shook her head and grabbed his arm, pulling herself back onto her feet. "I had that. Was just taking some time to plot my strategy."
 "Really? Was getting impaled by a Mulvain's sword your strategy?" Mara shot him a death stare. Cal brought up his evopatch and ended the simulation. The world around them faded away, dissolved into a million green pixels. They stood in the center of a white room, several elevated surfaces spread throughout to mimic the procedural environments. Cal took off the evorig, his world free from the green tint, and set the helmet down on the table. He placed the training rifle beside it and instructed Mara to follow. 

             Cal Cabor possessed the strong posture only fitting of a well-trained soldier. His obsidian shaded hair was kept to a fair length, paired nicely with his prominent jaw. Cal bared the color of one lightly tanned after a long summer day. But his handsome features were not his defining attribute, nor his most deadly. "Mulvain on Althea wasn't a very realistic scenario anyway. What was the point of that?" Mara asked.
 Cal met her inquisitive gaze. "Can't always fight the enemy you want, in the manner you want. Sometimes you have to improvise." He grabbed the necklace dangling over his chest and tucked the colyne crystal back under his chestplate.
 The metallic hiss of the doors sang. The Legionnaire, Cade Farrow, stood in the doorway, accompanied by two Chromarian guards and a mechanic servant. The Legionnaire was outfitted in a white cloak bordered in gold that looked even smoother than the fine silk it was crafted from. His face had begun to show signs of age beneath his well-trimmed beard, though his brown hair had not yet turned to gray. "Remind me to check here first next time," he whispered under his breath. Looking at Mara, "This is the third day in a row that I've had to receive word you skipped out on your studies."
 Smiling innocently to her father, "On the contrary father, I am always studying. Though simply galactic history and mechanic operations are rather elementary to me at this point," motioning to the mechanic standing beside him, "I could take him apart and put him back together right here. Maybe I'd even do a little rewiring— give his programming the woman's touch the Gawn can never quite get right."
 The mechanic turned to Mara. "Have I done something to displease you?" The mechanic's voice purely artificial in tone. Cal shook his head at the mechanic—an unspoken sigh.
   Mara continued to perform her exaggerated expressions as her father lectured. Cal smiled silently, never ceasing to be amazed by the girl's remarkable aptitude for persuasion. Somehow Mara's sarcastic tone gave her a certain charisma that made her near impossible to dislike. A Rianare from birth, Mara Farrow was born with the whole galaxy in her hands, never left wanting for anything, yet remained one of the humblest souls Cal had ever known. He looked at her—not as her royal subject— but as a father might, with the willingness to do anything to shelter her from harm. Examining the pair of them, both with their black hair and green eyes, they might have been believed as father and daughter. Cal however, was not lucky enough to be born into a life of royalty on the Legion's capital of Empria. His story began on the grassy plains of the planet Luxarus, far away from the beautiful, white marbled palace he now inhabited. The way Cal would tell it, his very first memory was venturing down into the dangerous colyne mines that spearheaded the planet's economy. Anyone on Luxarus knew there was little choice other than to work in the mines with the ever-increasing demand for freshly mined colyne throughout the Legionary system. Accidents were rather commonplace, even with all the safety precautions and equipment. Veterans of the mines knew disaster was only a matter of time.
   But in the end, the value of colyne remained too great for anyone to ignore, and thus the Legion would never lessen their need. This exponential demand of the mineral pressured citizens of Luxarus to meet the inflating expectations raining down from their neighboring capital world. Luxarans were crushed under the immeasurable pressure. Nevertheless, colyne had not acquired its precious standing by arbitrary means. A simple combination of the refined mineral with plasma produced a self-sustaining reaction unlike any other, spawning its own gravitational field through the pure strength of the interaction—gravity itself was defied. And thus, Grav was born. The colyne-plasma concoction powered all the artificial gravity generators in the Legionary star fleet, as well as on board every other starship in the known galaxy. Even a small amount allowed vehicles to levitate and soar across the surface of rougher terrain. The invention of these comets quickly made the tumblers of old Empria obsolete, confined to use by Luxarans and the occasional man seeking to reminiscence of driving with wheels on the ground—before the Legion came. 

Every day back in the colyne mines, Cal strapped on a pair of Grav boots and walked straight down into an endless abyss to claim the precious blue rock below. Right before his eyes, men plummeted to their deaths when the walls of the caves crumbled beneath their boots. Dozens of workers suspended in those dark spaces, pulling out colyne deposits with telekinetic gloves. The sight was truly captivating. Beautiful almost, if any shift in the rock wouldn't signal their last breath. Gravity became their greatest enemy down in those mines, and the very resource they were there to retrieve was all that might save them. It was a vicious, never ending cycle. A cruel joke tucked away in the back of Cal's mind. As a child, Cal often found himself lying awake dreaming of the white sand beaches of Empria. For years he bided his time, waiting for a chance to break free from the homeworld that had long suppressed his potential. His ticket out of his self-proclaimed prison came by a stroke of luck, now serving as the Captain of the Legionnaire's Chromarian guard; a duty he conducted with an utmost sense of honor rather scarce among the aristocrats of Emperion.
 Mara met her father with pleading eyes—a deadly little spell.
 The Legionnaire sighed. "Leave us." He waved his guards away.
   Even the most powerful man in the Legionary system, perhaps the entire galaxy, could not resist the intellectual charm of the mighty Mara Farrow. The Legionnaire would cave and brush it off as he always did for his daughter, never able to bring forth the same sternness and discipline to parenting he did to ruling. He was merely lucky she was turning out so well regardless; even if her obedience indeed left something to be desired.
 But anyone that knew the Legionnaire as well as Cal understood precisely the reason. To the Legionnaire, Mara was his whole world. After losing his wife during childbirth, Mara was all he had left to hold dear. For no matter how vast his empire, no matter the number of subjects he presided over, the void left by his fallen Queen remained barren. The loss forever became a piece of him, lingering behind every melancholy smile and the depths of his heavy, darkening eyes. Mara was there for him to remain anchored to the light. "Apologies your majesty, she was pestering me as always. Figured it was a skill she could use eventually," Cal offered to the Legionnaire. The Legionnaire stood with his shoulders tensed. "No! I'm tired of being constantly undermined—" He stopped himself and took a deep breath.
 Cal took a step back, head jerked slightly at the outburst, as out of character as it was.
   The Legionnaire calmed himself. "Not your fault, Cal. My daughter would have had her way with or without you." Shooting Mara an unwavering expression, "But enough is enough. It's time you return to your studies."
 Rolling her eyes ever so slightly, she took a shallow, sarcastic bow. "As you wish, your majesty."
   She walked towards the door, giving Cal a knowing look as she left. He returned a sharp nod and hooked grin as the metal door slid shut. Their simple manners of speaking without uttering a word detailed a closeness none could fabricate. "Come, Cal. Let's talk outside." The Legionnaire waved him out the door.
   They turned down the hallway and found themselves on the balcony, overlooking the Emprian ocean. It was where the Legionnaire did most of his thinking. He walked closer to the balcony's edge and stared at the vast sea of blue. As Cal scanned out along the coast, he doubted there could be a more beautiful sight in the entire galaxy. The way the bright white sun glistened off the water, the elegant arch of a skybridge in the distance, it made for a true marvel to behold. 

Cal stood there beside him. "She really is coming along great, Cade. They'll count her among the Golden Legion soon enough."
   The Legionnaire laughed. "I think those men had a bit more skill to warrant their legend."
   "Yeah, but she'll get there. Maybe not a fighter, but a great ruler someday."
   The Legionnaire paused for a long moment. Cal counted the rotations of the tide. In and back three times, waves dying out on the white sand below before the stalemate broke. The Legionnaire reached into his pocket and pulled out an intricately crafted glass pipe. The bubbling purple liquid inside, Cal recognized clearly as seastar venom. The Legionnaire pressed a button on the pipe and a small laser vaporized the liquid as he took a deep inhale. Cal laughed as Cade exhaled the smoke and passed the pipe to him. "Now what would the councilmen say if they saw this?" Cal mocked with a sly grin. He pressed the button and puffed in. "Maybe they'd say he actually knows how to enjoy the pleasures in life."
   Cal shot him a glance. "Well that's never a good trait in a leader."
   The Legionnaire smiled, and both fell silent as the venom began its effects. A calming agent accompanied by a euphoric after glow— simple and recreational. In high doses, the sea creature's fluid would cause hallucinations, maybe even death. But nothing worthwhile in the galaxy was without a little risk.
   "Traya used to wander off all the time; sometimes in the middle of the night. But I'd always find her here, just staring out at the waves. I used to wonder what she was thinking, yet somehow I knew it would be beyond my understanding. She was always the deeper thinker." Cade made a soft chuckle to himself.
   Cal took a step closer and leaned against the railing. His ears perked up, ready to listen. The Legionnaire continued on. "One time, I decided I finally had to know just what was running through that beautiful mind of hers. And she took my hand, so reassuring like she always was, and she told me:
   'When I look out there, I see the waves rolling by and crashing onto the shore. I watch their whole life in stride from their birth far out at sea to their end on the rocks below my feet. I think of how clear their purpose is: to be a force of motion. And I wonder if any of us can have such a clear sense of purpose to our lives.'
   "But me, I just look out and see a whole lot of blue. She could see it all at once... feel a storm coming just from the change in the air..." His voice began to trail off. "Wish I could have known her." Cal placed a hand on Cade's shoulder, hoping to mimic the feeling of calm his wife once brought over him. "We need more people like her—more people like you."
 The Legionnaire went silent again. Cal knew of the trouble brewing behind the scenes of the political stage. He reasoned accurately such was the cause of the weight on the Legionnaire's thoughts. The Legion stood at a crossroads and critical decisions would soon have to be made. All the while, the Legionnaire was forced to reevaluate who he could trust as his enemies crept in, masking their true nature from sight. "There's rumors being whispered throughout the city. Reports that a new political faction is plotting against me—calling themselves the Infinite Empire. Apparently, they believe the Legionary system is no longer enough for us," the Legionnaire told.
 Cal took no real surprise in the knowledge. Greed had long been the greatest flaw of humanity, and vast empires only seemed to breed it out even further. The more they had, the more they wished to take. "They seek to conquer the galaxy then?" Cal asked, believing the notion ridiculous. "I fear they hide their true motivations. I don't know who I can trust." "Then we'll get to the bottom of this, Cade. Together."
   The Legionnaire cleared his throat and spoke with a more authoritative tone. "We leave tomorrow for Luxarus. It's time I conducted a full assessment of the mining operation. The Governor will have me to answer to."
   Governor Serk was in charge of keeping the colyne acquisition levels to the Legion's needs. A growingly difficult feat that was becoming. With the Legionnaire's recent paranoia, well founded or not, he looked to bolster his assets. Luxarus was the logical place to begin.
   "Cal, I don't know how far this Infinite Empire's reach extends, who's backing their efforts." The Legionnaire paused and shifted his gaze back out towards the horizon. "Members of the council can discuss the political implications recorded down on their evosheets all they like, but its men like you that get results. That drive will be invaluable in what's to come."
   "Of course, sire. You point, say jump, and I'm there—whatever you require."
   "I know."
   The Legionnaire gave him a friendly pat on the shoulder and a quick smile of thanks as he strode out through the doors. Cal was left alone on the balcony, full of reminiscent thoughts. He reached beneath his chestplate and fished out his necklace. Rolling the glowing blue diamond between his fingers, he was reminded of a whole world he had not seen in ages, the very same world that was once all he knew. How far he had come since those early days. He thought of the Queen's words and felt a surge of pride. His life indeed had purpose, and every day the Legionnaire and Rianare Mara were safe reminded him of that. Maybe that was all he could hope for— maybe that was enough.

 

Chapter 2: Meet Your Heroes

 Cal Cabor first met the Legionnaire many galactic years ago, at his most desperate period in life. Recently widowed with a newborn baby girl to care for and an entire solar system to govern, lost could not begin to describe the man Cal met over a decade ago outside the mines of Luxarus. Only a teenager at the time, Cal first looked at the Legionnaire with a sense of wonder and a sharp sting of jealousy, representing a whole galaxy he longed to explore. He had no way of understanding the luck of the hand he had been dealt the day he was assigned to the crew giving their Legionnaire a tour of the colyne mines. Cal noted the two Chromarian guards that accompanied him, dressed head to toe in their ceremonial armor—each with a lasguard strapped to their hip. He wondered how exactly these men were supposed to protect the Legionnaire from the hazards that lied beneath them. A sudden concussion rumbled the ground all around. Cal watched in amazement, masking
    laughter with the cover of his hand as the guards scrambled around like children, trying to determine how best to combat the threat. They retrieved the lasguards from their belts and activated the circular metallic devices. Immediately they sprang to life, emitting a blue laser film that grew into the shape of a shield. "It's alright. No need to panic. Just an aftershock from another mining site we're clearing," the leader of the tour assured.
   After taking a moment to gather themselves, they proceeded down into the rocky cavern. The walls narrowed the further they ventured below. A bowrat scurried past Cal's foot, retreating into its nest. Radiance shined off the black rocks lined along the dark passage. The way their smooth surfaces gleamed in the light of the lastubes used to shepherd their path, calling out to those passing by to feel the cold rock on their fingers. Cal caught the Legionnaire himself doing this as the group continued their exploration down into the mine. He noted how the Legionnaire seemed elsewhere, paying poor attention to the man leading them, narrating along every step. Cal thought of the ocean covered world the Legionnaire came from, and wondered how a man surrounded by all that beauty could find such appreciation for a dark hole in the ground. Looking back, it was beyond foolish to bring the head of the entire Legion into a mine that saw collapses and rock slides nearly as often as lunch breaks. But the Legionnaire believed it important he saw the work being done there to fully appreciate all the benefits its riches provided. And so, the tour came to the precipice of a freshly blown out gap in the planet's crust, still quite warm from the monstrous mining laser that created it. Heat could be seen radiating from the rocks, some yet glowing a bright red. Cal passed by the crate full of Grav grabbers, as the Luxarans called them—Grav powered gloves that tore colyne straight out of the rock. The mineral suspended in their palms until they launched their claims into the giant processing bin floating at the abyssal core. Such a sight brought with it a lifetime of dark associations. Cal shook his head and moved toward the group. A man standing among them ventured a bit too close to the brink of the abyss. One too many doses of seastar venom served as the likely culprit. Luxarus didn't have the finest education system, considering nearly all men simply went to work in the mines as soon as they became of age, but one would hope common sense would be prevalent among those working in such a dangerous environment.
    It was not. The man took his last step when the rock crumbled mere inches from the edge. The ground beneath their feet gave out, falling into the deep blackness below, taking half the men with it—including the dear Legionnaire.
   Cal could nearly hear Trev whispering in his ear, ushering him to claim his chance at a hefty compensation of Rions. So he acted on impulse—a leap of faith after his doomed leader. If he had closed his eyes, Cal might have believed he was soaring through the clouds with the wind beating down on his face. But looking out at the vast shadow engulfing him seemed as if he was not even moving. As the Legionnaire fell, an image of shock and fear illuminated on his face, which Cal would learn later was not for himself, but the daughter he would be leaving all alone in this world. Cal threw his arms behind him, propelling downward like a rocket through the air. He grabbed hold of the Legionnaire's arm and launched the thrusters on his Grav boots. Activating them in a fluid motion, he anchored to the side of the cavern wall, perpendicular to the rest of the world. The Legionnaire dangled from his arm as Cal struggled to maintain his grasp.
   Cal turned his head toward the dead weight. "Don't... let go."
   The Legionnaire nodded through his solid red face. His teeth clenched together so tight they might snap. With great effort, Cal held his arm around him and gradually walked themselves up the side of the hole. Cal could feel the fragments of stone sliding beneath his boots. The two of them hung in suspense at every crunching of the rocky wall. A landslide would be their end. With one last firing of his thrusters they collapsed onto the floor of the tunnel where they began. They both laid there a moment, audibly panting in disbelief of not only what had just occurred, but that they survived to tell the tale. Their eyes met for the first time. "Thank you, son. Thank you," was all the Legionnaire could muster. In that moment, Cal's monetary needs dissolved. He wasn't the scoundrel he was raised to be.
   Next Cal knew, he sat beside the Legionnaire on his personal starship, headed for the Legionary capital. The Legionnaire never forgot how Cal saved his life—a debt he swore to repay. From that day forth, Cal was treated as the Legionnaire's own prodigal son. Provided with the best schooling Empria had to offer and the most advanced military training in the Legion, Cal had every resource at his disposal from then on. Cal made a promise of his own soon after: he would not waste the chance he had been given. Cal pledged his undying loyalty to the great man who had bestowed this gift upon him. The past no longer mattered, only the future would he look to. But now as the world Cal once knew came rapidly closer, memories stirred as well. Flashes of Reg's young face—brown hair falling towards his eyes—cycled through Cal's mind like an evostream. Always had it been his greatest regret. Maybe some thoughts were best left in the past. 

 

Chapter 3: Midnight

            The echo of a metallic hum filled Mara's bedroom. Another late night, as she often found herself lying awake, believing sleep would damper her potential. She sat there at her desk, holding the metallic cylinder in her hand, entranced by the cadence of flashing lights and feeling the vibrations it emitted. Not much larger than one of her fingers, yet within contained technology capable of showcasing memories amassed by others—a gateway into another life.
   First developed by the EVO corporation, producers of nearly all tech in the Legionary system, mem-stims became tools to represent knowledge and learning in a new way to students, allowing users to experience a memory as if their own. Such technology had endless application for educational and recreational avenues. In no time at all, Mem-stims became commonplace in every classroom, adopted as a means to archive important historical events. But naturally, it was not long before people used the devices to appeal to all their colloquial vices. And so, frequently many wealthier Legionites haphazardly abused the considerably priced stims, seeking to live out more adventurous and fulfilling lives.
   Through her stims, Mara ventured further into the depths of the obscure and abstract, learning intricacies that only the most committed scholars ever studied. She prided herself on her intelligence, so much so that she became determined to absorb all the same knowledge of the Legionite aristocrats. And furthermore, she aimed to learn everything their minds could never comprehend.
                Being the daughter of the Legionnaire certainly supplied its share of perks, but Mara never felt that as sufficient. She was convinced of her need to advance consistently and become worthy of her royal position—a trait she acquired from interactions with Cal over the years. She looked to him as a role model, intrigued by how differently he carried himself from her peers. She often found herself going to him for guidance in troubled times.
                Without a mother to instruct her, she lost some of her more warm qualities, and presented a tough exterior few could ever crack—a consequence of being raised solely by men. Mara carried only the vague recollections of her mother, passed down by others. This was a person that should have been crucial in her life, and yet she was to her in essence, little more than a bedtime story.              Time after time, the Legionnaire sought to force her into the normal activities of a Rianare, expected to spend her days with the other children of prominent society. But Mara rapidly grew tiresome of the Hanover boys and little miss Sarai who never had an intelligent thought in all her life. "I swear father, I'll go mad if I have to spend another day with those waterheads," Mara complained.
   Rather, her father would continuously catch her running off to see the young armorsmith's boy, fascinated by the craft. She learned her city as she should, by scouring through the streets of the lower levels. But eventually, at her father's request, Cal would always find her and bring her back to the more 'civilized' side of Emperion.              Nevertheless, the Legionnaire was fighting a losing battle. As soon as Mara was confined to the Citadel's walls, she found company in the royal plasmologist. She learned about the refining of plasma and development of plasmer projectiles. Not quite what Legionnaire Farrow had in mind for his daughter. She was truly a unique specimen.              Mara flicked the cap of the Mem-stim shut and adjusted her eyes, blinking repeatedly until the fine edges returned to her vision—always a bit of disorientation after coming out of the memory trances. Over at the electronic display above her desk, it was later than she expected. Right there at her fingertips, she possessed a full holographic overlay of information lit up by the lastubes hanging above. With a swipe of the projection, she could access any of the collected Legionary archives. After her latest memory dive however, she was not in the mood for more knowledge acquisition. 

             Cal's voice came over her evocom, "Go to bed, Mara. Don't make me come over there."
                Mara sighed. "Yes, we wouldn't want that. Goodnight." She stuck out her tongue toward the evocom with a shake of her head. Mara rose from the desk and walked across her vast room towards the bed centered along the back wall. Red curtains hung down, sheltering her mattress like a canopy. A large archway leading out onto a balcony positioned next to her grand wardrobe. As a Rianare, she was expected to wear all variations of elegant clothing to public appearances, but in her private moments she wore little indication of her station in life.              It's all a balance, Mara told herself.
                As she moved to her bed, ready to slip under her covers and retire for the night, she heard a pair of footsteps trotting down the hallway outside. Immediately, she found herself smitten with the prospect of a mystery.              Far too late to be wandering the halls, she thought.              She quietly crept towards her door, shooting higher up on her toes the closer she came to the keypad. She tapped the button lightly, as if that would factor in a difference of the intensity of the sound, and prayed the midnight wanderer would not hear. Mara peered out from the edge of her doorway just in time to catch a quick glimpse of a man turning the corner at the corridor's end. She swiveled her head, checking both ways down the hall. Suddenly she was stricken with confusion. It was empty.              Where are the guards? Mara wondered.
                She was never fond of the idea of being babysat constantly, but the lack of their presence felt troubling in the middle of the night. Surely the Legionnaire had not called them away. The possibilities of why they may have abandoned their post ran through Mara's mind. By then however, she almost unconsciously was halfway down the corridor in an effort to follow the stranger. Mara felt the cold tiles on her feet and realized she had forgotten shoes in her haste. She wore her white nightgown, hung appropriately to the bottom of her legs, and crossed her arms over her chest as she silently shuffled along. By the time she rounded the corner, the man disappeared behind a door. The gate slid shut behind him and Mara hustled to catch up. She held her ear up to the surface in a futile attempt to hear through the solid metal. She pressed harder against the door, but even the faintest sounds of murmuring were inaudible as she persisted. If this stranger was alone in there, she could not be certain.
                Mara jumped back from the door as a hand came down on her shoulder. She turned, startled. A man dressed in his polished white armor, a gold drape over the right shoulder, stood before her. The armored helmet he wore shrouded his presence in mystery. But Mara knew those golden eyes.              A Paratore.
                "Shouldn't be out in the halls this late, Rianare," Basilar sneered. He jabbed her arm with a hypodermic needle. Her head rolled back and body went limp.
                 "You can't... be... here..." She forced out as fatigue overcame her.
                Basilar caught Mara as she fell, tossing her over his shoulder as he rode into the room. No one else would be disturbing this meeting tonight.
   A long table spanned the length of the dimly lit study, donning an aura of secrecy nurtured by every artifact in attendance. The tall bookcases that surrounded the space were nothing more than an old fashion display to capture the library aesthetic—a tale of a different age.
   Basilar laid Mara's unconscious body down in a chair in the corner. He moved toward the bookshelf and adjusted his gauntlet, letting the nanites in his armor dissolve away to free his bare hand, and slid a book off from the shelf. The leather binding had become old and worn. He opened it and sifted through the pages, the feeling of the cellulose foreign to his fingers. 

The citadel's library held one of the last collections of printed books in the Legionary system. Relics of the past, books had not been printed in hundreds of galactic years, many ruined or destroyed. With the growing scientific understanding of space colonization, the importance of plant life became critical to successful planetary stability. As such, paper, wood, and other byproducts of tree harvesting became illegal under Legionary law. Buildings and materials were crafted solely from metal, synthetic materials, and other minerals. A mining industry flourished out of the legislation, moving knowledge to the digital form. And thus, the EVO Corporation was born, harnessing the power of quantified information to channel into new apparatuses for the public use. Where once there were books and papers, there became evosheets. Evo became the new currency of information through the Galactic Legion. When their corporation grew immensely in wealth from the prospect, power came as its natural compliment. The EVO corporation held the sole rights to their creation. Evo: a synthetic protein that stored information inside its molecular makeup. Its ability to self-replicate meant its storage potential was limitless. Refined into an emerald fluid, nearly every interface and piece of las tech had the substance flowing through its digital veins. Councilman Kane entered through the other end of the room, the shadows sheltering his definite features from view. "I like a man that appreciates the glory of the past," Kane said, pointing to the book. "I wish to return our Galactic Legion to that glory." He suddenly spied Mara slumped over in her chair. "What have you done?"
                Basilar placed the old book back onto the shelf and let the nanite composite armor recontextualize around his hand. He turned to the aristocrat, his gaze piercing, even through the cover of his helm. "Caught her skulking outside. She's fine. Just resting."
                "She's the carthing Rianare!"              "Which is why I handled it. She won't remember anything come morning."
   "If this returns to us, it's your head I'll offer to the Legionnaire." Basilar remained mute. The Councilman shook his head and took a seat at the head of the table. He motioned Basilar to join. "Think I'll stand. Took a lot of risk coming here. Legionnaire doesn't welcome my men in the citadel these days," Basilar replied.
                Kane signaled towards the other men around the table. "Hence why I have begun to lay the seeds of propaganda. Not all have as open a mind as I...  Your commitment to the cause is well appreciated, Commander Basilar. Many changes are coming soon enough. Including returning the Paratores to the prestige once held throughout the Legion."
                "Finest soldiers in the Legionary system."              Paratores were those warranted entry into the elite training program for Legionary soldiers, meant to prepare them for high risk infiltration missions. Or so it was publicly told. Their deeds had earned them a dangerous reputation, responsible for hundreds of assassinations and other unsavory work throughout history. Often held over people's heads as an empty threat, little children feared Paratores would carry them away like monsters in the night. Many rumors regarding the Paratores became commonplace throughout the Legion, but one story was told prominently of how they were made. Taken as infants, Paratores trained to become the paragons of warfare, learning fighting technique and marksmanship near before they could crawl, their innocence was all but stripped from them. The nanite integrated suits they wore stole whatever humanity that yet remained through the implantation of empathic disrupts into their brains. The implants interface directly with the Paratores mirror neurons, circuitry in the brain allowing the Human brain to feel empathy, and seemingly snuffed them out. They became soldiers incapable of feeling remorse for their actions.
                Councilman Kane held an evosheet in his hand beneath the table. He activated the button on the side of the cylinder. Laser film extended outward as the pale green glow arced across the surface, displaying his finer features. He scrolled across the evosheet. Paratore Directives titled across the header. Small profiles of every Paratore rested at his fingertips. Kane hovered over Basilar's image and smiled.
   "Yet the Legionnaire sees you as glorified garbage men—no more. Soon Commander, you will have the support of the entire Legion," Kane declared proudly.
                "If your mysterious friend can deliver what you've promised. I have my doubts. I'll handle it if you can't," Basilar stared him down through the golden eyespots on his helmet. He stood beside the viewport, staring at the night sky as he soaked in Halla's bright moonlight shimmering off his gold accents.
                "You'll come to see it my way. As for my friend, I assure you his abilities are... remarkable—not of this world," Kane spoke in a tone of amazement, almost into a hushed whisper by the last word.              "We'll see what your Infinite Empire can achieve. You promised me my home back, that's all I care about."
                "Do you even know what is we fight for, Commander? What is we dream for?" He let the question hang in the air. "Mankind basking under the light of every star in the universe. An empire that knows no end: our Infinite Empire."
                Basilar returned his gaze to Kane. "You sound like a fanatic."
                "Halla will be yours. The Paratores will return home once this is all over." Kane deactivated the evosheet and tucked it away in his pocket.
                Basilar was an intelligent man, as were most Paratores through all their training. He saw right through this man and the coup he assembled. But his years of experience made him practical; he would make sure he ended up on the winning side. The Legionnaire had declared it illegal to train new Paratores during his reign, and as insult to injury, banished them from Empria, crushing what spirit they had left. Many had turned to mercenary work in recent times—all had become desperate.              "We will accomplish great things together, Commander," Kane assured him.
                Basilar stood up. "Then we best get started." He adjusted the breathing apparatus on the front of his helmet. The golden shawl over his shoulder flew back as he turned to leave. A metallic hiss as the door slid shut, and silence reclaimed its rite.

 

Chapter 4: Emperion

        Cal waited on the landing platform attached to the side of the Starborn citadel. Quite some time it had been since he fully suited up in his uniform. He stretched his fingers under the lightweight armored gloves and closed them into a fist, repeating the motions several times to test his dexterity. The armored suit was the traditional Legionary color scheme of white with gold accents. A sleek, streamlined design with small shoulder pads and a rather tactical looking helmet outfitted with a tinted black visor. And of course, he never left home without a trustworthy pair of Grav boots strapped to his feet. For Cal, it only took one near death experience before he learned never to be caught without them. He held the helmet under his arm and gazed out at the breath-taking sight before him. All of Emperion could be seen from the Citadel, and few spots had a better vantage. From here, he could see comets racing down the crowded city streets and the various Humans, Gawns, and Mechanics that all went about their daily routine. The bustle of a thriving metropolis. Spanning along the horizon, the impressive scale of one of Empria's skybridges shined in the distance, cementing the various islands scattered across the planet's rich ocean into one prosperous community. Comets and wayward travelers alike ventured up the grand structures to make their way towards another isle, though none more populated than that of Emperion.
   The building adjacent, just across the open city square, was EVO Corporation's headquarters. A proudly standing dome with EVO branded across its side, declared its significance to all who passed by. And many passed by indeed. The building opened itself up to tours, eager to display its marvels to the system. School children received the presentation on the history of knowledge throughout the Legion, and how Evo made it all possible. Further off, Cal could make out the Legionary Council building. An exquisite, white museum that loomed over its neighbors, rivaled only in Emperion by the proudly standing Citadel. Starships came in and docked onto its surrounding landing pads. No doubt another meeting was being held in the council chambers. But the other ships were what more appropriately caught Cal's eye, the ones that went off to the trading and manufactory branch of the city known locally as the Gawn district. Littered in machinery and every variety of metal salvage, the sector was a scrap heap full of hidden gems. Naturally, it was not as aesthetically pleasing as the high towers and palaces above, and so it was buried in the under levels of the vast city. Occasional smog could be seen rising from the numerous factories, coming into view from the upper levels. Cal had been tasked with performing several security sweeps through the district in his years with the Chromarians. Plenty of the Gawn's ambitious creations were revealed to his eyes during these routine patrols, but never did anything dangerous turn up. They were a peaceful people. Though cleverness would always be their deadly trait. The Gawn lived in the shadow of humanity. Servitude was simply their way of life. Self-desired slavery, but Humans refrained from such repugnant labels. Throughout Gawn history, they had developed no method of attaining survival or life satisfaction other than working for others. Their overwhelming desire for a master led them right into the Legionary system, where they have lived among the Humans ever since. Mankind originally highly underestimated these people, believing their life of obedience must have rendered them helpless. But their unparalleled intelligence has since proven their merit across the span of time.
   And as soon as Humans realized the potential of the Gawn mind, they moved to subjugate it. Laws passed forbidding the Gawn to rise up, to question the working of a Human, anything that might elevate their stature. Humans sought to control the Gawn, and they certainly made it easy for them. There were no revolts, no violent rebellions. The Gawn merely nodded and went back to work. Cal often wondered if they even found time for sleep; although he knew deep down their perfectionism would lead them to sleep walk right to their workshops.

             Small, innocent looking creatures—a naturally subordinate race with their unpretentious ways. Their mostly white and grayish skin stood in contrast to their large, beady black eyes. Short tentacle-like structures hung from the back of their heads, flowing down like braids of hair. Their tiny, clawed hands and feet were extraordinarily nimble, capable of operating on the most intricate of machinery. Breakthroughs in space travel, infrastructure, military weapons and equipment all would have been impossible without their technological genius and imagination.
   Yet their greatest achievement to date has been the production of the Mechanics. The Gawn became so proficient at technological engineering that they created a being that could provide the same services to Humans they had for so long; likely so they themselves would be able to commit more time to their growingly complex inventions. These robotic beings were little more than bipedal tin cans when the concept was first developed. However, their evolution progressed at an alarming rate. Mechanics primarily functioned as basic servants, and slowly have begun to assume more advanced roles such as translators for venturing diplomats. At long last, this made diplomacy feasible if nothing else. Even if few Legionites would prefer it. Seemed as if every time Cal looked back, a new advancement in the mechanic design, a new aspect of their coding that allowed them to achieve more impressive feats was revealed. The mechanics were rapidly becoming more intelligent—more cunning. Cal feared it only a matter of time before these creations improved their design themselves. That would certainly be the end, Cal thought. Perhaps he merely read a few too many evosheets about machines overthrowing humanity than was good for him in his younger years. Perhaps, but it would never sit right with him. Cal turned his attention to the door at his back. Rianare Mara, followed in tow by Ben Rook, a fellow Chromarian guard, walked towards him. Rook was a fresh recruit, having only graduated from training at the academy several months prior.
 "Father told me I'll be accompanying him on his visit to Luxarus," Mara said, wearing a perky smile. "Never mentioned this to me, Mara. You gonna make me double check?" Cal replied, crossing his arms.  "For once, she's telling the truth. Listened to her spend all morning trying to convince the Legionnaire," Rook informed him.
 Mara brushed her hair with a face of pure satisfaction, content she had won this dispute. Cal merely shook his head, rolling his eyes as he did. Mara proceeded across the landing pad and up the ramp into the docked starship. An advanced class diplomatic cruiser outlined in high durability white paneling—perfect for protecting valuable personal—and equipped with a powerful Grav engine enabled for interplanetary travel. "Been to Luxarus before, Rook?"
 Rook chuckled. "Now why would I want to do that? Galaxy only goes down from here."
 "Oh really? And why's that?"
 "There's a reason the greatest army the galaxy has ever known came to conquer this planet. And there's a reason the natives were sent to Luxarus."
 "Alright Rook, I get it. You don't like where I come from."
 Rook turned to him, his chin cocked upward, his brow furrowed. "What I don't like, is a sandsquatter who doesn't know his place. Legionnaire's always had a soft spot for you."
   "There's a whole galaxy out there." Cal motioned to the sky. "Gotta see a little more of it. Maybe then you won't be so narrow minded."
 "Let's just stick to the job... Captain." 

Rook paced away, taking his post on the opposite end of the platform. Cal shook his head. The rear door opened again, this time with the rest of the Legionnaire's escort. The Legionnaire walked across the platform, joined by more than his regular guards. Another man walked beside him; clearly a politician by the sight of his formal attire and blonde hair parted neatly on one side.
 "Cal, I'd like you to meet Councilman Auger Kane," the Legionnaire motioned to them both in a sign of introduction. Kane extended his hand to Cal. "It's a pleasure to finally make your acquaintance. I don't believe we've ever been properly introduced."
 Cal returned his hand with a firm grip and met his gaze. "No, don't believe we have." "I've heard many stories of the great Cal Cabor. They say you were but an orphan roaming the streets of Luxarus—that you gave yourself your own name." He took a brief pause as if to allow him to catch up. "But I'm sure Luxarans always love their talk and childish rumors."
   Cal's gaze had turned into a stare, noting the way this man met his eyes, as if a challenge. Yet Kane had been made famous for his charismatic speeches and good looks. He was a rising star in the Legionary council, with ever growing popularity among the people of the Capital. After only serving two terms on the council, he cemented his role as one of the leading voices of the administrative body, and had undeniably wasted no time in taking advantage of his newfound authority. "And some Legionites talk too much," Cal replied with a hint of malice.
 Kane laughed softly. "That they do. With all your years on Luxarus, the Terra mining riots must have been hard on you. I could only imagine."
 "Was a bit before my time actually." Cal's tone was flat and uninterested.
 "Ah yes, I suppose it would be."
 Cal turned away, signifying the determined end of their exchange. The Legionnaire felt the tension and took swift action to reconcile, if not mitigate.
   "Let's get our flight underway, gentlemen," the Legionnaire announced.
 They proceeded up the starship ramp as it slowly rose, closing behind them with a hiss of steam. Cal walked into the main cabin where Mara had already made herself perfectly at home. She sat there on the L-shaped bench tucked in the corner of the room, scrolling through an evosheet on the table in front of her. The words and images projected themselves slightly off the thin, holographic laser film extending out of the circular metallic tube like an ancient scroll. The rich green glow of evo flowing from the device was unmistakable. Cal took a seat right next to her, while the Legionnaire led Kane down the hallway towards the conference room at the other end. The engines of the ship rumbled the metal floor. Thrusters engaged, pushing them off the landing platform. They soared through the clouds of Empria higher into the atmosphere until only the cold, darkness of space surrounded them. They were finally on their way to Luxarus. "What are you reading there?" Cal inquired. "I'd like to know more about the different species of the Nebulous system. I don't plan on getting beat up by a Mulvain again. Have you ever seen a real one?" "Never been to Karkken, but I've seen a few. Mulvain occasionally join up with smuggling crews. I'd spot them roaming through the towns on Luxarus." Cal thought of the way the monsters towered over you; the shortest no less than seven feet tall. Their sullen colored bodies seemed to be shaped of pure muscle, with massive shoulders and arms covered in smooth, leathery scales. The Mulvain's colossal, round heads appeared like a thick shell with a short neck separating from their shoulders. Their mouths sported short mandibles that flared out when enraged, only adding to their intimidating demeanor.

The Mulvain of course were a notorious warrior race built on the foundations of strength and honor; such values coursed fiercely through their veins. Their thick, heavy plated armor made them ready for combat at any moment. Everything down to their mating and reproduction revolved around the concept of dominance over others. Hermaphroditic organisms by nature, the Mulvain courtship rituals were conducted through the performance of a duel. Such head to head battles often raged on for ages, with both parties drawing blood before it was over. The victor of the ceremonial fight assumed the dominant role of the male, and the reproductive process would proceed. Mulvain society divided up into distinct clans on their world of Karkken, often clashing in typical fashion. The Mulvain had a constant power struggle between the conflicting clans; always were those more powerful, more hungry. Each clan chose its own leader, honored with the title of Warlord, and a territory they resided over. Mulvain wore their clan membership proudly, displaying their clan symbol as war paint on their armored suits. While Warlords had the clan insignia marked onto their forehead like a crown for all others to revere. For many Mulvain, the symbol of their enemy clan would be the very last sight they would ever see. These aliens were indisputably a product of their surroundings. Their planet was likely only suitable to a people such as them, with the majority of the surface being nothing more than a desolate rock. They became the only ones capable of surviving in such a harsh, icy wasteland, and so little was known to outsiders of just what occurred over on Karkken. "How did the Mulvain get past the shield wall?" Mara replied, visibly rising off the edge of her seat.
 "There've been rumors of a secret backdoor smugglers found through the shield. Somehow they bypass the docking gates and slide right in and out as they please." "Why would the Mulvain work with smugglers? Seems beneath the skill set of such proud warriors like them."
 "Well they might be a little different than us, but they still love money. Carth, everyone does." He looked apologetic as his last words simply slid out. "Anyone would be willing to pay quite a few Rions for a Mulvain bodyguard helping out with their shipments."         The shield wall, a colossal laser film stretched out to encompass the whole of the Legionary system in a bubble of blue energy. The method of its creation and power source had been largely kept secret throughout the Legion. Cal had heard the shield drew power from the bright white sun that stood at the center of the solar system—that the souls of the dead drifted into its orbit. A dozen theories had been presented as old tales, each seemingly less plausible than the last.
   Constructed centuries ago, even the Legionnaire could not speak definitively of how it came to be. All Cal knew for sure was the Legion relied on it to keep their borders safe from any alien intruders. The only known way for starships and freighters to pass through the shield wall was by one of the highly guarded docking gates. Of course, that required all the necessary docking codes and licensing, so very few Legionites ever ventured beyond the shield's protective enclosure. In many ways, as time went on, Cal felt more and more like the shield wall was confining them in rather than keeping the dangers out. "Perhaps I should get a Mulvain of my own then. He'd probably do a better job than you," Mara mocked.
   Cal laughed. "In your dreams, kid." The small maintenance hatch leading to the inner workings of the ship slid open. A tiny Gawn emerged from the narrow passage and nodded a friendly hello. "Everything is still in perfect working order. Not to worry, sir," The Gawn technician informed.
   "Glad to hear it."
   "We will be arriving to Luxarus momentarily, sir."
   "Then I'll go inform the Legionnaire." The Gawn scurried away towards the cockpit, disappearing behind the door as it shut behind him. Cal stood up and smiled to Mara, proceeding down the hallway toward the other end of the ship. As he came closer, he overheard two voices—Kane and the Legionnaire he identified as the conference room door neared. The escalation in tone during the exchange, the shouting and snapping, told him to wait before walking in. This was an argument he might want to survey. "... action must be taken. Hiding behind our shield wall has allowed us to amass strength, but continuing to do so would only make us appear cowardly," Kane's voice came through.
   "The Mulvain only just ended their own civil war. They're no threat to us."
   "Precisely why we should strike now. Before they do." "We've no reason to believe the Mulvain would attack. And even their dreadnoughts could never breach our shield." "Your majesty, that is a possibility I do not wish to consider."
   "Regardless Kane, Karkken is of no use to the Legion. A preemptive strike against the Mulvain would gain us nothing. They might yet prove to be an ally under this new leader of theirs."
   "Karkken could be the answer to our Grav problem. Reports have shown colyne can be mined from that barren rock. The planet itself is in bad enough condition. I doubt mining could make it any worse." He paused, as if unsure he should disclose the knowledge. "The council has been pressured by the EVO Corporation. They have a sizeable investment in our colyne stockpiles."
   "Then perhaps we can open negotiations with this Mont'gar—see if we can't strike a mining deal. But carth if I'm going to let the EVO Corporation tell me what to do."
   "The Mulvain are not the kind of business partners we want. And it is imperative that we keep EVO happy. I beg you to reconsider..." Deciding he had heard enough, Cal punched the button on the wall, sliding the door open. Kane and the Legionnaire sat across from each other at the long table. The room appeared like a mobile war room. Holographic maps lined the walls, evosheets spread across the table. All the tools needed for true business to be discussed. "We're about to descend onto Luxarus," Cal notified the Legionnaire.
   Kane sat there, hunched over with a furrowed brow. Cal had heard enough to know he did not appreciate where Kane was venturing with his ideas. War was the last thing the Legion needed right now. "Thank you, Cal. We'll be ready to leave shortly."
   Cal nodded, and looked back at Kane once more. He saw something different now—remorse. Kane swallowed a knot in his throat like he had dreamt the most awful thought imaginable. He met Cal's gaze, then turned away. 

 

Chapter 5: Grav

        The starship tore through the atmosphere and sailed above the hustling world below. Luxarus had its own form of beauty to those trained to see it—the majority of the planet covered in tall grassy plains with the occasional tree standing out amongst the sea of yellow blades. Dense towns and mining sites appeared like islands across the grassy landscape. Mining largely occurred in the mountain ranges, hallowing out the insides as they burned through the rock in search of treasure. Machines rolled in to the grasslands as soon as a reading registered on their minegraphs, calibrated to identify highly concentrated areas of colyne deposits. Geysers of black soot pumped out of the mining equipment, blanketing the grounds in ashen dust as life fled the landscape, draining the color from whatever it touched. But nothing would stop their pursuit. More times than Cal could count, he was forced to pack up and leave his town when the mining equipment arrived too close. Always so profoundly sad the way the ash rained down and buried the little beauty left; like the coffin of a loved one lowering into the dirt. All he could do was turn and walk away. Their ship neared Ivar, the major city of Luxarus, a place he had not been in a very long time. As they came closer, passing the many grey buildings within the walled enclosure of the city, Cal spotted the Governor's estate. Despite standing much more significant than its neighboring structures, the estate paled in comparison to the palaces of Empria. They hovered over the landing platform as the pilot engaged the landing gear and slowly touched down onto the surface. The ramp lowered from the ship in front of Governor Serk and the rest of his party awaiting the arrival of the Legionnaire. The Governor himself was a short and rather round man—all together not much to behold. He had been appointed by the Legionnaire several years ago in hopes he would find a way to increase the colyne production on Luxarus. So far, he was performing below the Legion's constantly expanding expectations. Cal slid on his helmet with a click into the neckpiece of his suit. The visor booted up, displaying a detailed analysis of his environment on the top of his visual display. Temperature, pH levels, radioactivity, and other scientific readings filtered through his monitor from the evo flow. His visor analyzed the world the way an advanced mechanic might, interacting through a virtual overlay of processed evo influx. He tapped the holographic display of the evopatch mounted on his wrist and adjusted the amount of readouts.      Cal threw his plasmer rifle onto his back and descended the ramp. Rook stormed ahead, unwilling to wait for procedure. The rest of the passengers followed down the ramp behind him and the other guards. Cal first took note of the people that accompanied the Governor on the platform. His wife at his side appeared far too beautiful to be with a man such as Serk. Attracted to the wealth and power Cal reasoned. But he couldn't help himself from wondering what the story was there.
    The Legionnaire made his way across to the Governor. Serk extended his hand in formal greeting. But the Legionnaire did not seem interested in formalities. "Governor Serk, it's been quite some time. I trust you have you full report prepared for me."
 "Your majesty." The Governor bowed. "We have been eagerly anticipating your arrival."
 "Then let us proceed." The Governor motioned to the door leading to the estate he called home, ushering everyone inside. They made their way to a grand hall, an exquisite painted glass ceiling spanning its length. Expensive rugs covered the floor and artwork hung on the walls so tasteless it must have cost a fortune. Far nicer than any place on Luxarus I ever knew, Cal thought. "It's not as elegant as your Starborn citadel I am sure," Governor Serk said. 

             Luxarans had long since resented the Legionites—ever since the war a millennium ago. They never stopped dreaming of their ancestral home, and how the Golden Legion had driven them from their beaches. When the war ended, the Legion erected their grand cities and castles, and the Emprian natives were forced off to Luxarus. One would think all these generations later, such ancient history would no longer matter, but Luxarans had yet to outlive the 'sandsquatter' slurs. The Legionnaire looked around at the hall with a silence that stretched out the length of time ever more. He broke his long pause with a desire to dive right into matters of business. "As you know, this isn't a social visit. I've come to discuss Luxarus' colyne production."
 The Governor cleared his throat. "We are doing all we can to continue to increase our yield. Mining can only be done so quickly without—"
 "If I may interject," Kane began, stepping forward. "Now is not the time for excuses. Only results. So I ask—"
 "We're doing all we can with the amount of pressure the Legion has forced upon us. Our numbers haven't been poor by any means," Serk challenged.
   Kane stared him down. "Can you increase the production or not... Governor?" The Legionnaire eyed Kane carefully. Serk paused, his eyes drifted down as he swallowed, never meeting the Councilman's gaze.
   "Enough," the Legionnaire declared. "Let us continue your tour."
 For once, Cal was glad his face was hidden beneath his helmet, for he doubted in his ability to mask his contempt for the business being discussed. More colyne coming out of the ground meant more accidents, more deaths, and more of the planet being converted into an ashen graveyard. Governor Serk waved them with his hand. "Yes, venture now to our Grav research facility. I think you'll be pleased with what we are developing through colyne refinement." Serk led them down the hall to the back of the estate and outside onto the decorated porch. A beautiful view of the nicely kept garden of various plants awaited them. Off to the side, two comets were parked, ready to deliver them to the research facility the Governor boasted about. Cal sat himself down in the front of the vehicle. No roof, and a single powerful Grav engine featured in the rear—a lightweight shuttle model. Mara nudged the other Chromarians out of the way to secure her spot next to Cal. She seemed rather excited to be taking a tour through what was to her, a foreign place. Cal nodded in acknowledgement and assurance to the Legionnaire seated in the other comet. He noted how Kane placed himself beside the Legionnaire, prepared to whisper more ideas into his head no doubt. The Grav engines fired up and suspended the comets a few feet in the air. The driver hit the ignition and raced off down the road towards the research facility on the other end of the city. Each building they passed flooded Cal with all kinds of memories of his past life. He had lived in Ivar for several years, moving from place to place—wherever he could find those willing to provide asylum for a young boy. Luxarans looked after their own. "What kind of things do you think they'll show us?" Mara asked Cal. "Not sure. All the time I spent mining the stuff, I've hardly ever seen what they turn it into." "I imagine the possibilities could be quite endless."
 Cal looked at her with a smirk. "Well you have always been the creative one."
 The comets came to a stop at the front of the facility—an adorned complex outfitted with even more security than the Governor's estate. They filed out of the vehicles as the Governor led them up the steps to the front entrance. The guard beside the door looked up from his daydream. His eyes shot open as he realized who was before him. His hands fidgeted, rushing to let them into the facility. The Legionnaire gave a plain smile as he passed. 

After breezing through the main lobby and down a long corridor, the feeling of sterility became noticeable in the environment. Everything appeared shrouded in white and metallic colors with bright light shining off the lastubes lined along the halls. Workers were quiet and solitary, all seemingly in a rush to their next destination. Cal's head traced their movements, curious where they might lead. Finally, they came to a secured door at the end of the hallway. A Gawn dressed in a white lab coat stood waiting for them. He continued to straighten his coat, pulling down on the sides, and brushing back the tendrils on his head. "This is Gren, our chief scientist," Governor Serk introduced. "Honor to meet you, your majesty. I trust you will be impressed by all we're achieving here," Gren said, shaking the Legionnaire's hand with overwhelming enthusiasm. The corner of his mouth twitched as he struggled to meet the Legionnaire's eye. "I am eager for you to show me."
 Gren punched a code into the keypad, the light flashed green and they continued on into the next room. It was unlike anything they had ever seen before, a vast laboratory housing a massive containment field in the center of the room. The containment device appeared as a hexagonal pedestal with a laser film dome blanketing the strange phenomenon. The barrier remained the only force holding back the powerful gravity vortex pulsing inside with that unmistakable hue—an orb of blue energy, radiating out like solar flares from a hot star. The force of the vortex sucked objects in and rotated them around like a planetary orbit.
   "It's... brilliant." Kane's face almost pressed right up to the barrier as he marveled at its flickering energy field.
   Cal struggled to make sense of the alien machinery all around him. Limitless applications danced in his mind, and limitless concerns. He had seen how Grav could produce its own gravity, allowing him to walk on walls with his Grav boots. He had seen how it allowed comets to levitate off the ground or let people walk unhindered aboard a starship out in space. But this was something else entirely; looking at this gravity vortex in front of him, he knew this technology was being groomed for weaponization.
 "This right here is the beginning of our Grav reactor. The energy created from the vortex's gravity field can power the entire facility for us to accomplish so much more." Gren paused while they continued to examine the reactor. "Come now. We've prepared a wonderful presentation for our esteemed guests."
 Gren took them further down the laboratory walkway into another room resembling a firing range. Targets lined up at the end of a long empty corridor. Three tables in front contained strange devices with which none of them were familiar. Cal stepped closer to one of the tables and inspected the object lying there, still hesitant to touch. Gren came up next to him. "They are perfectly safe to pick up I assure you. These are the devices that passed our preliminary testing stages." Gren pointed to the metallic four-pointed star on the table, "This here is a Grav star. Try throwing it towards one of the targets. It's a crafty little thing."
 Cal picked up the Grav star and felt its smooth edges. Warmth radiated at his touch, emanating from the blue sphere at its core housing the Grav. He felt a bit of a resistance field as he moved his fingers towards the sphere, like a magnetic repulsion. Cal took aim out at the targets down the range. Everyone watched him now. The star sailed off his fingertips and darted toward the targets. A swift wisp in the air sounded as the aerodynamic disk traveled to its mark. The star hit the target dead on, shattering on impact and releasing the Grav energy vortex contained within. Just like the one they had seen moments earlier behind the display. But watching this one form right before their eyes... truly mesmerizing.

Oh I like that, Cal thought. "Someone like me could get into a lot of trouble with a thing like that," Mara said with a hint of devious sarcasm. They all jerked their heads toward her. "What? I made a joke. Occasionally people even laugh at them."
 "Not today, sweetheart," the Legionnaire dismissed her. She crossed her arms in a huff, moving away.
 Gren filled the silence with the continuation of his lecture. "Any non-massive objects will be pulled into the vortex, making it highly difficult to escape its grasp." "Enough of these could render an army completely inert," the Legionnaire said in a state of disbelief. "Then I think you'll be very interested in our main project here. It still has much progress to be made, but our prototype is rather promising," Gren told as he motioned for them to follow down another hall into a new laboratory. Several Gawn scientists were spread across the room monitoring various machines. An engineer worked on a table welding together parts with his plasmer torch. The metal burned bright orange as the joints liquefied into one. Gren led them in front of a large, tubular glass enclosure. A metal capsule, about the size of one of their heads, suspended inside. The cylinder emitted that same undistinguishable blue glow.
 "We call it the Gravity Well," Gren declared. "When installed into the harness our engineers are working on over here..." He pointed to the welder. "... it will bless the user with a near limitless supply of Grav energy. They can generate and manipulate gravitational fields at will."
 Cal observed the protected capsule with a stunned silence that all seemed to share. Gren stood there rubbing and intertwining his fingers as he eagerly awaited a reaction from the Legionnaire.
   "The ultimate evolution of the Grav technology," Kane said. After a short pause, "But what might happen to man when they have the power of planets?" the Legionnaire questioned. Cal imagined the power this would place in the hands of an individual and wondered how they might wield it. A person with the ability to summon gravity vortexes from their fingertips surely would not be humbled by the possibilities. The technology would spread and change the society he knew. He imagined still who would contract this gift. Corruption would find its way to twist the technology eventually. The disease had no bounds. Cal dreamt of a battlefield where no shots were fired. Men marched forward, fueled by their Grav suits, capable of superhuman action. Anyone who dared challenge these soldiers without a Gravity Well were dragged into the empowering blue masses. A barren landscape with everything collected into independently orbiting systems of debris would be all that remained. Yet Mara's reaction seemed a great departure from Cal and her father's. Her eyes lit up with amazement as she gazed at the glowing capsule. She had absorbed Gren's words, thinking of the potential energy housed right out of her reach. Mara found herself dreaming of all the fantastic feats such a device would be capable of. It was the most beautiful object she had ever seen. I could do anything, she thought. "I assure you your majesty, the Gravity Well still has far to go before it would be considered for use. It currently has the tendency to overload which leads to... an explosion," Gren told. "Well... you have given me much to consider." The Legionnaire's minimal response was noted by all. He needed adequate time to weigh this new technology. He needed time away. "I thank you for the tour. Continue your good work." The Legionnaire extended courtesy to Gren and the other scientists and made his way to the door. Cal noticed his haste toward the exit, imagining it had arisen only from a great deal of concern. The new technology had the potential for disastrous applications. Once the Grav devices were perfected, this entirely new class of weapon would scatter across the Legionary system like wildfire. Though Cal could not refrain from some degree of excitement at the prospect. If the Mulvain got their hands on technology like that... The Legionnaire pondered.
   "More of a show than you were expecting? We can return to my estate now if you wish," the Governor offered. "Yes, I think I've seen enough for today," the Legionnaire said.
   Once back at the entrance of the facility, they made way towards the comets parked where they had left them. Filing into the vehicles one by one, there was a notable silence between them, as if all deep in thought. "Actually your majesty, I think I'll see the city a bit more if that's alright," Kane said.
   "Yes of course," the Legionnaire replied, hardly listening to the words. "Rook, stay with Councilman Kane and see he makes it back to the Governor's estate safely," Cal ordered. "Gladly," Rook replied. He nodded obediently and moved to Kane's side. The comets launched off down the road, leaving Kane and the research facility distantly in the past. Kane watched them disappear behind the city streets, staring like one would during the goodbye to an old friend. Goodbyes were never easy.

 

Chapter 6: The Phantom Shadow

        When the comets arrived back at the Governor's estate it was already dusk. The colors of the world were washed out by the coming of night. A time when all the bleak shades of grey on Luxarus seemed more natural, like it was merely a result of the absent light. Mara hopped out of the comet with a joyous leap, crunching the soil beneath her boots as she landed. The rest of the party followed suit through the garden and into the estate.
 The Legionnaire pulled Cal aside. "You and I have a lot to discuss, Cal. This visit has entailed more revelations than I would have cared for." "I think the feeling of surprise hasn't been lost on anyone." "Whether these new gravity devices are mass produced or not, we know for certain our Grav dependency is only going to increase."
 "With all due respect your majesty, if we keep pulling colyne out of the ground at this rate, there'll be nothing left on Luxarus. Riots will return." "That's why we begin focus on other colyne sources— take some stress off the mining operation here." "You had something in mind?"
 "There've been reports Karkken has trace amounts of colyne deep beneath its surface. We can take minegraphs and scour the entire planet."
 "Don't imagine the big scaly giants would take very kindly to that."
 "That's why I want you to go to Karkken and speak on my behalf—establish an alliance."
 Cal's eyes widened. The Legionary ambassadors had long been charged with such duties. It was the ambassadors that helped bring the Gawn into the Legionary fold, establishing rules and terms for how their two people could thrive together. But negotiating with a race as docile as the Gawn was undeniably different from the venomous warriors of the Mulvain, and Cal was no diplomat by any means.
   "I fear my enemies are higher up than I anticipated," the Legionnaire said with a shake of his head, hand pressed to his temple. "Sir..." Cal hesitated. "If I may speak freely."
   "Always."
   "Never make decisions out of fear. These jackals... they can smell it."
 "I was working on this strategic angle long before the Infinite Empire. They merely accelerated the need."
   Cal thought again of his request. "Wouldn't this be a job for your ambassadors?"
 "Normally yes, but we both know the Mulvain are a special case. They will never respect any ambassador I send. But they may respect you, Cal." "May being the operative word there."
   The Legionnaire waited a moment to let Cal compose his feelings. He placed his hand upon Cal's shoulder and locked his eyes with a soft smile. "You're the best of us. Always have been."
   Cal could not help but return his warm admiration. "I'll do whatever it takes." And the Legionnaire knew he meant it. Cal could devise no more just course of action, no method of gratitude other than to continue to make the Legionnaire proud. He had been given the opportunity to carry the Legion into a new age. An alliance with the Mulvain and a brand-new influx of colyne could have a dramatic effect on their prosperity moving forward. Cal was prepared to make his dream of a greater Legion come to be. "Let's head back. The Governor gathered everyone in the dining hall. Mara is probably torturing the poor man without us right now," the Legionnaire joked. 

Cal laughed with him and they ventured down the hallway to the towering set of doors at the end. The room was painted an elegant white with several tall marble columns running down the length of the room. A dining table stretched down the middle with a royal feast already laid out. Mechanic servants waited around the table, bringing food and drinks and taking dishes away to the kitchen. The Legionnaire's guards waited at their posts, appearing as rigid as the marble columns they stood behind. Cal took his place at the column furthest from the door near the Legionnaire. One of the mechanics offered to take the Legionnaire's cloak as he went to sit, and draped it over the back of the grand chair. Mara was seated right next to her father, growing impatient with the prospect of eating. At the other head of the table sat the Governor and his wife.
   "Will councilman Kane not be joining us?" the Governor asked across the table. "No, I believe he will be catching up with us shortly," the Legionnaire replied. "Yes, I'm sure he's marking up all the little changes he would make to my city."
   The Legionnaire stared him down. Their eyes met. He merely stuffed a serving of food into his mouth and looked away. Cal removed his helmet and placed it on the servant's cart next to him. Instantly he felt more at ease. One of the Chromarians walked to the set of doors and swung it open, taking his post outside. As the door slowly closed, Cal spied a man through the crack. He stood in his ivory shaded armor with streaks of gold. The golden shawl draped over his shoulder told Cal all he needed to know. Paratore.
   Cal felt a sudden peculiarity in the air. His heart beat faster. A cold bead of sweat dripped across his brow. He became conscious of a cool breeze on his face that softly blew the hairs at the back of his neck. Something was not right. Cal turned to face the rear window. His eyes deceived him as a trail of black mist morphed into a hand. Like a rag doll, he was thrown across the table into one of the columns. Cal hit the pillar with enough force to crack it down the middle. Dazed and disorientated, he laid on the cold floor. Cal watched in horror as the mist pinged around the room materializing into the shape of a man before his eyes. But no man moved liked this, without mercy or a mortal form. It was a monster.
    Every guard was executed sequence. The shadow moved effortlessly through the men as if swimming through water, only stopping to deliver a swift fatal blow before his next stroke. The figure seemed to disappear and reappear at will. Only an emission of black vapor left in his wake. Cal struggled onto his feet and realized his plasmer had been thrown clear across the room. The guests at the table sat there in a state of stunned panic. The Governor's wife ran for the doors. The hulking figure appeared behind her like a spirit from the void. His blade sunk deep into her back, emitting smoke as it burned ice cold through her abdomen. She dropped to the ground and the figure remained there for a moment, giving them their first real examination. His face was hidden beneath a dark hood, but his eyes glowed a bright yellow fury. The claws located on his dark, fur covered hands rested calmly at his sides. He examined them like cattle. The blade the figure carried hung from a device mounted on his wrist that retracted on command. The talon formed out of thin air, growing like an icicle into the shape of a dagger, menacing before his eyes. It burned a bright white that crackled in the light. Smoke poured off the thick edges as if crafted from dry ice. It seemed to draw out all heat from the surrounding air like nothing Cal had ever seen.
   The beast sent out a loud roar as he advanced, dematerializing into mist again. He reappeared an instant later, striking down the Governor so he might join his wife. The figure danced around the room as a trail of smoke, eviscerating anything that moved. His blade cut clean through one of the mechanic servants, spilling out the gears and moving parts from his machine insides like living organs. The sound of each metal piece hitting the ground was deafening in the murderous scene. 

Cal made a dash for his plasmer across the way while Mara ducked under the table. He slid onto the ground and snatched the rifle, quickly raising to the firing position. The figure shuttered in a frenzy so erratic Cal couldn't get a clear shot. He performed a hopeful blind fire that immediately met contact with the wall. The mist appeared in front of him and swatted his rifle away—an effort to toy with him further. Cal rose back up on his feet just in time to witness the tragedy as it unfolded. The shadow reformed, looking right into the Legionnaire's eyes as the white glow of the blade disappeared into his chest. The hooded monster loomed over the Legionnaire like a muscular wall, gripping his shoulder as the peculiar blade exited his body. The monster misted away once again. The Legionnaire let out a dying gasp as he fell back. Cal rushed to the Legionnaire's side. He collapsed into Cal's arms.
   "Cade, it's... it's gonna be—" Cal couldn't find the words. He helplessly padded the Legionnaire's chest as if the frozen wound could be healed.
   The Legionnaire's head turned towards Cal, his final effort. "Save the girl," the Legionnaire whispered. And the last bit of life faded from his eyes. A pain shot through Cal's chest. "No no." He held the Legionnaire's head, desperately trying to shake him awake. "No!"
   Mara screamed as a claw dragged her out from under the table. Her fingers clung to the marble in vain as if it were life itself.
   Mara, it rang in Cal's head like a bell. He lowered the Legionnaire to the ground and stood up to face the creature.
   The figure made his presence known as he stood opposite Cal. He held Mara in his grasp, arm wrapped around her in a guarded manner as if to stake his claim of the girl. She appeared miniature by comparison. A look of pure dread loomed in her eyes. The hooded monster held his luminescent blade against her throat mere molecules from her skin. She felt the surge of cold radiating off and feared her skin would crackle and freeze if touched. Mara looked to Cal with a pleading face. Paralyzing uncertainty left Cal in a passive stance. The figure could teleport himself at any moment, and now he had Mara an inch from her demise. Cal could only watch in his disorientated state as those yellow eyes burned their image into his brain. In a flash, the figure and Mara were gone, leaving an emission of black mist out the open window. "Mara!" he screamed after them. At the sound of his cry, Commander Basilar, surrounded by a group of Paratores, burst through the dining hall doors. Their plasmers instantly raised at the sight of the horrific scene. Basilar stood at the center of the pack, ordering the guards around with the wave of his hand as they engulfed the hall. Without any means of explanation, Cal sat crouched in the middle of the room attempting to return himself from the feelings of loss and insanity that had overcome him. Cal slowly moved his hand toward the plasmer pistol stowed away in its holster. The sound of plasmers heating up rang behind his head.
   "I wouldn't," Basilar said sternly through his helmet. Cal glared up at the Paratore and attempted to meet his gaze through the golden lenses. A tremor of rage washed over Cal's face as he stared Basilar down. The Paratore replied with the same calm and collected demeanor he always carried himself with, his plasmer never wavering from the spot between Cal's eyes. Cal's fingers wrapped around the handle, whipping his pistol up and parallel against his hip. Basilar reacted to Cal's quickdraw in the blink of an eye, dashing to the side with a thrust of the Gravjet stowed on his back. Cal fired a speedy plasmer bolt from his pistol, grazing the side of Basilar's helm. Sparks flew out from the armored helmet as he narrowly avoided disaster. A deep black scorch mark singed across the white plating and nanites moved in to attempt to repair the damage. Basilar winced in pain, grasping the side of his head briefly, and fired a shock wire from the launcher on the opposite wrist. The electrified cord wrapped around Cal's torso multiple times like dense spider silk. He fell to the ground as the shocks rippled through his nervous system, parting the plasmer from his grasp and rendering him immobile. Kane appeared in the doorway surrounded by a reinforcement of Rionaughts, lasguards already activated. Their shiny white armor bordered in chrome distinguished the common soldiers from the golden elite. Kane seemed to take a moment to marvel at the scene before him, from amazement or horror, one could not determine. As he revived from his state of pause, his voice erupted into a thunderous shout. "Seize the traitor!"
   Cal remained in his state of shock as the Rionaughts rushed toward him. The waves of electricity slowed, rendering him inert. But as the Rionaughts came down upon him, trying to lift him onto his feet, he protested once again. "It took Mara!" Cal yelled to no avail. He fought to get free of the entangled web, but his struggle only expedited the pain. The Rionaughts held him down as he fought against capture. "Mara!" he roared. Basilar clocked him over the head with the butt of his plasmer and Cal went down onto the floor motionless. Blood dripped out from the fresh wound on his forehead. He laid there on the ground, bloody and broken, as the Rionaughts secured his arms fully behind his back.
   Basilar turned away once Cal's cries ceased. The drape over his shoulder blew back as he proceeded to exit the dining hall. The implant in his head sparked out from his helmet, leaving a strange uncertainty inside him. Departure felt like a sudden urgency. Basilar disappeared past Kane through the set of twin doors. The rest of the Paratores quickly followed suit, fading into the night. Cal's vision compressed into the solitary vignette of Ben Rook—a wide grin on his face—standing over him. Maraaaa. Her name echoed softly through his mind before fading into black.

 

Chapter 7: The Ambassador

 Starships roared overhead, echoing throughout the homes of Emperion. Each ship carried more men offworld in a panicked frenzy. On any normal night, the loud rumbling of their engines would surely have startled Jasen awake in his bed. But tonight, he would get no sleep regardless—that he knew. Jasen was wide awake, just feeling the flow of time pass by. The uncertainty killed him inside. None of the public citizens had been made aware of the situation. But the anxiety was palpable in the air. Even as a Legionary ambassador, he had not been informed of the circumstances at hand. With all the recent debates about colyne mining and the worries of the Legion's increasing Grav demand, troubles on Luxarus seemed a safe bet. More mining riots perhaps?
 As Jasen came out onto the balcony of his royal apartment, the moonlight shimmered down. His pale face lit up and revealed his piercing blue eyes. He had short brown hair, slightly disheveled after rolling out of bed. He was dressed in his night clothes, fully prepared to retire for the night after a long day of dead-end political discussions. A couple years ago he had been appointed the sole ambassador to Canopen. Despite his young age, he was full of obvious intelligence the Legionnaire intended to make real use of.
   But Canopen itself was a lush jungle world most of the Legion had written off as a mere tourist attraction. The wildlife was fierce, full of beasts that had ruined every attempt to setup any permanent form of colonization. The jungle was so dense with an abundance of plant life that clearing space for settlements was highly time consuming and costly. Finally, after several failed attempts, the effort was abandoned all together. The planet was largely forgotten about, left to its own devices. Ambassador Dien, as was his official title, became an immediate proponent of furthering the attempts to bring Canopen into the rest of the Legion's fold. He himself had seen proof it was indeed inhabitable. A group of renegade Gawn, opponents of the Legion's Gawn civil rights restrictions, were discovered deep within the forest, rumored to live in grand wooden cities expanding through the treetops. Such a feat Jasen had never thought possible—he became determined to capture the image with his own optics. He found their existence there as a sign of hope and beauty, if technically still illegal. The Gawn had always been a clever and adaptive people, able to survive through nearly any circumstance. Humans had long tried to live on Canopen, but there were no records of any Human settlement surviving longer than a galactic year. After all the evosheets Jasen had read throughout his studies, he found little surprise that the Gawn were the ones to achieve success. The predominant of the Legion however, were not thrilled. A planet in which the Gawn could seemingly call their own, many Humans believed would spell the end of the Gawn's servitude, providing a safe haven for the Gawn to defy Legionary laws—their own private utopia. And with no masters on Canopen, there was ample time to assimilate into new mind sets. Perhaps even one that does not account for Humans. Jasen had suspected he may have been appointed to his position for the very reason of preventing this revolution. But he would take whatever circumstance presented to advance his career. He saw in Canopen a unique opportunity to learn about this mysterious and beautiful world still all but unexplored right in their backyard. These indigenous Gawn in the deep jungle were a subject Jasen wished to study in further detail. The secrets a society of free Gawn must hold excited him beyond normal comprehension. At heart he was, and always would be, a scholar, eager to learn more and expand the depths of his mind. Not born into royalty, but his family was certainly one of great wealth. Throughout his childhood, he was close friends with none other than Auger Kane, as they found themselves running in the same aristocratic circles. Together they were both able to attend the finest educational institutions Empria had to offer. Jasen and Kane were immediately recognized as remarkable prodigal students by their professors. 

But as the years went on, Kane's ambition grew to limitless heights, until eventually they drifted apart. Kane became so obsessed with his career path and goals for the Legion that he lost his friend along the way. Jasen never found a companion quite the same after that. Nor did he ever find that purpose Kane had seen so clearly for himself. Even so, he remembered when Kane was nothing more than a studious little boy with a head full of dreams.
   As Jasen amassed his education he became highly infatuated with the documented history of the galaxy. He sought to learn all there was about the various worlds and alien races that spanned the cosmos. Whenever available, he used Mem-stims that showed him firsthand the marvels of the universe. There were stims that revealed the death of a star as a starship passed by, a meteor crashing into the side of a planet, and the insides of the holy temples of Althea. He watched the Golden Legion first conquering Empria unfold before his very eyes. Such moments provided more than mere knowledge, they brought clarity. Without the power of Mem-stims, all those moments would be lost in time, like footprints in the desert sand. Jasen was one of the few scholars in the Legion's political circle that chose to validate the truths of the increasing disappearance of stars throughout the galaxy. He studied all the archives available in search of a proposable solution or even mild explanation. Most others regarded him insane for his quest. Some mockingly branded him the 'galaxy's savior', while others still chose to deny the facts entirely.
   Jasen became consumed by the history of Nebulas throughout the universe. The connection between the disappearance of stars and Nebulas was an easy one to make, but it had been overlooked by most scientists. Through all the updated star charts that he pioneered about, he found no evidence of the existence of any Nebulas besides the very one residing beyond the borders of their shield wall. It stood there dormant, perhaps the last of its kind. But in time, Jasen had exhausted his efforts and began to fear he was merely chasing myths. Jasen heard his apartment door slide open and two Rionaughts walked into the room. The Rionaughts had been stationed outside his door at the start of the unknown crisis, as was standard procedure during such times. He turned to face his guests, now standing in the middle of his bedroom. "Sir, Councilman Osad is here to see you. He says it's a matter of urgency," the Rionaught told the ambassador. "Let him in," Jasen ordered. The Rionaught nodded obediently and returned to the front door, letting the Councilman into the apartment. He was already fully dressed in his attire and wore a look of seriousness that masked any fatigue. Councilman Osad was likely the closest Jasen came to a friend these days. He was one of the senior members of the Legionary council and the few left with a reputation for true honorability. "Jasen, the Legionnaire is dead," he said bluntly. Jasen's eyes went wide. His heart sank a little beneath his chest as he absorbed the truth behind the statement. Jasen had an unspoken admiration for the Legionnaire, though he had never known him well. More than anything, he feared what this meant for the Legion. Surely this explained the sense of panic running rampant throughout the city. "How?" became the only intelligible response Jasen could muster. "I'm not sure. But I expect foul play."
   They were silent for a moment. Thoughts of all the recent dissent ran through his head. No leader, no matter how beloved, could run an empire without establishing an impressive rogue's gallery. He knew exactly who was responsible.
    "The Infinite Empire," Jasen said. "I fear so. There are rumors it was the Legionnaire's own Chromarian Captain."
   Jasen heard stories of the Captain of the Legionnaire's guard. Though he often found minimal proof of their validity one way or the other. The man seemed to be a ghost, having little record of his life before the day he came to Empria. Cal Cabor was unpopular throughout the political community for no reason other than his Luxaran heritage. Often wealthier Legionites referred to him as the Legionnaire's charity case. They did not wish for the descendants of Old Empria to acquire any ideas of their return. And after all that, the thought that Cal could betray the man who gave him the galaxy shook Jasen to his core. "Carth."
   The councilman raised his eyebrow at the vulgar language. Jasen felt slightly embarrassed by his lack of professionalism. He gestured an apologetic motion, but the councilman did not appear hung up on the occurrence, quickly glossing over and continuing the news. "The culprit is in custody, but the Rianare is still missing," the Councilman said. "She's been taken?"
   "Half the Legion is searching for her."
   "Then what happens now?"
   "This has to be the Infinite Empire's grab for power. Most of the council has gone to their side. The EVO Corporation sees this as a financial gain—there's little left I can do." Councilman Osad dipped his head down, a look of defeat Jasen could not help but sympathize with. Whether they liked it or not, the coup seemed to already be complete. Jasen was never much of a fighter, nor was he one for confrontation.  He saw no move forward other than business as usual.
   "We'll keep in contact. For now, just don't do anything out of the normal," Osad ordered. Jasen nodded in compliance. Osad returned his gesture and walked out from the ambassador's apartment. Jasen was left alone with his thoughts. An overwhelming sense of worry flooded over him— uncertainty like he had not felt since he was a boy. Perhaps he could just disappear to Canopen and lose himself in the sea of foliage. He thought of those Gawn living deep within the jungle and hoped they might be as friendly as any here on Empria. For a moment he seriously considered the possibility of such an escape. But with this new regime's thirst for power and expansion, would anywhere be safe?

 

Chapter 8: Enemies Unmasked

        Thunder awoke him. The rumbling sound of droplets pattering onto the floor filled the dimly lit room. Cal slowly began to regain consciousness, but his eyes felt heavy, as if sown shut. He stirred in his chair positioned in the middle of the room. He felt the restraints for the first time as he tried to move. Loud pattering sounded once again. His eyes flew open to the ground beneath his feet. Another drop fell from his forehead and molded into the growing pool of blood along the floor.
 Memories flooded back to him in waves. The Legionnaire dead, Mara taken, the burning yellow eyes of the shadowy monster. It was beyond the reality he had prepared for. There were always legends of supernatural beings throughout the galaxy, but Cal never had the luxury of bedtime stories. Whatever it was that took Mara and murdered his Legionnaire, it would bleed like anything else, of that he was sure. He had no time to mourn, no time for pity at his circumstance. He had to plan his next move. These first few moments in the aftermath would prove crucial. His next step could not be one of revenge. Mara was out there somewhere. He was going to bring her home—place her on the Legionary throne as was her birthright. Cal found his mind wandering to a happier place, despite the current times. He imagined Mara sitting on the throne in the grand hall of the Starborn citadel— Legionness Mara. A funny thought for a man that had been with her near since birth and knew her unparalleled sarcasm better than anyone. With no other living heirs, Mara would be next in line to the Legionary throne. She was still young for certain, but Cal had seen countless showings of her ability to think in the abstract and make unconventional decisions to say the least. She would make a fine Legionness in time. "You're awake," Cal heard a voice say as his blurred vision began to come back into focus. He recognized the face of Kane standing before him in the dark room, some kind of basement by the look of his shambling surroundings. He struggled against the restraints before sense struck him. He would only make them tighter this way. Cal stared Kane down. His expressions betrayed him, as his fine muscles twitched with anger. Kane merely stared back with a handsome smirk. "When I was a boy, in my quieter moments, I would look up at the stars and become so afraid. I would see those massive balls of fire in the night sky and I became terrified because I knew I may never get the chance to leave anywhere near that kind of impact on this galaxy... For we are nothing more than the dust stars left behind," Kane stared off blankly in a trance. Cal sat there quietly, listening to his words, examining him as one would an opponent before a duel. He knew his release would be when Kane desired and not a moment sooner. The truth only enraged him further. He thrashed out against his restraints once again. Kane spoke louder to rise above the clinking of metal shackles, "There are a lot of things I'm about to explain to you, but it is vital that you understand these two above all." Kane paced back and forth about the room. "One: I take no pleasure in any of this. Everything I have done, everything I will do, is for the glory and prosperity of the Galactic Legion. The Legionnaire was unwilling to do all that is necessary, and so he forced my hand. It is my deepest regret that I could find no other way." Cal spit out his frothy blood onto the floor in demonstration. This was all Kane's childish ploy. Kane's lust for power knew no bounds. The Councilman stepped over the pool of blood.
 "Two: No harm will come to Rianare Mara. She is being held safely until I can legitimize my place upon the throne. Without an heir available, the decision of a new Legionnaire will fall upon the Legionary council. The Infinite Empire now controls the council, and as such they will appoint me to be the new Legionnaire."

             As Kane said the words, Cal knew it was true. Ever fiber of his being wanted to scream out in protest, but it would be in vain. The Infinite Empire had successfully executed their rise to power with a clever coup and a mystical ally he still could not comprehend. "Down the road, should she fall into my line of thinking, perhaps I could even take the Rianare as my wife," Kane said, watching for a reaction from his captive. "You're a traitor— a murderer," Cal barked in his face. "Oh, but history will not remember it as such. They will tell the story of Cal Cabor, the Captain of the Legionnaire's guard who turned on him, the man who killed the people in that hall one by one," Kane knelt down, meeting Cal at eye level. Their faces close enough to touch. "Mara was the only one who survived because in all your delusions you could not bring yourself to harm the innocent girl. In time, maybe even Mara will come to believe it too." Cal tensed his muscles. His nostrils flared out. He longed to pounce on this creature. This man would bury him to cover his own tracks, forever tarnishing his name in the archives of history. In his heart, Cal felt enough despair from his failure to save the Legionnaire. Yet somehow, the whole galaxy believing he had struck the killing blow was like losing him all over again. He did not know if he could live with this; but then again, he may not be long for this world anyway. "How did you do it? What was that... thing?" Cal asked. He decided if he had to die, he wanted answers first. "You wouldn't believe me if I told you," Kane replied. The pride Kane carried himself with strangely dissipated. He took a step back as his mark of retreat from the conversation. The powerful figure emerged from the shadowy corner of the room, taking his place next to Kane. His dark hood was still drawn, but those eyes were unmistakable. Had he been there the whole time? Cal wondered.  His clawed, fur covered hands reached up and lowered his hood. Cal watched in stunned silence as he saw his face for the first time. A cross between man and feline. Covered in a fine layer of dark brown fur, he wore a prominent brow with a flattened nose. A jet-black mane bordered along his face. Looking closer, Cal noticed the scar that traveled down his left cheek with surgical precision—a deep cut from a blade long ago. He had a snout that protruded from his face slightly and sharp teeth that lined the inside of his mouth. His body was composed of stacked muscle that built up his broad shoulders. The creature wore a tight fitted black tunic crafted from leather with shoulder pads atop. That silver device housing his blade remained mounted on his wrist. Cal noticed the obvious discomfort Kane felt in the presence of the beast. Despite the two working in league together, it was clear Kane was not the man calling the shots. Kane, eclipsed by his comparative size, feared this dark creature. When he finally broke his silence, Cal immediately knew why. "I can see in your eyes, you know nothing of what I am," his voice carried a deep richness that rumbled the very foundation as he spoke.
 And it was true. In all of Cal's years of experience, through all the evosheets he had studied, never had he come across a species like this. "This is a part of something much larger than you. The end of an ancient war between Mulvain and Valmera that the galaxy believes ended centuries ago." He came closer to Cal as he spoke, "But here I am, the last of the keepers of the mist—the last of the Nebulae." A Valmera? Nebulae? the questions cycled in Cal's head. The words rang no bells in his mind. Fragments of their ancient religion Cal ventured, but he could guess at little more insight than that. If the beast's race was as ancient as he claimed, then perhaps they were already gone long before the Legion came to be. Their records of galactic history only went back so far, much of it from a biased human perspective. Long concerned with their own self-contained affairs, humankind was largely unaware of the secrets that lied out in the vastness of space.
   Those glowing eyes told a story. This creature had seen a great many things, and lost a great many more. Anger, rage, and pain all burned passionately in his gaze. The Valmera knelt to Cal's level, meeting him face to face in confrontational manner. Cal met his look, those haunting yellow eyes stared right back. He heard the unmistakable crackling of his blade materializing from its frozen sheath. The ominous white cloud began to pour off its distinct edges. The Valmera lifted the blade up to Cal, raising it a mere inch from his face. He felt the strongest surge of cold he had ever experienced fill his cheek. He dared not move, paralyzed by the uncertainty of what lied next. "The mist does not touch you... and yet... strange," the Valmera declared, studying him carefully. He ended his analysis with the retracting of his blade. The Valmera turned to face Kane, remained standing behind him, almost frozen in fright. As his eyes fell on him, Kane straightened out his expression to one of minimal emotion. "We will have more to discuss later," sounding like a command as he said it. The Valmera opened the door leading out of the room and disappeared once again before their eyes, leaving another lingering of black smoke on his departure. Kane stepped forward, back across center stage in front of his captive audience.
 "How many more people are going to die because of you?" Cal asked, enraged. Kane paused, standing at a halt. His back faced Cal as he turned his head to the side. "I will mourn them all—even you."
   Cal smirked. "You're a real hero."
   "After a brief investigation, during which you will be found guilty, you will be sentenced to death for high treason," Kane said matter-of-factly. "What about my trial?" Cal gritted through his teeth. "Trials are subjugated by the Legionary council during times of crisis. A vote will be cast on your guilt... it is a shame..."
 Kane walked out through the door past the two guards posted outside. Cal was left all alone, tied up in the growingly dark basement. From the combination of the blood loss and general shock of the events transpired of late, he passed out in the chair. Cal awoke some time later to a loud commotion out in the hallway. How long had passed, he could not be sure. Listening closer, Cal heard one of the guards cry out and the sounds of a struggle. The thump of their helmets crashing onto the floor echoed in the otherwise silent room. The door slid open a moment later and a ray of light poured in. Cal squinted to give his eyes time to adjust as a serpent of smog slithered through the doorway. The wisp dashed towards him. A shape of a man reformed. "Go play out your destiny. It intrigues me," the Valmera told him. His clawed hand broke Cal's restraints and disappeared quick as he came with a gleam of his glowing eyes.
 Cal tore his hands free from the bindings, desperately seeking to hunt down the beast, but there was no trail to follow. He stretched his muscles as he tried to piece the occurrence together. These forces around him held no place in the world he knew. Being there, seeing it unfold amounted to little in terms of understanding. This was a new age now, and as he wavered up onto his feet, he made a determination he would survive it—learn the new rules and players on the board, winning the game against those unwilling to play fair. But this can't be about revenge. Have to save Mara, Cal told himself. Cal made his way to the door with a showing of caution. The doorway erupted open as the dazed Rionaughts stumbled inside, fury in their movements. Cal dove out from the corner and tackled one up against the wall—a mighty punch to the dome that fully drained his opponents resolve. His partner threw Cal onto the ground and frantically reached for his holster. Cal kicked him away and rolled toward the fallen guard. With blinding speed, he drew the Rionaught's plasmer and fired one bolt at center mass. The second Rionaught collapsed backward like timber.
 Cal groaned as he struggled back onto his feet. He stared down at the Rionaught. "I'm sorry... I didn't want to have to do that."
   He pressed a hand to the blood gathering on his forehead. He squeezed his fist, breathed deeply, and strode through the doorway, plasmer in hand. Time enough he left the Governor's estate. 

 

Chapter 9: Old Friends

        The humming of insects rang throughout the stagnant air. Farther off in the distance, starships came down onto landing pads. Rionaughts hastily marched down the ramps as if heading straight into battle. The world was pitch black as Cal made his way out the backdoor of the estate and found himself hidden behind a boulder on the edge of the Governor's prided garden. Several patrols passed by as he waited. Their casual mannerisms told they had yet to realize Cal had escaped custody—a luxury he certainly wouldn't be able to maintain much longer. Another group of Rionaughts moved past. Cal felt his breathing slow and shallow, almost hesitant to even exhale. Across the other end of the garden, Cal spotted a comet relatively unguarded. He nodded to himself and darted for the next available cover behind one of the garden's grand, exotic plants. A Rionaught posted in sight of the comet—his best way out of there. On the other side, the unmistakable golden shawl of a Paratore. He would have to coordinate the assault to avoid detection. His ambush was swift, like a whispering of the wind. Cal took the Rionaught down from behind, bringing him into a choke hold. His legs buckled out from underneath as the air gradually fled his lungs. Cal lowered him to the ground and the man finally laid still. The Paratore turned around as Cal pounced. The pair collided into the boulder positioned along the hedges. Cal wrapped his arm around the Paratore's neck and brought his plasmer flush with his temple.
   "I have a few questions," Cal sneered.
   "Ask away." The Paratore stood still.
   "Rianare Mara, where did they take her?" Cal charged up the hum of his plasmer, sensing the soldier's hesitation.
   "Offworld. Beyond that, you're asking the wrong man."
   Cal clenched his jaw. He breathed out heavy through his nostrils. "Very well." Cal pulled the trigger. The bolt passed clean through the Paratore's helm. He let go, and the limp body dropped to the dirt.
   Cal climbed into the comet, knowing the next part of his plan would be pure luck. He fired the ignition, engaged the Grav engines, and sailed away from the compound, leaving a few confused Rionaughts in its dust. In moments, they would realize Cal had escaped. But he would be out of reach by then. The comet zoomed further away from the estate, passing through the empty city streets.
   On the run, in a nest of spiders, Cal only knew one person to turn to—one person that would always hate the Legionites as much as he now did. Trev Ril, the most ambitious smuggler he had ever seen. An old soul with a twisted sense of humor and a deep-rooted love of adrenaline. Trev became a smuggler for the thrill of it all, or maybe even just to prove he could be the best; as far as Luxarus went, he certainly was. Had he not been pigeonholed into the life of a man born on Luxarus, he might have been someone truly exceptional.
   Before Trev found Cal and took him under his wing, since birth, he moved around the planet in search of somewhere to call home. Trev never quite provided the nurturing hand Cal had been lacking all those years as an orphan, but he was good to him—far better than most. The smuggler gave him a sense of purpose. The first family he ever knew. Cal felt a sharp sting, a piercing pain in his gut as he absorbed the realization of loss all over again—the legionnaire—another family gone.
 Cal veered the comet off the road to avoid a Legionary checkpoint up ahead. The walled enclosure of Ivar was locked up tight now. The presence of patrols increased dramatically in the city. They had discovered his escape. Cal stowed the vehicle away in the cover of a dark alley, deciding it safer on foot from here. His old friend was a creature of habit. If he was still around, then Cal knew exactly where he would be: Dagger's Den. Luckily, it was only a little further through the city. 

             How many checkpoints do I have to sneak by from here to there though? Cal wondered.  He remembered how he met Trev in what seemed another life, only a young boy at the time. Of all the stories he told of his youth, this was one of the few he could look back on fondly. Back in those days, there was a booming market for tumbler parts, specifically the high durability wheels. Cal wandered the streets of Ivar with nothing to his name—nothing but an eagerness to improve his station and the craftiness to do so. Parked right outside of one of the drinking halls downtown, he spotted his mark. A cargo transport tumbler with custom modifications—a sign the owner knew something valuable when he saw it. The class of tumblers were like spacious freighters on wheels, capable of hauling an unbelievable amount of materials while remaining rather discrete. Cal reasoned the tumbler belonged to a smuggler. There was no other valid reason a vehicle like that would be parked here. And so, he knew they would never report a theft to the authorities, even one that left them stranded. Cal got out the toolkit he kept stowed away in his pack and dropped down next to the tumbler. He took one last peak over the hood towards the drinking hall. No one had come in or out since he arrived. The wrench quickly attached to the bolt on the first wheel. His arm rotated in attempt to remove each one before the owner returned. The last bolt fell to the ground as he popped the wheel off the tumblers axis. Heavier than he expected, it crashed onto the ground, masking the sound of approaching footsteps. The unmistakable hum of a plasmer pistol aimed at his head filled his peripherals. He dropped the wrench and rose up his hands in automatic fashion. "Nice ride I know. Not much use without the wheels though sadly. I'm gonna have to hold on to those," the man said in an authoritative tone. Cal slowly brought up his head and looked at the man towered over him. He met his soft face and brown, joy filled eyes.
   "Carth. You're just a kid." The man lowered his plasmer. Trev brought him back to his hideout nearby that night, not before making him reattach his wheel though of course. After that, Cal lived with Trev and his crew for the next few years, right up until the day he met the Legionnaire and sailed off to Empria. Now Cal was on his way to see him again for the first time since he left over a decade ago. Cal led down the corner of the side street and scanned the path ahead. As the last patrol passed out of sight, he darted across and took shelter in the adjacent alley. Cal brought out his plasmer pistol and cautiously continued further into the darkening path. The last light from the lastubes in the street slowly faded as he reached the end. Two industrial buildings resided on each side of the alley. This is where Dagger's Den was all right, but the alley looked different now. A brick wall greeted him with a bulky cargo crate sitting in front like a welcome mat. Something about the way the crate was positioned felt out of place. Cal took one more step as drones descended out of the woodwork. The familiar surge of charging plasmers encompassed the surroundings. Instinctively, Cal raised his hands in compliance. Combat modified mining drones—the criminal element here was getting more paranoid. A light shined from the drone onto Cal's face. "Identify yourself," a voice demanded, speaking from the drone. "I'm the guy the Rionaughts are looking for. But I'm guessing you wouldn't call them friends either," Cal replied. The drone withdrew back slightly. There was a long pause as they made their decision on the other end.
   "Go on through," the voice said. The drones flew up above his head, nestling back into their ambush positions. The crate planted in front of the stone wall swiftly pivoted to the side. Just as Cal suspected, a wide hole was unmasked behind.

Trev always loved his secret passageways, Cal thought with an internal laugh. One of several underground crime dens in the city, this just happened to be Trev's favorite. Any second now Cal would be able to smell Trev's same old cologne assaulting his nasal cavities. If he was going to find Trev Ril anywhere, it was right here. Cal took the initiative and stepped through the newly opened passage, ducking under the bricks. The hole led to a short passage with a metal door at the end. As he approached, he noticed the keypad beside the door and pondered for a moment if he could guess the code. Before he could react, a small window on the door slid open and a giant eye peered through the slot. Taken aback for a moment, Cal hesitated to answer until the profile of a Mulvain became visible through the window. "Here to see Trev Ril. I'm an old friend," Cal told the bouncer. The Mulvain flexed his mandibles as he eyed him up through the narrow slot, then slid the window back shut. Cal let out an audible sigh right before the door made a beep and opened for him to enter. "Don't cause any trouble," the bouncer said, his deep gravely voice shaking the air around them as he walked by. Cal stood in brief state of awe of the massive figure. A long time it had been since he met a Mulvain in the flesh. Yet he was primarily surprised the Mulvain spoke in the Legionary tongue. Dagger's Den was much as Cal remembered, a lively community full of shady patrons. Mostly Human, but several mechanics and Gawn also spread throughout the tables. The lighting filtered through a dull golden hue. A bar stretched along the side wall and a stage of performers dancing and playing music positioned at the back.
   "Wouldn't get too comfortable here," Cal whispered to himself. His eyes followed a Gawn dancing on top the bar. The small being slammed back drinks, almost falling over from inebriation. Not a common sight for a Gawn. But this was not a common place. Cal grabbed the Gawn's drink and took a swig. He welcomed the sharp burn of a fresh brew.
   Cal made his way towards the booths at the other end of the room. A mechanic walked up to one of the tables with a tray of drinks. The poor servant looked to be on his last legs, covered head to toe in a thick skin of rusty metal. Cal wondered how the machine was even still functioning. From Cal's angle, all he could see was a cybernetic hand reaching for one of the drinks. He strode over with a display of confidence hiding his undeniable feeling of mild anxiety. The man slouched back in the booth like he intended to make it his home for the rest of the night. He looked the same as the day Cal left, only with a touch of grey through his hair and a few extra wrinkles. His beard was still scruffy, and his eyes gleamed as youthful as ever. Trev peered up with his drink firmly in his silver, metal fingers. He nearly dropped the bottle when he saw who stood in front of him— as if staring at a ghost. "Hey Trev. The hands new," Cal said casually, pointing to the shiny hand he sported.
   The sounds of music died down right as he made his introduction. A few of the surrounding patrons took interest in the man awkwardly standing in front of Trev's booth. "Yeah, well it's a long story. Thought you were dead. Guess it only takes you being on the run from the entire Legion for you to come say hello," Trev said with a blank stare. Trev stood up to meet Cal's stance. Suddenly Cal began to reevaluate his decision to come here. Trev squared up next to him, his face still emotionless. He jolted towards him and squeezed Cal into an embrace. Trev let out a loud laugh as Cal felt the relief wash over. "Good to see you kid," Trev replied, motioning him to join in the booth. "Wish it was under better circumstances." Cal took a seat across.

"Yeah, figured you were looking for help. Carth, your face is only plastered on every evosheet in the system." "I didn't do it, Trev. I'd just say there's been a coup, but I'm not sure I even believe the things I've seen. Maybe I'm going crazy." "Well you always were an easy person to cast blame on." Trev eased back into his seat and pointed to his blue necklace. "Still where that thing, huh?"
   Cal grabbed the colyne diamond protectively. "I don't forget where I came from. Where's Reg? He here somewhere?"
 Trev just looked at Cal and laughed, calling over the mechanic waiter back to their table. "Hey Rusty." The old mechanic turned to Trev. "Where's Reg?"
   "The archives indicate that Regen Vail is deceased. However, my conversation log tells me you already knew this information. Therefore, my condolences were already given," Rusty replied through his electronic, monotone deliverance. Rusty shuffled away with the loud grinding of rusted joints as Trev shooed him elsewhere. Cal leaned back further into his chair, feeling the full weight of the knowledge he had received. Cal and Reg were both Trev's pupils he had taken in with nowhere else to go. Reg was the only friend his own age on Luxarus growing up—one of his few friends in general. In no time at all, he became the closest Cal ever found to a brother. Reg might have been the soul person who could have convinced him not to leave with the Legionnaire all those years ago. But Reg was a dreamer like him, with a smart head on his shoulders. He never would have tried to stop Cal from taking his shot. When the time came however, Cal never even gave him the opportunity. He left without a word, never being good at goodbyes, and didn't see Reg ever again. The reality dawned on him—now he never would. "I didn't know," was all Cal could manage.
 "Well of course, how could you? After we made the mining collapse look like an accident, you were supposed to save the Legionnaire and take the reward. Instead, you hopped on board that Legionite starship and never looked back." Trev's joking manner was gone.
 "He was a good man."
 "He was our mark. A very wealthy mark. We were your family."
 "I had to get out. This life was never for me. You of all people should have understood that." "You just didn't have to be a stranger, kid."  No matter the fragments of goodness Cal may have found along the way, his years on this world were the worst of his life. There was never anything for him here but death and suffering. Trev found away to live with it, to look at all the decay around him and laugh. Maybe he was stronger than him. Or maybe he simply had something figured out Cal never did. "Since you're here, might as well play a game of cards. Remember how to play flux?" Trev already drew the deck from the inside of his jacket. Cal glared reluctantly. "We both know cards are illegal, Trev."
 "Says the guy wanted for treason. I got the cards already. Aren't harming anyone now. If you can find a way to put them back together into a tree, then be my guest." He mockingly extended the deck to him. "No? Then play the carthing game. And I don't want to hear about any of that evo card crap."
 Cal sighed and leaned back as Trev dished out the cards. One after another he placed them down. The sword, the star, the shield, the ship, all the various sets laid out on the table. "Know why I've always loved flux?" Trev said as he flipped over his first card. "You find out so much about a person. How are they gonna play?"

             Cal turned his card over and glanced at Trev across the table.
 "Are they a scavenger? Do they wait right until they end and see if they can steal all my power away?" Trev flipped his next card. "Or are they a ruler? Do they seek to claim all the cards and control the momentum of the game?" Cal matched his card. "And maybe they're just a fool. They believe they can play the game, taking no real risks, and win merely by chance. What kind do you think I am?" Trev locked eyes.
 Cal smiled. "You've always just been a scavenger."
 And with that last turn, Trev reached across the table and raked all of Cal's cards over.
   Cal tossed up his hands, accepting his defeat.
 Trev tucked the cards back into his jacket. "Don't be the man in the limelight. Just win the game. You don't need to be a hero." "You done with your wisdom now?"
   Trev sighed. "Listen, I know you came here for help so just tell me what I can do."
 "I need passage off Luxarus— to Karkken."
 "Karkken? What the carth is there on Karkken? Never mind the shield wall in the way."
 "Come on, Trev. We both know you have a way past that shield." Trev took a moment to think of his response carefully. He ruffled the beard on his chin, then motioned to Rusty that they were heading out.
   "Ah yes, I do tire of serving drinks all day," the Mechanic droned.
   "If we're gonna have this conversation, better do it back at my place," Trev said as he climbed out of the booth. But the Legion had different plans. As they moved through the crowd of various peculiar characters, a loud thud sounded at the front door. Cal darted his head over, standing in the middle of the room. The metal blasted off its hinges, rocketing towards them at escape velocity. The Mulvain bouncer ate the full force of the impact as the metallic wall collided with his hulking figure. His roar startled the patrons more than the breaching, sending them into a panic.
   For a moment, the dark void to the street behind remained still. A single lasflare flew in through the doorway—a spiraling beacon of light. The anchors on the glowing blue cylinder clutched down onto a table. A high-pitched beep sounded, and any in range with enough brain cells ran scared. Cal rolled over the bar and shielded his eyes as the laser field pulsed outward. A dozen glass cups shattered across the floor as Cal barreled over onto the ground. Lasflares were nasty little trick. Anyone would see stars for days after the lasers greeted their eyes.
 Cal drew his plasmer and pressed up against the sturdy surface. Basilar marched through the doorway, plasmer in hand, dawning his Legionary gold. Three more Paratores followed closely behind. Bright orange flashes lit up the dim room as the Paratores silenced the patrons that dared attempt flight. Basilar held his plasmer low to the ground. Boiling surges of plasmer arced out after every scream from the crowd. Basilar fixed his sight on one of the escaping attendants. His hand shook as he went to fire. His helm twitched to the side with a sudden jolt, and he regained his deadly edge. Another target down.
 Trev took cover behind overturned tables and returned fire at the approaching Paratores, but the thin tables provided little in the means of protection. Cal heard the screech of a Gawn heeling over, and the nearing of armored boots. He whipped his head over the bar, plasmer in hand. Basilar stormed toward him, waves of his Gravjet pulsing behind. The Paratore grabbed Cal by the neck and slammed his head onto the bar surface. Basilar twisted him around, pinning him to the bar as he squeezed Cal's throat tighter. Cal looked up at the Paratore with burning eyes. Shades of red bloomed in his face as the air in his body became scarcer.
 Basilar held Cal's face mere inches from his mask. "What did you do to me?"
 "I... missed," Cal forced the words through his ever-closing windpipe.
 A monstrous scaled hand gripped Basilar's shoulder. He turned his head in time to see the Mulvain. The dazed juggernaut threw Basilar clear across the room. Basilar crashed against the backwall, shattering the table as he collapsed onto the ground. With blinding speed, the bouncer was upon him. His massive arm swung out and engulfed the entirety of his throat. Basilar hung in the air, pinned against the wall. He clutched at his neck, his legs dangling below.
   But the Mulvain had had his fun. Basilar removed the heat dagger from his belt and thrust the fiery metal into the creature's abdomen.
 The Mulvain roared and drew back. He clamped his mandibles down on Basilar's arm. The strong appendages nearly dented his armored gauntlet. Basilar slashed his heat dagger across the Mulvain's chest, singing the plated metal. He drove his knife into him again, finding a soft spot in his scaly figure. He sunk the blade in over and over—less resistance from his opponent with every blow. Basilar jabbed into his gut one final time, twisted the boiling blade, and tore it out. The Mulvain dropped to the ground— dead. His flesh filled the air with the smell of cooked meat.
 Trev shook Cal to attention. "Come on, kid!"
 Cal hopped off the bar and sprinted after Trev to the back exit. The door slid open to front of an abandoned factory. A wide-open area littered with debris laid before them. Parked in the middle was an unmistakable sight, Trev's cargo transport tumbler seemingly in perfect working order. "Fire up the engines!" Trev yelled to Rusty.
 The sound of crashing debris echoed from the Den as the Paratores neared. Cal dashed into the back seat and listened to the sound of the engine roar as Trev punched the ignition. He pressed down hard on the sticks and just like that, they were in the wind once again.
   "How did they find us?" Cal asked out loud. But no one had to answer.
   A flood of memories came back to Cal as he stowed away in the tumbler. He remembered all the various items they used to hide back there, most illegal by Legionary standards. Though none of it warranted being hunted by Paratores either. Reg always wanted to drive the tumbler more than anything, but Trev would never let them. First chance Reg got, he probably would have crashed. Reg had a tendency to get carried away. Cal was afraid to ask, but he hoped Reg drove it at least once before he died. He hoped he lived a good life, and wondered if he should have tried to bring Reg with him so long ago. Maybe things would have turned out different. 

 

Chapter 10: Hideaway

        Trev forced Cal to stay down in the back the whole ride there. In case they got stopped by any Rionaught patrols on their way to his hideout he claimed. But Cal guessed he also got a kick out of it. The drive there was bumpy, enough for Cal to question if they were even driving on a road anymore. The crates stored in the back shifted into his side every time they ran over a notch in the road or veered too hard on a turn. By the time they got there, Cal had been sufficiently bruised and battered.  The tumbler came to a stop and the engine went quiet. Trev and Rusty climbed out the front and came around to let Cal out of the cargo space. He practically fell out when the hatch opened. Rattled, Cal gradually rose to his feet in front of a fairly run-down shack at the edge of the city. "I know, she's not a beauty on the outside," Trev said as he led through the front door. The inside did not fare much better on the senses with the shambled, debris ridden room they were welcomed by. Trev walked over behind a counter positioned in the middle of the room. With the press of a button, the metal counter retracted, and a stairway revealed underneath. Cal looked over at Trev with a satisfactory glance.  "Well I'm not gonna let just anyone come say hello," Trev explained. He brought Cal down the steps where a reinforced door greeted them. Trev punched in a code and the door slide open with a satisfying wisp of air. Trev walked through the front entrance into the rather sizable common area with a low ceiling. He tossed his jacket onto one of the couches and sank down into his seat. Cal followed his example, sitting on the opposite couch. Rusty instinctively made his way to the kitchen—a robotic butler for Trev's any purpose.
 Trev snagged his pipe off the table and took a puff of seastar venom. "So, you want a ride to Karkken? Let's talk." "You've smuggled cargo in and out of the system plenty of times. What's the secret?"
 Trev sighed. "It's risky, kid—even if you do it perfectly. Still a chance of severely damaging your ship." Cal leaned in. "This was the Legionnaire's final order. Go to Karkken, establish an alliance. I have to do this. May be our only shot at preventing war."
 "Our only shot? This is your battle, kid. When war comes to my doorstep, then I'll start worrying."
 "War's already here, Trev. They're making Grav weapons on Luxarus that could decimate all of us."
 Trev leaned back in his chair, fingers scratching his chin at the prospect. A dangerous grin cracked his face. "What kind of weapons exactly?"
 Cal smiled internally. Trev had taken the bait, never the kind of guy who could pass up an opportunity for a good score. And sticking it to the Legionites was yet another passion of his. High on the rush of their heist, Trev wouldn't be able to say no to Cal's any request.
 "There's a research facility here in Ivar. Went there before this all happened. They're developing a weapon they call the Gravity Well." "Yeah I know the place—never been inside though. Hmm... bet I could find us a way in."
 "You're not even gonna ask about the tech?" Trev rolled his head back and spoke plainly. "The way I see it, anything I get outta the hands of the Legionites is gonna be better for business." Cal chalked Trev's response up to a small victory. Content with Trev's motivations, he expected nothing less. "The whole facility has high levels of security. Any access to the building requires a passcode."

             "If that place is researching Grav, they'll need a steady influx of colyne." Trev's finger hammered down on the table. "I make my living moving goods around Luxarus. Know all the routes." Trev paused, drawing the motions with his finger. "We hijack one of the comets carrying in a shipment and drive it right through the checkpoint into the facility." Trev was all in now.
 Cal sat back and considered his proposal. They had pulled off similar jobs back in the day, and surely Trev had done plenty more since, but Cal was not as confident in Trev's abilities as he was as a kid. That Gravity Well could spell immeasurable trouble down the road if Kane became Legionnaire— the thought driving Cal's motivations. Trev's plan was the best shot he had at removing it from Kane's slippery grasp. Cal had not even begun to consider what he would do with the Gravity Well once in his possession. All he knew for sure, it would be safer far away from Luxarus and the rest of the Legionary system. "Then we need to move fast. Get the Gravity Well, then I'm off to Karkken," Cal said. "What do you say I hold on to it when we're done? Then we can call it even," Trev proposed. "Don't think so, Trev. I'm taking it with me." Trev held a blank, confrontational expression on his face. Cal returned his look, and for a moment it seemed they were engaged in a standoff. Trev was a good guy beneath the rough exterior, but his judgment was often less than sound— his primary drive was still monetary. Trev quickly broke their locked gaze with a wide smile and a piercing laugh. He placed his hand on his stomach and chuckled louder to himself. Cal relaxed with a breath of relief. He didn't need to be making any more enemies. He had a whole army of those. "You always had to be the hero," Trev said with a vague sigh.
 Cal leaned in closer. "You're in trouble with Mosk again aren't you?"
 Trev turned away, scratching his chin. "Wasn't my fault this time. My crew got ambushed and we lost the cargo."
 "Carth, Trev." Cal paced around, seeking to plan their course of action. He had no desire to deal with Mosk. He had half expected the old crime boss to be dead by now. But it seemed Mosk was still kicking.
 "Listen, I'll be fine. Let's worry about your little situation for now. I got it figured out," Trev promised.
 "He's going to want you dead for this."
 "Me? Dead? Everybody loves me, kid."
 "I remember quite a few people taking shots at you back in the day."
 Trev tossed up his shoulders. "And they all missed. Guess none of them wanted it bad enough."
   Trev rose up and waved Cal to follow down the rear corridor, marking the end of their back and forth—a sidelined issue for now. Trev stood with a protective manner as he punched in the code to the door's keypad. Whatever lied beyond, he wanted no one but himself to have free range over. Or maybe it was the extra caution of a man with a price on his head. Cal knew what that was like now. The door beeped and released its generic hiss of air as it slid open. Cal stepped through behind Trev, immediately immersed in the scenery. Trev's trophy room: a vault of the most valuable and impressive items he acquired throughout his nefarious career. Most of the chamber was full of cargo crates stacked along the walls, EVO stamped across the side. More boxes packed with Emprian seastars spread haphazardly across the open space. Trev's more prideful prizes were displayed prominently on a shelf to the left of the entrance. Cal walked closer to the exotic display. Some type of prototype mechanic head rested in the center, first catching his eye. A large tooth, that by appearance alone warned of the creature's size and formidableness, lied next to the metallic skull. Cal reasoned it could only have come from one of the great beasts of the Canopen jungles. Numerous plasmers were propped up on a rack, intriguing variations he had never seen. Some appeared rather old, while others, Cal doubted with his affinity for plasmers, were even on the Legionary market yet. Gazing further down the line, Cal spotted various tech he didn't recognize. Surely there was a good story behind each gadget. At the end, the collection of Mem-stims Trev had amassed. What wonderous secrets they must have held to have earned their place in Trev's grand treasure cave. Trev patted Cal on the back. "All stories for another time."
   As Cal turned to leave, one last relic in Trev's trophy set caught his eye. A silver metal wrist gauntlet, identical to the device that housed the Valmeran's pale blade. It belonged to something sinister— the creature of shadow. Those yellow eyes burned in Cal's mind. Cal picked it up in his hand, rotating to examine from all angles. The device no longer seemed to contain the deadly weapon itself—nothing more than an empty shell. "Hey careful with that!" Trev grabbed the device and set it back down. "Those things go for a fortune to the right buyer."
   "You know what that is? Where it comes from?" Cal held a wild look in his eye. "Slow down there, kid. It's some kind of old artifact. The Mulvain say it used to be a weapon from an ancient group of mystics. Anyway, the thing doesn't work anymore. Always sounded like a bunch of nonsense to me."
 Cal struggled to make sense of his words. "I've seen one of them – a Nebulae. With their frozen blades... it killed the Legionnaire." Cal declared it bluntly in hopes he might be believed.  Trev sensed his seriousness. The phrase 'frozen blades' rang true is his mind. He rolled his cybernetic hand into a fist and flexed each finger one by one. "Think I've seen it too," showing Cal his hand, "Left something for me to remember him by."
 Cal's eyes narrowed. He homed in on his first acquired piece of evidence. "Where? What happened?"
 Trev stumbled back onto one of the crates, taking a seat and a moment to compose himself. "My crew and I were bringing a shipment of artifacts back from one of the Arks off Althea."
 "Other side of the Nebulous system is a long way to go for a job."
   "Yeah well this one paid a lot of Rions. And normally there was little risk—lucrative business. But this time... something found us after we landed. Killed my whole crew, Reg included... took the artifacts... and my hand." "What did he take exactly?"
 "Some Karkken relic. I didn't know what any of it was. I was only concerned with the price tags. I've never seen something move like that though..." His voice trailed off. "After it left me for dead, this little device here was the only thing left in the crate we dug up." Trev picked the metal band up, only to throw it onto the shelf once more in disgust.
   "Then there might be more answers on Karkken," Cal said, thinking out loud. He paused, realizing his lack of sympathy. "I'm sorry, Trev... About Reg especially."
 Trev rocked forward onto his feet. "Yeah me too, kid. Let's just get on with this."

 

Chapter 11: The Heist

        Light poured through the long passageway ahead—the exit within sight. The collapsed maintenance tunnel ran all throughout the undercarriage of the city. Workers could travel quickly to their required posts without interfering with the normal flow of city traffic. However, as with much of the infrastructure on Luxarus, it eventually eroded after time—maintenance ironically unable to prevent its decline. With the old tunnels decommissioned, they became all but forgotten by the rest of the city dwellers—by everyone except the smugglers of course. The rundown catacombs were far from glamorous or safe, but that was the nature of the job. The air felt cold and damp as they made their way through the brief underpass and came out on the other side of a large cave opening. Several tumblers were parked in an organized line. The floor alternated between sections of black rock and shallow puddles of water in an almost checkerboard like manner. Cal took one false step and dunked his boot down into one of the shallow wells. He rose up his foot, shaking off the mud. Armored boots were all that protected him from the sewage. Trev seemed to have the floor down to a science. He weaved through the wet circles lined along the floor until he arrived at the tumbler he sought after. "We follow down this tunnel and it'll put us right in the middle of our shipment," Trev said. Trev signaled with the wave of his hand to pile into the tumbler. Rusty climbed into the front seat at the helm. Cal made way into the back of the vehicle, greeted by an impressive array of weaponry. He picked up one of the plasmer rifles and drew into the firing position, taking aim along the sights. Cal let out a satisfied snort of air and rested the rifle against his leg. If there was one thing Cal could appreciate, it was a well calibrated plasmer. The tumbler's engines fired and began to produce the standard rumbling in its massive wheels as it geared up to launch. Trev looked back to him for the go ahead. Cal responded with a nod and Trev hollered at his mechanic crewman to proceed. He pulled up the cargo manifest on his evopatch. There in real time, Trev tracked the exact location of the comet carrying the colyne. How Trev had managed to get his hands on that manifest, Cal could only wonder. Trev looked down at his evopatch. "We're right on schedule."
 Ahead of them in the tunnel, a segment of the ceiling lay collapsed in the center of their path, forming a makeshift ramp to the industrial district of the city above. Rusty revved up the engines as they flew across the stone bridge, bracing for the rough landing onto the dark city streets. The tumbler leaped out through the shadowed hole in the road, sending the bowrats scurrying away into the foliage of trash lining the alley. Shockwaves rushed through the suspension as the tires contacted the ground, grinding the tumbler to a halt from the jarring impact. Cal, not properly strapped in, sat shaken in the back of the vehicle. He gripped his plasmer tightly, as if channeling all his discomfort into the rifle. Cal slid up towards the space between the two front seats. "A little more warning next time please."
 Trev laughed. "So you're up for a next time, kid?"
 And for a moment, a wave of nostalgia rushed through his mind as Cal began to reminiscence of the old days with Trev. He could not deny he had a natural affinity for this kind of work, and the thrill of a fresh score did leave him with a satisfied grin. But somewhere inside Cal knew it would never be enough. He thought of the Legionnaire, the promises he made to him, and of Mara, his last reminder of a happier life. Cal kept his priorities straight— this was business, not pleasure. Trev sensed this was not the time for jests, brushing his comment to the side, and pulled up the overlay of the comet's route. He pointed to the intersection ahead. "Convoy should be filing through the street right in front of us." Trev turned to the back seat. "Hand me the plasmer launcher."

             Cal titled his head to the side, questioning the order he'd been tasked with. He opened the arsenal crate lying beside him, promptly welcomed by the plasmer launcher along with a variety of military grade weaponry. Cal's eyes went wide with the excitement of a young boy. He hadn't fired a plasmer launcher since his training at the Legionary academy, and had never known a greater rush of adrenaline. He always thought once he chose to join the Chromarian guard, his chance at using the heavy artillery was forfeit. Cal had never been happier to be wrong. He picked up the launcher, drawing in his arms closer once he experienced the full weight of the weapon bearing down. The launcher was capable of completely immobilizing an armored vehicle, comet or tumbler, often dissolving the target beyond repair with its tidal wave of molten plasma. Cal passed it over and Trev rested the plasmer launcher against his shoulder. They remained silent, like predators lying in wait. Trev was solely fixated on his evopatch display as the tiny blip on the map gradually made its way toward them. His fingers tapped with excitement. Trev jolted his head up and gave Rusty the signal to accelerate straight through the intersection. Like clockwork, the convoy passed through the perpendicular path. The tumbler blasted through, colliding with devastation into the side of the leading escort. They watched from the viewport as the comet crumbled and flew off to the side alley. The comet carrying the shipment was far larger than the others, and of course, more adequately fortified with all the colyne they were hauling. Lucky for them, Trev sought not to leave a meager scratch on his prize. The backstreet intersection was determined to be the least risky route to take due to the minimal traffic flow. In this case however, it merely meant the alley was too narrow for them to maneuver back out of. They were trapped exactly as Trev planned. The front side panel slid down and immediately Trev leaned his upper body out the opening. The plasmer launcher tucked nicely into his shoulder as his driver reversed to give him a better shot at the comet leading at the rear. With a gentle squeeze of the trigger, the launcher sent out its blast, knocking Trev back inside the tumbler.  "Woo!" He yelled joyously. The plasmer launcher's bolt sailed towards the comet, arcing into a wall of orange plasma. As it encapsulated its mark, the metal began to singe and splinter before their eyes. The Grav engine deactivated in seconds and the vehicle fell from its levitated state. Trev motioned for Cal to exit the tumbler. Rifle in hand, he rolled out the back and cautiously approached the cargo comet stopped before them. With the viewport tinted, they were unable to see inside the vehicle. But no one had left the comet. They were waiting them out. Trev was smart enough to jam their evocoms before their ambush, knowing they would likely try to wait out a rescue. Once they realized no help was coming, the guards inside would become desperate. Cal stood ground in front of the stationary comet while Rusty drove the tumbler around, blocking the road ahead. The side door of the comet swung up like a bird flapping its wing. Two hands stuck out, raised towards the sky. The opposite door lifted, and the other guard quickly followed his example. Slowly, they stepped out from the vehicle as Cal fixed his sights on their every move for signs of betrayal. They lined up in front of the comet with headlights shined heavily against their backs. Their shadows projected before them appeared frightful, as if they might scurry away into the brush.  Trev climbed out of the tumbler and walked over. "We need your uniforms." Pointing to the vehicle behind them, "And the comet of course."
   The guards nervously shook their heads in response. They removed their uniforms and laid them at their feet. Trev let out a smile of appreciation before he unholstered his plasmer pistol and struck one of the guards. Hesitantly, Cal raised the butt of his rifle, thinking of how he had been on the receiving end not long ago.
   The man lunged at Cal, catching him off guard and tackling him to the ground. They clawed at each other, locked in their tussle. The guard attempted to wrestle the rifle from Cal, causing it to slide away on the floor. Trev aimed his pistol, but the two squirmed too much to line a clear shot. The guard reached for Cal's throat and tore away his colyne necklace, discarding the blue stone into the dirt. Cal struck his head forward like a hammer, colliding with the man's dome. He flipped the guard over and mounted him, striking him in the face over and over. Cal screamed as the rage channeled through each and every blow. "Don't! Ever! Take—" Trev grabbed his shoulders and pulled him off the guard. He pinned his arms behind his back as he still attempted an advance. 'Hey! Hey!" Trev shouted in Cal's face. Cal's chest rose up and down like the crashing of tidal waves. "Pull yourself together, kid." Trev released him and plucked the colyne stone from the bushes. Cal captured it safely into his hands as Trev tossed it over. "Thanks," Cal said softly. He refastened the chain and secured it back around his neck. The guards laid unconscious on the cold ground, long gone they would be by the time they awoke. Quickly, they suited up in the grey guard uniforms, a black vest sliding over top and plasmer pistols strapped to their hips— now they looked the part.
   Cal climbed up into the comet. "I didn't mean to—"
   "I know, kid." Trev nodded to Rusty. "Take the tumbler back to base. We have this from here."
   "Finally, I was afraid my arms might detach if I had to steer this thing much longer," Rusty complained.
   In their time for pleasantries, Cal shook his head at the decaying mechanic with a scoff. He had done his job for now; any real praise would have to wait for peacetime. They climbed up into the comet, Trev taking the driver's seat, and continued on the intended route toward the research facility. Finally, they were on their way, the last stop before Karkken—before Mara. With the Gravity Well out of Kane's hands, and the Mulvain by his side, Cal might just stand a chance of finding the girl and restoring the Legion. He clung to his hope, unsure of what else was left. His world had decayed before him, like leaves in the changing of seasons. Now it was time to breathe life back in. 

 

Chapter 12: Narrow Departures

        The sun just began to rise over the horizon as the comet neared the receiving area at the back of the facility, where a small checkpoint was setup to inspect the shipments as they arrived. Hot white rays beat down, reflecting sharply off the boldly standing metallic complex. Trev piloted the comet into the orderly line behind another vehicle. Once the comet cleared, the guard at the gate waved them forward. Cal sat in the passenger seat, his head down in effort to remain discrete—anonymity critical to getting inside the facility. Cal wondered how high the price for his capture had risen— high enough and there would be bounty hunters on his tail before long. Yet another cause to vacate the Legionary system as soon as possible. The Legionnaire never sanctioned bounty hunters during his reign, but Kane and his Infinite Empire had a more 'by any means necessary' approach to goal acquisition. The underworld of the Legionary system crawled with all kinds of men and women—even some Gawn and Faen— looking for their shot at what they perceived to be glorious retribution. Some, like the notoriously deadly Faen assassins, were inclined to believe themselves on a holy mission from the sacred temples of their homeworld of Althea. Or maybe that was just what they told themselves, surely there was not an assassin alive that had not learned to savor the killing. For all that Cal read in the archives about their skills, they were not to be trifled with. Their speed and agility alone made them adept enemies, but their resilience and expertise with weapons alien to Legionites earned their reputation throughout the Legionary and Nebulous systems. Cal counted himself lucky he had never come across one.
   Trev approached the guard waiting at the checkpoint gate. He rolled down the viewport and casually handed the man the clearance codes taken during their hijacking. The guard scanned over them briefly with his terminal. A quick satisfied nod to himself, then handed them back. "You're all good. Carry on."
   "Have a nice day," Trev said with a smile. He grasped his hands back on the sticks and drove past the gate as it slid open. Several shipments had already been dropped off, lined up along the rear of the facility as they docked and were unloaded by mechanic workers. "So we're inside. What's the next part of the plan?" Cal asked.
 "Well we have the guard uniforms... so mostly a lot of improvising from here on out."
 Cal wore a face full of ridicule. "Improvising? That's your plan?"
   "Hey it's worked before. I've seen guys who think they gotta plan out everything. Right down to the last detail. But the truth is, nothing goes to plan on a job. So when everything goes sideways, the guys who planned exactly what they're gonna do, have no clue what to do next.  That's not gonna be me."
 Cal leaned back in his seat, accepting their options were limited. He was less than surprised by Trev's carefree attitude. Pressed for time, educated improvisation might be their best course forward.
   "Hope you know what you're doing," Cal replied. Cal's eyes searched frantically around the dock as they came to a stop. The two of them hopped out of the comet down onto the loading dock. The mechanics wasted no time in beginning to unload their cargo. Cal tipped a friendly nod to the overseer tasked with monitoring the mechanics as they unpacked the shipments and sent the colyne over to processing. They walked past down a long corridor leading deeper into the facility. A different area than Cal had been before, but they seemed to be heading in the right direction as the surrounding color palette morphed into the clean whites and silvers that marked the laboratories. The few men they passed seemed to take little notice of them; they blended into the environment as intended. 

             This just might work, Cal thought. They came up on the first secured door to the research labs. Luckily, this was one security measure Trev always planned for. He pulled out his decoder—a small electronic device that fit nicely into the palm of his hand—old school Luxaran tech. With an electronic display on the screen and two wires that extended from the top, Trev pressed a couple buttons then attached the electrodes to access points on the keypad. "Wouldn't it be easier to hack that through your evopatch?" Cal asked.
   "Yeah well not all of us have access to those expensive evo upgrades. This little guy does the trick just fine," Trev replied as he adjusted the wires onto the keypad. Thousands of numbers speed by across the decoder's display like a spinning wheel as it tested for all combinations. The device uploaded its own code that prevented the system from locking them out from failed attempts. Such a useful little tool went for a great deal on the black market. Trev however, won his in a game of flux; he had always been a man of chance after all. Suddenly with the input of the desired combination, the keypad light went green and the metallic hiss greeted them with a wisp of air against their faces. Trev led the way through the next room, with Cal close behind. Cal swallowed the knot in his throat as he realized they were fully immersed in the improvisational stage of the heist. Gawn scientists were hard at work, paying little mind to the slightly dazed guards passing through. The lab was filled with various terminals and containment fields that housed their intriguing experiments. High above in the rafters, the massive Grav vortex powering the Grav reactor drew their eyes. Last time Cal was here, the Grav reactor was still in its early testing stages, but now it had been positioned up above to begin supplying energy to the entire building. These scientists were moving fast. It made Cal more nervous, and his mission more dire. In that moment, Cal began to reevaluate his plan. He could steal the Gravity Well and take it far away from this facility and the Infinite Empire, but that would only delay the inevitable. Take away the prototype and they will create another, perhaps with even more destructive potential than the last. He would not allow it to rise again like a phoenix from the ashes. More time would be needed if Cal was going to even the playing field. "We have to destroy the facility." Cal left his words hanging in the open air. Trev shot him a jaunting glare. "Are you out of your mind, kid?" Lowering his voice to a harsh whisper halfway through his reply. Trev grabbed his arm and pulled him in close as he gritted through his teeth. Some of the scientists around the lab began to take notice, sensing the confrontation. Trev released his grasp and smiled politely to the Gawn working across the room. They hurried along, seeking to distance themselves from their audience. "I agreed to help you snatch that gravity whatever. I didn't sign on to blow up an entire building," Trev said.
   Cal stood his ground. "If we don't do this, they'll just build another—a whole army of those Gravity Wells waging war across the galaxy."
   Trev sighed. "Hope you have a plan, kid." Cal smiled. "I'll improvise." He pat Trev on the shoulder and continued toward their destination. Two identical guards posted in front of the access door to the lab. Cal saw the red light on the keypad and knew they needed the decoder to get past. Guards wouldn't exactly look favorably on a blatant intrusion through their security. They were going to be a problem. "Let's see if I still have my old charm," Trev spoke soothingly. As they neared the men at the door, Trev relaxed his posture in an attempt to radiate a sense of casual comfortability. Oppositely, Cal had stiffed up and molded into a marbled stone, fully uncertain as to what method might facilitate the preferential outcome. The guards quickly zoned in on the men approaching, not wavering in their blank expressions. Cal's attempt to profile them proved futile. He hoped Trev might have more luck. 

"Morning Gentlemen, we were requested in the lab. Some kind of security issue. Boss didn't seem to wanna lay all the details on me," Trev schmoozed. The guard seemed hesitant in accepting this lie. "We didn't hear anything." "Just got the order over evocom a minute ago. Sounded like he was in a rush, probably didn't get the chance to let you know we were coming." Time seemed to fade into slow motion waves as the guard eyed up Trev, slowly lowering his gaze to the metallic hand. As his eyes locked in on the distinct feature, Cal realized their fatal mistake. He knew all about the physical requirements and specifications needed to enter any sort of personal defense profession. Cybernetics were one way applications were immediately rejected; the risk of mechanical failure on the job was one few employers were willing to make. Trev moved in a sharp reflex before the guards had time to react. He balled up his cybernetic fist and punched the guard hard in the face. Cal wound up and threw the other against the plated wall, giving him a kick for good measure as his body slid down the surface and onto the floor. They stood there a moment, stunned.
 "We have about a minute until alarms sound," Cal said. Trev wasted no time in swiping the keycard from one the guards and unlocked the laboratory door. Cal rushed in, immediately recognizing the Gravity Well capsule resting behind the containment field on the opposite side of the room. Gren's black eyes grew two whole sizes as he realized who had entered his lab. Cal drew his plasmer pistol, feeling rather awkward with his sights trained on a creature so small. "We're not here to hurt you, but the Gravity Well comes with us," Cal told him.
 Gren complied. "Of course, sir. Just please be careful, it's... it's dangerous." Cal brushed past the Gawn toward the containment field while Trev watched Gren and the other scientists carefully. Cal stood in front of the access terminal that shielded it from his grasp. Brilliant flickerings of cobalt energy danced inside the metal cylinder. Entering a series of commands into the terminal, the containment field deactivated, lowering the capsule onto the pedestal. He snatched it into his hands, the glow of the reaction lighting his fingers up a prominent shade of blue. Cal stowed the capsule away into a pack strapped across his back and secured it shut. Cal turned to Gren. "The Grav reactor—I need you to overload it. Then take all your scientists and get far away from the facility."
 Gren's face was an expression of overwhelming fear. "I... can't—" His stumbled words cut off by the loud wailing of the alarm. The lab shrouded in rhythmic flashing of red lights as the alarm drummed on. A low pattering of boots from the hall beyond the door rose into an audible crescendo. Guards were closing in on them fast.
 Pointing his plasmer directly at Gren, "Do as he says." Trev lost all humor in his voice. The feeble Gawn raised his hands to shield his face. He cowered before them. "Alright. I'll... do it," he chattered. Rushing over to a control panel across the lab, Gren entered a series of digits on the display as he bypassed the security precautions. A bar displayed on the screen of the reactor's energy levels. Gren took his finger and slid the gage all the way down, causing the Grav vortex housed inside to go critical. Overhead the containment field spiraled out of control, shooting beams of energy arcing in every direction. The barrier quickly overloaded from the bombardment and tentacles of blue lightning engulfed the room. 

             Gren and the other Gawn scurried away into the maintenance hatch, fleeing far away from the facility in a matter of moments. Knowing they wouldn't be able to follow, Cal and Trev fixed their plasmers at the pounding on the door. They took cover behind the work benches spread across the space, their only shelter from the continuous shower of Grav energy spikes. An acrid singeing of hot metal filled the air as a lasguard drove through the laboratory door. Plasmer bolts erupted from the newly formed passage, each shot melting away more of the metallic border. Cal returned fired at the entrance as the room became a sea of smoke and crackling energy—an abstract painting of blue and orange streaks. The men powered through the molten tare, their lasguards at the ready. Yet these were no ordinary guards, but Rionaughts, dressed head to toe in their signature white and chrome armor. They advanced in a coordinated movement Cal knew far too well, holding their lasguards steady, and continuing to take pot shots out from behind their shields. Trev fired a well time bolt that connected with the Rionaught's head just as he made his last peak. "We have to get out. Reactor's gonna blow," Cal said between firing off shots. "There's an exit behind us. Concentrate fire on them," Trev advised. Their heads down low, their bodies pressed firm up against their respective cover, Cal fired off a series of plasmer bolts toward the Rionaughts. Several quickly found their mark, the chrome plating evaporated off their bodies. More boots sounded down the hall. Reinforcements had arrived. "Kid, hand me that plasma puddle!" Trev shouted, pointing to the ground at his feet. Cal stared back. "Plasma what?" Trev pointed to the object again, aggressively this time. "The carthing grenade!" Cal reached down and tossed Trev the plasma grenade. A metal sphere, pulsing with orange energy inside. "They don't teach Luxaran slang on Empria, Trev. Afraid I'm a bit out of practice." Trev sighed as he hurled the plasma grenade over his shoulder. The device landed at the Rionaught's feet, exploding out like an egg from its shell. The molten yolk oozed out, disintegrating the metal floor below. Rionaughts tumbled down one by one into the sizzling chasm. And Cal recalled where plasma grenades had derived their colloquial name—a molten puddle of plasma. They had their opportunity now. Cal grabbed one of the fallen Rionaught's lasguards off the ground and dashed for the exit. Plasmer fire sailed in behind them as the door sealed shut. A long corridor leading to the rear of the facility greeted them on the other side. Sprinting to the end, they burst through the last set of doors and made it to the outdoor storage area. Thousands of massive crates were stacked into towers looming high above. Further down at the other end of the metallic forest, a starship docked on one of the landing pads. "More Rionaughts will be here any second. We gotta go," Cal declared.
 A voice from overhead nearly made them jump. "Actually, I dealt with the rest. Wanted to bring you in myself," the voice came from a female. Unlike any female Cal had ever seen—a Faen. Described in a single word, the Faen would be regarded as beautiful, their every feature soft and elegant. From their smooth light blue and white patterned skin, to their brightly colored purple eyes, they were angelic in their presence. Thin, pointy ears resided on the side of their faces. They possessed a flattened nose that consisted of only two slits for nostrils and an overall body shape quite comparable to that of a Human, though not a f
   The image of their species had not been exaggerated, her figure one of exceptional beauty. She wore a dark grey, sleeveless tunic with a high collar and several knives decorated across her belt. From far on top of the storage crates, were it not for her oddly shaded skin, she could easily have been mistaken for human.

             The Faen withdrew a cylindrical hilt from her belt and ignited the las tech core within. A flowing laser beam condensed into a flexible whip extended from the hilt as a stream of lighting, burning a bright, fluorescent blue. With a flick of her wrist the lasclaw lashed out and scorched the side of one of the crates. Cal drew his lasguard and shielded in front of Trev. Her acrobatic expertise became adamant as she flipped off her perch and began her assault down towards them, kicking off the adjacent stack to slow her descent. She landed on the ground with a soft pattering of her boots that spiraled into a roll. Cal raised the lasguard as the lasclaw rocketed towards him. The two fields collided, producing a thick white smoke and an electric rippling that stood the hairs up along the back of his neck. The assassin went into a frenzy, lashing out in a series of strikes. Cal felt himself being maneuvered backwards as he was driven further onto his toes in desperation to parry the attacks, each deflection by a more narrow margin.
   Trev stood back, unsure of how to intervene. Her movements were hard to track—the various flips and dodges unpredictable. Trev fired off several plasmer bolts toward the feinting warrior that she evaded with a gymnast's precision. The glowing tentacle darted toward Cal, winding up and coming down hard with all its momentum on the side of his arm. Cal arched his back and winced in pain, absorbing the shock throughout his body as the lasclaw left a lasting burn in the deep layers of his tissue. The Faen grabbed one of the familiar Grav stars and hurled it toward Trev. Sailing into the ground at his feet, the pointed star cracked open on impact and spawned the gravity vortex. The whirlwind engulfed him in a mere moment, lifting off the ground and sucking him toward the core of the pulsing blue star. Trev flailed arms in a futile effort for freedom, like a rag doll, unable to control his own body. Instead, he was simply forced to flow through the motions. Cal, realizing Trev was at her complete mercy, rushed to occupy the Faen's attention. With the flick of her wrist, the whip wrapped around his waist and pulled him toward her with great velocity, his arms restrained at his sides. As Cal reached the assassin, a sharp pain rose in his lower abdomen, quickly becoming all consuming. His knees grew weak as he suffered through the lasclaw's entanglement. Trev was subjugated to watch helplessly as Cal hung over the cold surface of the cargo bay. "Cal!" But there he waited, suspended in stasis like a piece of space debris. Trev desperately stretched his fingers to reach for the plasmer strapped to his hip. His digits twitched violently as the handle slowly came within reach, grabbing hold and tearing free from its holster. Trev fired a single shot at the Grav star in the floor below, dropping to the ground with a loud crash. The Faen released Cal, causing him to stumble back. He recovered in an instant and launched a charged shot at the Faen, scorching the side of her abdomen. She pursed her lips and stumbled back clutching her side, feeling the melting of her flesh. Trev fired off another series of bolts. Her strength was waning. With a speedy exit, she grappled with her whip and hurled herself back on top of the cargo stacks. They fired a volley of shots as she sailed upward, each one burning into the side of the metal containers. As she disappeared over the top, Cal knew she was gone. He lowered his plasmer in defeat. The stomping of boots became crisp in the air once again—more Rionaughts. Trev grabbed Cal by the shoulder. "Kid, you gotta go." Trev pushed him toward the starship docked at the landing pad. "Hey, I'm not leaving you. Not like I did Reg. I won't make that mistake again." Cal stared Trev down, seemingly unaware of the approaching danger. Trev shook sense back into him. "Yes, you can. You have to. Carth, you deserve better than this. Better than this life. That's all I ever wanted for you."
   "Come with me."
   Trev shook his head. "Not this time, kid." Trev handed him an evosheet. "Take this—all my smuggling routes. Coordinates to get past the shield wall." He pressed the digital scroll into his hands. "There's a distortion in the energy field. Pass through it and it'll fry the carth out of your ship's shields, but you can make it." The Rionaughts burst through the doors to the cargo bay. Trev grabbed Cal and shoved him toward the starship ramp. Trev slid into cover behind the small cargo crates resting on the landing pad.
 Cal stopped on the ramp. "Trev, I—"
 "I'll be fine, kid. I live for this kind of stuff." He grinned wide like he always did
 Cal simply nodded, knowing he would understand all the words he could never say through the common gesture. He turned and ran up the ramp, hitting the button as it folded up into the ship.
 Trev popped up from behind the crate and pulled out his second plasmer, firing a hailstorm of plasmer bolts at the forces enclosed around him. A surge of wind weighed down on him as the starship took off and sailed up through the atmosphere. Suddenly, a brilliant chasm of light surged across the sky as it shattered the shell of the facility into pieces. Shoots of Grav energy exploded out from the inside, swallowing the structure whole. Firing ceased as the facility imploded on itself like a black hole sucking all matter up into a single point. As the Rionaughts looked over in disbelief, Trev fired off a volley of plasmer bolts, knocking each one down like a line of tin cans. He stepped out from behind the crate and walked over to the pile of defeated men lying still on the floor. White trails poured off their singed armored suits. A massive crater spawned where the facility once stood. Black smoke lifted into the sky as a signal to what had occurred. Sparks of sapphire lingered in the darkness. A fiery burst of wind erupted through the air. Trev turned as Basilar rocketed down from above, landing hard with a crunching of his boots on the rubble. The Gravjet on his back vented off steam, then sealed back up into an enclosed compartment in his armor. Basilar's plasmer was already fixed on his target. Trev fired one bolt at the Paratore, hitting dead center on his chestplate. Immediately, the blue nanites reassembled the composite plating. Basilar never even skipped a stride and Trev knew he had been bested. He chuckled to himself, tossed his plasmers to the ground and threw up his hands. "Cal Cabor, where did he go?" Basilar demanded.
 "You know, he said something about starting over on a farm I think," Trev snapped back.
 Basilar's response was silence, momentarily turning his attention to the side before swinging back around with a fist to Trev's kidney. Trev fell onto his knees, coughing through the radiating pain. "Not too good at asking questions. Gotta do it nicely." Trev laughed weakly. "Bounty hunter, she with you?" So, Kane was hiring bounty hunters now, Basilar thought. Basilar faced his back to Trev and began to stride away over the rocks towards the sparkling crater in the ground. Rionaught reinforcements swooped in and secured Trev, dragging him away into custody. Maniacal laughter filled the air as Trev was taken, cracking whatever jokes he could manage through the harsh treatment. Basilar stared into the crater, the arcs of blue reflecting off his golden lenses. He found himself lost in the way it danced from each remnant of a once functional machine. In it, Basilar saw his own mortality, and the expiration date of his own people. They needed Halla back, their home back. That became the only truth he knew anymore. For the first time in his life, he was questioning things he never had, feeling things he never felt. Basilar moved his fingers to the blazed crack in the side of his helmet and felt a jolt as the implant failed further.
   What's happening to me? Basilar wondered.           He slid his plasmer back into its holster, tucking the intruding thoughts away along with it. He did not have time for inner-conflict. There was still a job to do. 

 

Chapter 13: Beyond the Wall

        The flashing of plasmer bolts filled his view as the ramp closed shut. Cal made a mad dash for the cockpit, passing through the cabin of the small starship. From a quick overlook it appeared little more space fairing than a regular shuttle. Cal plopped into the pilot seat and examined the various controls. With how long it had been since he had flown a starship, the plethora of buttons on the control console's digital screen seemed rather alien. He retracted the landing gear and felt the purr of the engines come to life beneath his feet as he hit the ignition. In that moment, he was unsure if he would ever see Trev again. Yet somehow, Cal always felt he would. Cal pulled back on the pilot sticks as the sky lifted closer to him. Engaging full thrusters, he sailed away through the atmosphere, sighing in relief as he distanced from the doomed research facility.   He removed the bag storing the Gravity Well on his back and put it down next to the console. He could not help but marvel in the fluorescence the capsule emitted. He only wished it would not have cost so dearly. Cal began to ease up his guarded nature slightly as he leaned back in his chair. From behind, the sound of mechanical feet shuffled across the floor. Turning and drawing his plasmer from its holster, he came face to face with the on-board mechanic. "Oh my! I am sorry if I startled you. I assure you there is no cause for violence," the mechanic droned. "Just when I thought I'd get some peace and quiet." Cal lowered his plasmer. "What are your directives?"
 "I am a servant mechanic intended to assist with starship operations. I am capable of serving as quite the proficient copilot if you would allow me." Cal motioned to the seat on the other side of the console. "Thank you, sir." The mechanic sat down in the chair. The socket bulbs on his face gleamed as he analyzed information. "The archives show we do not have a launch scheduled at this time. Where is your intended destination?" "Karkken."
 "Karkken? Certainly such a mission would have been recorded somewhere in the archives. Do you have your clearance codes for the docking gate?" "Must have left them back at the facility."
 "For such an undertaking I am afraid I will have to insist on seeing those codes. There is no other way we could get past the shield wall, sir." Cal focused his attention back on flying as he attempted to drown out the incessant pestering of his mechanical copilot. He passed by the Legionary ships orbiting outside of Luxarus' reach virtually unnoticed inside his unambiguous starship. Cal reasoned with the devastation left in his wake, they would likely be kept otherwise occupied for a while. Cal pulled out the evosheet Trev had given him and entered the coordinates for the shield wall distortion into the ship's navigator. Homing in on the new destination, a circular waypoint appeared on the cockpit viewport's digital overlay. Not too much further, Cal thought. Increasing power to the engines, the ship propelled toward the outskirts of the Legionary system—where the shield wall resided. As the ship sailed to the vast horizon of blue energy, Cal could not help but feel humbled in its presence. He, and even his ship, paled in comparison to the greatness of this wall, single-handedly holding back an entire universe. A wave of anxiety rushed over him as the waypoint grew nearer. Never had he been less sure of a plan he committed to fully. He closed his eyes for a moment, suddenly taken back to a bottomless pit in his memories. Cal saw the Legionnaire falling. He recalled how it felt to dive after him, the only certainty being he had to save him. Time for that leap of faith one more time. "Sir, you're on a direct collision course with the shield wall! Contact would mean immediate—" A series of bright sparks and gear parts splattered against the wall, the mechanic silenced by the sound of Cal's plasmer piercing straight through his metallic skull. The mechanic's arms twitched, as if trying to comprehend its damage report. A smoking stump was all that remained of its processor. The shiny husk fell back onto the floor. Cal smiled as peaceful bliss ensued in the cockpit once again. Cal braced, tightening his grip on the arms of his chair as the starship went head on through the energy wall. Red lights flashed over the center console, warning of the imminent impact. The ship jerked back as it passed through the distortion. An arc of electricity ran over the outer surface of the ship like veins through marble. A loud pop sounded from the back of the ship and another alert flashed up on the overhead display. The ship's shields were completely overloaded. Trev was right again. Once the rhythm of lights and life or death messages subsided, Cal was finally able to direct his attention to the destination before him—Karkken. The desolate planet appeared as dark and dreary as described in the archives, resembling a single obsidian globe floating out in space. Orbiting around was the legendary fleet of Mulvain dreadnoughts—massive starships stretched out longer than any ship Cal had ever seen. Their thick plated hulls were spawned of an alloy derived from korite, the same midnight colored rock their planet was blanketed in. Looking past the vast armada and the twilight world, the fear dissipated, and an overpowering sense of beauty instilled within him. Cal laid eyes on the Nebulous system's famous Nebula for the first time— more grand and fantastic than was ever detailed. The luminous cloud stood behind Karkken like a backdrop to a beautiful painting, full of brilliant colors and swirls inside of the dark wisps of cosmic dust. The twinkling inside seemed to almost tell a story, and he wondered in that instance why it had been dormant all these years. Its mere presence was an anomaly. None of the Legion's scientists had been able to justify a satisfactory explanation for its existence. All they knew for sure, no stars were being formed inside its borders. It simply laid there, as if in wait for a still unknown signaling. Cal found himself holding his breath as he slowly passed beneath the colossal hull of one of the dreadnoughts. It came as no surprise when the newest alert began flashing red on the viewport overlay. Even a shuttle as small as this would only go undetected on scanners for so long. Now there was a dozen plasmer cannons locked on to his location. Cal lowered the ship, attempting to distance himself from the bombardment, executing a series of barrel rolls. Like shooting stars, the plasmer blasts rocketed toward the ship, their bright orange glare standing out sharply against the black. Evading the first few, the last plasmer blast skidded across the ship, damaging one of the rear engines. The ship became increasingly difficult to control as it hit the outer atmosphere of Karkken. It plummeted down to the surface with a trail of grey smoke following behind. Cal pulled the safety straps over his torso and secured himself tightly to the pilot's chair. He pulled up on the sticks, desperately trying to slow down the ship as the jagged rocks became larger in his view. The bottom of the ship scrapped against the top of a mountainous dome and dove into the valley below. Rocks and debris sputtered out from each side as the ship lugged along the rocky plain, tearing a deep scar into the crust before coming to a dead halt. 

 

Chapter 14: The Laprian

        The Laprian. Somehow as Cal hung vertically by the seat belts strapped across his chest, it was all that came to mind. The ship laid there beached up on a mountain of rocks. Cold winds delivered frost to its metallic hull, rapidly spreading across the surface. There was nothing but the cold black stone as far as the eye could see in every direction. This was the wasteland.
 Blood rushed to Cal's head in his unconscious state as he began to recollect of a better time—a simpler time. The sound of waves crashing over the rocks of Empria flooded his thoughts. The hot white sun beat down on his face. A childish laugh, belonging to the face of the sweetest girl he had ever known—Mara Farrow. Like her mother, she had always found the waves, their rhythmic soothing, to be an instrument of reflection. A place to reminisce and dream of what could be. Cal walked out onto the dock located off the coast of Emperion—a beautiful little spot permitted only to royalty. Mara sat at the end of the silver walkway suspended over the crystal blue water. Her feet hung down, moving the water around like a paintbrush against canvas. Three waveriders were lined up next to the dock. The vehicles differed from comets only in their extra features designed to keep seawater out of the Grav engines and an aesthetic that seemed naturally aquatic in nature. They raced over the surface of the water, leaving a trail of ripples in their midst. Mara turned around as one of Cal's boots made a creak in the metallic boards. She smiled. "Thought I lost you this time."
 "Gonna have to try harder than that, kid. Face it, you're predictable." He took a seat down beside her. "Better not be out here catching seastars again."
 She made a short chuckle and pointed out towards the horizon. "Have you seen what's really out there? I mean we live on a planet filled with water and spend all our time on the islands—or the bridges going to the next island." She gestured with her hands. "Seems like a waste to me." "You have everything you need right here."
 "I have plenty of things—there's a difference. I wanna make the kind of memories people buy Mem-stims for." Mara's eyes lit up wide as an open-mouthed expression spread across her face. "We have waveriders right here. Let's go out on the water!"
               Cal shook his immediately, trying to shut down the idea before it could develop any further. He knew better than anyone how determined she was once a new adventure sprouted in her mind. "No way. Your father would have my head if something happened to you out there."
               Mara cupped her hands together and pleaded for all she was worth. Cal rolled his eyes at the sight of her pouting face. She drooped her shoulders and let out an audible sigh as she realized he was not taking the bait. A moment later, in a single bound she popped up from the edge of the dock and darted over to a waverider parked on the side. Climbing into the driver's seat, she started the engine as the vehicle rose up over the water. Cal sprang up to chase after her. "Mara, no!" "I know you're not gonna let me go alone. Guess you'll just have to follow." Mara smirked as she raced away over the waves. Her long brown hair blew back like a smoke trail as the distance increased. "Carth!" Cal exclaimed as he jumped into another waverider.  The smell of salt filled his nostrils as he sped across the water. Mara grew further away as her waverider continued to accelerate. As fixated on the pursuit as Cal was, he could not help but revel in the beauty of the ocean this far away from shore. The waves were undisturbed by man's interventions. The silence was peaceful. Carth, the girl was getting to him just as she intended. 

Up ahead, Mara's vehicle was stopped in the middle of the vast sea. Cal slowed his speed as he came up on her. She leaned over the side of the waverider looking down at the transparent water below. "Careful you'll scare them away," she said in a harsh whisper. As his waverider came within view, a school of bioluminescent fish shined a bright shade of green beneath the waves, dancing through the watery depths in perfect unison. Mara was entranced by the way they dipped, and dived, and darted around in a single unit. As she examined closer, a growing shadow rose up from below the school of fish and a chasm opened wide, swallowing the school whole as a geyser burst through the surface of the water. A creature erupted through the tower of water high into the air. The resulting wave flipped Mara's waverider over with its nautical pull. Her attempt to hold onto the side failed, and tumbled into the drink. Cal dove after her, leaping into the water. The sea beast sailed over them in a wide arch, boasting a deep rumbling call through the air. The thick spiked shell it wore on its back, its long blue neck, and the four massive lobed fins identified itself as a laprian. In all his years on Empria, Cal had never once seen one. They were one of the primary hunters of the seas, though largely unconcerned by Humans. Nevertheless, the impressive size of the creatures made them a formidable foe when stranded out at sea.
    As the laprian reentered the water at the end of its trajectory, the splash formed another tidal wave that tossed them both around. Cal held on to Mara as he swam them back towards his waverider. He pressed a button on the side of the vehicle that lowered it to the watery surface. Cal lifted Mara up to grip the edge of the waverider. She pulled herself over and collapsed on the backseat. Cal joined in their state of exhaustion. After a long moment of total silence, they slowly built up the sounds of laughter. Mara looked over at Cal slumped in the front seat, drenched in seawater. His dark hair hung down like a wet rag. "Told you there was stuff worth seeing out here," Mara said.
   Cal chuckled to himself. "Let's just both agree to never mention this to your father." "Deal," they said in unison. "What do you think that laprian was thinking?" Mara proposed out loud.
   "Probably that we looked like some awfully big fish."
   "I think he was like me. He just wanted to see what else was out there..." She took a deep breath and let the calm wash over her. "When you expand your horizons, your field of view, you find out who you really are in the world." She stared up at the white hot sun. A splash sounded in the water beside them. They leaned up in their seats and peered over the edge of the waverider. The giant eye of the laprian stared back. Its massive eyelid blinked, fluttering a piece of seaweed off its face. The creature seemed to be watching them, as curious about them as they were him—a mutual observation. Mara jumped up in her seat and opened the trunk of the waverider. The hatch popped open, revealing the aquatic gear inside. Diving suits, deep sea evocoms, Grav boots, everything one might need to safely navigate the watery depths. As a natural explorer, it was not Mara's first time adventuring below the seas. She grabbed the suit and began to put it on with a clear familiarity. Cal however, had not had such experience, and as such—among other reasons—was not as inclined. Large bodies of water were scarce on Luxarus. When he first came to Empria, he was embarrassed to admit he did not know how to swim. It was one of the many things Mara taught him. "Mara, what do you think you're doing?" Cal asked. Mara slipped the sleek black suit over her body. She tapped the lastubes on top each shoulder, igniting the laser beam inside. 

"He wants us to follow him," she said. "Who?" Cal sounded in disbelief. "The laprian!"
   She motioned to the sea creature still floating beside their waverider. "There's no way I can let you dive in after that thing..." Cal began. A splash—"and you're already in the water."
   Mara swam to the laprian and grabbed hold of one of its shell's bony horns. She turned and looked at Cal, waving him into the water. "We both know you can't let me go alone," she teased. Cal grunted and begrudgingly threw on the diving suit and Grav boots. She knew exactly how to take advantage of him. He dropped down into the water and swam up next to her. Together they slid on their helmets, clipping down onto their suits. The evocoms booted up and their voices filtered through the channel in their glass domes. They felt a sharp pull and a sinking feeling as the laprian dove beneath the waves. They held on tight to its back as the creature swam with the full force of its fins. Cal felt the suits oxygen sensors come online, refreshing his system with clean air. He turned to Mara next to him, lost in awe. "Look!" she yelled, pointing down to the ocean floor. Lined along the sand was an expansive reef of an endless variety of organisms. Fish chased each other around, darting in and out of holes in the rocks. Large predators swam overhead, waiting for their chance to strike. Grassy weeds swayed with the roll of the currents. And there again was the glimmering of bioluminescence. Something about the organic light fascinated them both to no end. Cal remembered the only other time he had gone on a dive like this—well not quite like this. Towards the end of his training at the Legionary academy, they began conducting their final mission scenarios. He was tasked with an underwater infiltration mission. Wearing the same kind of diving suits, he and his team plummeted beneath waves. Cal still recalled the sight of a plasmer bolt sailing through the water, burning each droplet of water it touched. It singed into steam until the bolt could travel no further and died out. "This was worth it," Mara said to herself, smiling beneath the glass helmet. "The Legionnaire is going to kill me," Cal muttered. Mara's eyes shot open, gleaming intently. She slapped Cal on his shoulder, forcing his attention to the ocean floor ahead. At first, the looming shadow seemed like another massive reef. As its edges became more defined it appeared as a watery monster. But as the laprian swam closer, diving further into the depths, what they saw was far more magnificent to behold. Right below where the sunlight stopped streaming into the ocean, a colossal starship rested on the floor. Sand had engulfed much of its structure, but the ship still maintained its integrity. Cal had never seen one of this particular model. Its design seemed old, the banner on the side of the hull did not belong to the Galactic Legion. But as he looked closer, he knew that symbol was familiar. "Unbelievable. The story's true!" Mara exclaimed.
   Cal looked at her, puzzled. "What story? You know what that ship is?"
   "It's just like in the archives—as clear as day. The Golden Legion. That's one of their ships—has to be." "Down here after all this time? That was centuries ago."
   "When they first invaded Empria, they came in starships just like these. They weren't prepared for such a watery planet, so most of the ships crashed right into the ocean during the ensuing battle."

"Yeah, we all know the story."
   The Golden Legion were the mythical founders of the Galactic Legion—an army of fierce soldiers bent on galactic conquest. They came down as a storm from the heavens in their starships, dressed head to toe in golden armored suits and wielding metal projectile rifles. Those that first called Empria home could only hold back the tide for so long as the Legion rained down upon them. Little is known about the Golden Legion's ancestral world, but it is understood it was far from the island paradise they encountered on Empria. Once they brought the natives to submission, they planted their roots down—soon conquering Luxarus, Halla, Canopen, and branding it all the Legionary system. Centuries of peace followed once their thirst for conquest had been quelled. There they erected the shield wall to keep out all others that might seek to encroach on their claim. Just then, the laprian pulled up, rocketing back toward the surface. They clung to the laprian's shell as two mollusks might, feeling the rush of bubbling water pass by as they came back up over the waves. The creature turned its long neck around as if urging them off. They complied. The laprian hummed its deep, rich melody. A farewell of sorts. Then dove far beneath the waves and out of sight. Mara felt sad her new friend had left so soon. But their sights left a lot to absorb—a strange and unexpected day to say the least. They swam back over to the waverider, climbing back on board. "We have to tell someone about the ship!" Mara yelled. Cal popped off his helmet. "Hold on. If we tell someone now, I'll have to explain to your father why you were out here in the first place." Mara slouched her shoulders, annoyed and disappointed. Cal brought up his evopatch and entered the coordinates into his log. "I'll give the coordinates as a little tip to my friend—he's a Rionaught in the oceanic patrol. If there's anything in that ship, we'll hear about it soon enough." Cal rested his hand on her shoulder. She sighed and took a seat, accepting the less fun option of the scenario. It certainly ended up being quite the find. Ringing through his mind even after all this time, was that same bellowed hum the laprian sang as he flew over their heads. As if it breathed life right back into him, he emitted a deep gasp of air from his diaphragm and sprang forward in his seat. Cal slowly began to gain understanding of his surroundings as the confusion faded away. He felt the resistance of the seat straps holding him in place as he tried move. Pulling on them for all he was worth, he realized they were stuck. Cal pulled a knife from his belt and sliced the straps free, immediately sending him spiraling down to the back of the titled ship. His body made a heavy thud as it hit the rear door. Cal gritted his teeth at the pain, the superficial burn on his arm further intensifying—a souvenir from the Faen assassin's lasclaw. His anger boiled up inside.
   Rage was made secondary as the sound of tumbler wheels crunching over the rocks played in his ears. Cal turned over and scrambled for a means to protect himself. The tumbler came to a stop outside the ship, the engine chugging along. He reached for the plasmer fallen out of his holster. Tumbler doors opened, quickly followed by armored boots pounding into the ground. Cal counted the footsteps in his head, reasoning there were at least four distinct sets—four Mulvain rapidly approaching. Cal leaned against the wall of the ship and faced the door with his plasmer raised. The ship rocked slightly at the noise of claws digging into the exterior. A loud scrapping of metal pierced his ears, followed by the slap of a wave of frozen air. Cal fired a shot from his plasmer as the Mulvain tore the door right off the ship's hull and tossed it over into the rocks. Before his second shot could land, a thick, scaled covered arm reached in and grabbed him by the chest. The Mulvain threw him out of the ship effortlessly onto the unyielding surface of the Karkken wasteland. Cal hit the ground hard, laying on his back like a fish out of water as the Mulvain warriors surrounded him. The aliens stood as monstrous towers ominously looming over him. One of them had smoke pouring off the armor on his shoulder— a graze mark from his plasmer bolt. The Mulvain muttered a series of undistinguishable words to his companions. Cal merely looked up at them and realized communication would be impossible. He wouldn't be talking himself out of this one. His thoughts began to race, searching out frantically in all directions for assistance—an escape—anything to get him out alive. The Gravity Well, he thought. The device was still inside the ship, and he was not about to risk it falling into Mulvain hands. Cal hoped they would be unable to decipher its purpose, but Mulvain may not be as unintelligent as the Legion stereotypes led him to believe. Cal struggled onto his feet. "Now listen boys, let's be friends here. I'm just gonna get some stuff out of my ship and then I would very much like to speak to your Bane." The Mulvain let out a series of angry grunts and words he doubted were friendly. One of the larger ones grabbed him and held his arms behind his back. Cal jerked around in vain before he determined any further resistance would only result in his own harm. His boots scrapped along the cold korite ground as they carried him away from the shipwreck. The Mulvain opened the rear door to their tumbler, revealing a rusted cage inside. They swung the door open and lifted him off the ground, tossing him inside. "Hey!" Cal yelled back. He dashed for the door as the bars slammed shut in his face. The lock slipped on and the doors to the tumbler closed with another bang. He sat there in the dark, inside his rusty metal cage. The engines fired up and the tumbler drove away across the rocky plain. Cal wondered if he was being carried off to his new life in slavery now. He had heard stories of how Mulvain would often enslave members of the lesser clans. Surely a Human showing up on their doorstep would make a fine addition to any Mulvain's collection. It would be a poor way to end his mission—before it even began.
   Cal slumped back in the cage, leaning against the cold metal bars. As the tumbler continued its journey across the wasteland, ghostly cries echoed through the valley. The shrieking amplified as it bounced from rock to rock. The hard surfaces of the mountain faces acted like an amphitheater for the valley below. Cal felt the engines to the tumbler accelerate as the cries grew louder. He had no idea what was out there, but by the response of the Mulvain driving, they were not looking to stay long enough to let him find out. 

 

Chapter 15: Efforts in Diplomacy



   The continuous rattling of the starship's inner workings made Jasen uneasy as they ventured further along towards the shield wall docking gate. Jasen still had trouble wrapping his mind around why he had been volunteered to return the traitor to Empria. Mulvain were not known for their diplomacy, and he doubted his intellect would give him much of an edge against these fiery people. Bane Mont'gar, the leader of this race of warriors—for the little he knew of him—was not known for being friendly or reasonable. Near all Mulvain history consisted of conflict between the clans of Karkken. Recent times were no exception. But as the years went on, the escalation of conflict continued to the point where the prosperity of Mulvain society was surely being halted. Were it not for the enormously quick reproduction time of the Mulvain—capable of hatching dozens of eggs at once—their population may have truly been in jeopardy. Foreseeing this inevitable future, the more noble leaders of the clans came together in an effort to unite under one Mulvain leadership. A unified Karkken, stronger than ever, became their rallying cry. But when it came to Mulvain, they were born to challenge—to fight for dominance. And so, the Mulvain Civil War broke out. Half the clans backed the bold and calculating Mont'gar, Warlord of clan Rydon. While the other half supported the relentless killer Gorn, Warlord of clan Reave. After a long and treacherous conflict that nearly decimated the Mulvain entirely, Mont'gar claimed the throne and the right to rule over all clans as Bane of Karkken. But with the wounds of civil war still fresh, and the blood of Gorn not yet dried, the people would need more time to recover. Looking across at the bench across from him, Jasen was glad he was being escorted by a full squad of Chromarian guards, no longer having a Legionnaire to protect. Jasen immediately saw the irony in their recent unemployment, as the Captain of the Chromarian guard himself committed the treachery. Jasen felt sorrow in this. Legionnaire Farrow was a good man who deserved better. What would happen now, Jasen was yet unsure. He held his hands together, feeling the growing perspiration between his palms as his nerves further betrayed him. Jasen rested forward, forearms on his thighs, hoping to calm his labored breaths. A maintenance hatch opened on the other end of the cabin and a Gawn scurried out from inside. The sound of his bare, clawed feet pattering on the hard floor snapped Jasen out of his trance. The Gawn's white color was unusual for most of their species, and the shiny glow that his moist skin reflected told he was still full of life. He wore the outfit of a regular technician, but walked with noticeably more confidence than usually observed in their people. The Gawn sat himself down on the bench next to Jasen, his short legs dangling as they struggled to reach the ground. Jasen turned his head to look at him, surprised by the Gawn's demeanor. "First time going to Karkken?" the Gawn asked. Jasen did not answer, simply taking another deep breath. Sensing his nervousness, "Whole planet of Mulvain there. Don't worry, with all these guards you got with you, they're bound to at least stop a few of them before they get you," the Gawn teased. "Do I know you?" Jasen asked. He disliked the informality with which the Gawn addressed him.
 "Name's Talc. Never met a Gawn with a sense of humor before I take it? Not surprising—few have," Talc muttered along. Jasen stared back. "Can't say I've had the pleasure, no."
 At first glance, Talc was a Gawn much like any other, but beneath those endless black eyes was an inner drive not found in most. An undeniable genius of technology and engineering, he had been trained from birth in the signature Gawn profession. But his years in the Legionary capital had revealed many truths to him. And so his need to serve lessened, replaced by his own ambitions. It was a boldness Jasen was not prepared for.

             The starship came to a sudden stop as they reached the outside of the docking gate. Two massive arms extending out from a large ring imbedded in the shield wall. The ship piloted right between the wide structures and the gate's appendages latched onto the side of the hull. Jasen gripped the edge of his seat as the ship shifted slightly. The ring charged up and launched the ship forward, temporarily dispersing the shield within the ring to allow for safe passage. They sailed beyond the wall, unrestricted in their movement. Jasen breathed out a sigh of relief. All that lied in front of them was Karkken. Thoughts of strategy ran through Jasen's head, dismissing each one as impractical one after another. There was a reason they had no Legionary ambassador to Karkken after all. Now he would attempt to be the first.
 "Allow me to introduce your best friend for the remainder of your stay on this gem of a planet." Talc motioned to the mechanic hastily shuffling toward them. The two glowing bulbs in his helm scanned along frantically until settling on Jasen. The white and gold bordered paintjob of his chassis easily marked him as a Legion service mechanic.
 "Greetings ambassador. It is truly an honor to be your translator. My classification is TX-42. As one of engineer Talc's newest and most advanced models, I trust you will be quite pleased with my functionality," the mechanic chirped enthusiastically. Jasen turned to Talc. "You built him yourself?"
 "It's my job. I build things. And I'm pretty good at it if I do say so myself." Talc lowered his voice to a whisper and leaned in closer to Jasen. "Between you and me, I'm working on a new piece of tech that'll render this guy and every other translator obsolete—just you wait." Talc had a cocky grin on his baby-like face.
 Jasen was amazed by this strange little Gawn he had encountered. He had a gut feeling Talc might prove to be trouble down the line, but if he was anywhere near as skilled as he claimed, he would be nice to have around. The ship came to a slow crawl as they descended upon Mulvaire Keep—a stronghold high atop Karkken's tallest mountain range. The structure itself appeared ancient, crumbling beneath its own weight, but the lifeless castle showed poor promise for what could be found inside. Waiting at one of the landing pads in front of the entrance were several Mulvain warriors— their welcoming party it seemed. The landing gear engaged, and the ship fluttered down softly in front of the keep. Jasen stood up, attempting to swallow his anxiety as the ramp lowered onto the surface. He nearly jumped at the sound of the ramp touching down. The frigid air of the planet blew across his face, sending a shiver racing down his spine. Jasen reached for the zipper on his cargo jacket—navy, embroidered with gold accents—sealing it up tighter against the cold. "Shall we precede, ambassador?" TX asked.
 Jasen nodded and walked slowly down the walkway to the Mulvain skulking at the bottom, outfitted head to toe in their plated scale armor splotched in a variety of coloration. On their backs, they stowed plasmer rifles and blackened swords Jasen swore were longer than his whole body. He slowed his pace to let the Chromarians take place before him, TX and Talc at his side. Jasen peered out from a space between the guard's barrier of enameled armor. They parted slightly to allow Jasen through. He met the Mulvain eye to eye as he raised his head up toward them, like gazing up at the blackened sun. TX began to immediately translate Jasen's words for the Mulvain. "Greetings honored warriors. I have been sent here by the Galactic Legion to retrieve a Human charged with the murder of our Legionnaire." His words did not seem to prompt a response. TX continued, "Bane Mont'gar is expecting me." 

             A warrior stepped forward, asserting himself as the leader of the group. His eyes scanned Jasen along, as if sizing him up—assessing his worth. He flared out his mandibles casually as he did so, making Jasen feel visibly uneasy. As unfamiliar with Human customs as they were, even to the Mulvain, body language was universal. The warrior's deep voice began to rumble as he spoke in the Mulvain tongue. TX translating after every word into Legionary. "This Human is terrified." The Mulvain made a noise of foreign laughter. The Mulvain leader gestured to Jasen and turned towards the tall columns lining the entrance to the stone temple. The door was one monstrous slab of dark rock, rumbling the very ground as it lifted like a drawbridge. Dim lights lit up pale shadows as the passageway opened before them. Jasen filed in closely behind his guards as they ventured down the corridor. Next to him, Talc examined every fine detail of the passage. Every little marking on the wall was of great fascination—every statue a story. Jasen turned his attention forward, taking solace in the Gawn's inquisitive attitude. Perhaps visiting Karkken would be a great story he would tell one day. Maybe it could even be enjoyable. Maybe.
 The end of the passageway opened into a vast chamber with several different avenues shooting off in all directions. Lastubes hung on the walls and down from the grand ceiling far above. A giant statue depicting a Mulvain warrior raised on a thick stone pedestal stood proudly in the center of the chamber. The warrior dressed in the same plated armor and carried with him a ceremonial blade. Even knowing it a mere statue, from the aggressive stance and flexing of its mandibles, it still reflected an aura of intimidation. At the base of the stone juggernaut, a dozen fur covered hands reached up for submission. It was the end of a long story, its beginnings all but lost to those outside this world. Jasen's appreciation was cut short by a booming thud. The sound of two Mulvain's heads ramming together echoed throughout the empty chamber. More Mulvain rushed in to watch the dispute. By the way the others spectated the brawl between these hulking reptilians, Jasen gathered this was a regular occurrence. The colored markings on their suits distinguished the fighters as hailing from two different clans. The black crescent moons, signified Clan Reave. While the blue arrowhead belonged to Clan Luthara. The brawlers made a series of strange groans and grunts as they punched and crashed into each other. Jasen positioned himself a safe distance away—an effort to stay uninvolved. He looked over at Talc, nearly laughing as the short creature tried to push his way past the Chromarian guards obscuring his view. Genuine glee washed across Talc's face as he cheered on the fight. As hostile glances from the Mulvain onlookers fell upon him, Talc retreated back into the anonymity of the crowd. Their Mulvain escort let out a forceful snorting sound, which Jasen took to be disgust or general disinterest. His departure from the scene signaled their progress onward and down the tunnel on the opposite end of the camber, turned arena. Talc whispered to Jasen, "I think I'm going to like this place." A wide grin spread across his face. Jasen tried to ignore him, but couldn't help but smile a little. The passage ahead was different than the one they arrived through. The walls were lined in layers of gritty metal with lastubes dispersed along. Several doors were set up as offshoots of the walkway. Jasen peered into one of the rooms as a Mulvain walked inside. He could see dozens of giant eggs in a protected enclosure underneath a powerful heating element—a breeding room. With the extreme cold environment on Karkken, the Mulvain had to shroud their eggs in an excess of heat to ensure proper development. These breeding chambers were used by the more prestigious warriors to allow for their numerous offspring to be born strong. Their guide came to a halt at the end of the passage in front of a wide door of darkened metal. He seemed hesitant to intrude, pausing before he pressed the button to slide the door open. The room was a reflection of the twilight world in which they inhabited—dreary with a scarcity of light. Faces of several Mulvain clan leaders were highlighted only by the glow of the massive holographic galaxy map projected from the terminal in the center of the room. Behind them were weapons propped up on display and terminals that allowed access to the archives. Large heating elements hung down from above, coils glowing bright red, cushioning the room into comfortable warmth. 

By one quick approximation, Jasen knew they were interrupting. Standing at the head of the projection console was Bane Mont'gar himself. In the short time since he had first encountered a Mulvain, Jasen already knew this would be the most intimidating he would likely encounter. The Bane's armor plates were streaked in a deep, crimson red. Clan Rydon's bleeding red trident emblem was tattooed across his large, domed forehead. The bloody fury stood in stark contrast to his void-black scales. The mandibles encompassing his mouth hung down like fangs coated in shimmering wetness from a freshly devoured meal. Mont'gar stood elevated, and more muscular than the Warlords gathered around the console, each representing their respective clan. As a people that valued strength over everything else, Mont'gar's physical superiority did not surprise the ambassador in the slightest. As the door latched shut behind them, Mont'gar looked up from the holographic map and switched it off.  The drastic separation from the polished, white armored suits of the Chromarian guard from their bleak and rustic surroundings became evident. Mont'gar seemed to rise taller to amplify his presence. With the wave of his hand, he motioned for the other clan leaders to leave the room.  One of the Warlords beside him spoke with a tone of command and importance. Jasen honed his attention on the one Mulvain daring to speak up to the Bane. He had light grey scales with two black markings stacked on top of each other on his forehead, resembling crescent moons lying on their side: the Warlord of Clan Reave. His silver metallic armor was decorated with streaks of black war paint. Dents and scratches etched deeply into the korite armor showed a high degree of battle ware. "Waited long enough, Bane. My warriors are ready for the expedition," the Warlord spoke. "I suggest you search for your sense of respect before seeking out the Norwraiths. May serve you better in the long run, Warlord Rallow," Mont'gar snarled.
 "I can end their plague once and for all," Rallow declared.
 "I won't be challenged here."
 Rallow came in face to face with the Bane, close enough for their mandibles to cross. Thick saliva poured off the short appendages as the Warlord grew more impatient with the Bane. "Enough. We have guests." Mont'gar directed their attention to the ambassador and his escorts standing in the doorway. Rallow took a step back. He tossed his fierce looking sword over his back and snatched his plasmer up into his claws. An exhale of annoyance fled his nostrils as he stormed out the war room. Jasen signaled TX to translate his statement to the Bane. "Thank you, Bane, for welcoming us into your stronghold. Our people have not had much contact for quite some time, but we have come today to retrieve a Human criminal from your custody. He has committed acts of treason against the Legion and we humbly ask that you allow us to take him away to receive swift justice," Jasen said, followed immediately by TX's translation into the Mulvain language. Mont'gar stared Jasen directly in the eye, his expression, even on his monstrous face, looked unpleasant. "Quiet, metal man. I speak your tongue, Human," Mont'gar's deep voice boomed loudly in the space. Jasen was taken aback for a moment, surprised by the Mulvain's capacity for the Legionary language. He realized then there might be more to these aliens than their rage and fighting spirit. He made a note in his mind. Their intelligence was not to be underestimated.
 "Do you know how I brought the clans together here on Karkken, ambassador?" Mont'gar asked.
 Jasen offered a diplomatic reply, "I'm afraid we have little record of Mulvain history. One of many things I hope to change."
 Mont'gar continued past Jasen's response, "Told them to join me. And when they refused, as I knew their pride would, I brought down an army of my strongest warriors. Forced them to their knees. I told them, 'imagine what strength we would have with the force of an empire'." He left the words hanging in the air.
 Clan Rydon had long been the strongest of the Mulvain Clans. When Mont'gar sought to unify them all under his banner, Clan Reave was the only clan capable of amassing an opposition. In the end however, Gorn did not share Mont'gar's dream. He merely wanted the glory of the greatest war in Mulvain history, violence being all he craved. More than anything, he wished to see the war rage on into infinity. "I have no love for your Legion or the justice you speak of. Why should I surrender my captive to you?" Mont'gar sought to toy with him.
 "In hopes of new prosperity between our people." Jasen tried to project the offer with a sense of genuine optimism. One look at Mont'gar's face told Jasen the olive branch was less than appealing.
 "We enjoy our solitude on Karkken. I allowed your entry to my world out of... curiosity," Mont'gar explained. He walked to the back of the room and faced opposite them. "Seen few Humans in my lifetime. None have impressed me yet. If this man you speak of has done what you claim, perhaps he'll be the first." A devious smile crinkled his scaly skin. Mont'gar pressed a button on one of the terminals. The metal wall at the back of the room lifted up, revealing an overlook with a view of the valley down below. Mont'gar strided out on the platform. A look of pure admiration and a soft content hum purred from his throat as he greeted his dominion. But the city in the valley was more disheveled than the stronghold in which he resided. Trails of dust blew up into the air behind tumblers rolling through the streets. Half the buildings appeared to be little more than masses of rubble. What little light fell upon this sunless world was concentrated here. Glowstone lined nearly every building, illuminating every alley and local market—every crowd of squabbling fighters. At the city's center was the main attraction— the arena. Standing more prominently than any other structure, the stadium was crafted from the same black Karkken stone that composed the planet's surface: korite. The obsidian shaded stone could be refined into an unfracturable metal that made up the fabric of Mulvain weaponry. Everything from their broadswords to their thick, plated armor was composed of korite. Mont'gar pointed to the arena and looked back at Jasen. In the quiet essence of the air, Jasen could hear the roaring of the crowd. The chanting was all consuming, drawing him in to the games. Visions of great battle played throughout his mind. So vividly they became indistinguishable as memories or dreams. "You want your Human?" Mont'gar motioned out to the arena. "Go get him."
 A dropship rose up in front of the platform and hovered patiently as its ramp lowered and extended out toward them. Mont'gar looked to Jasen, clearly expected him to board. Not wanting to extend a show of disrespect, Jasen hesitantly stepped out onto the ramp. "Very well," Jasen said. He balanced with his arms as he nervously shuffled into the small ship. His guards followed close behind. Talc hopped on with an eagerness that declared he was ready for whatever was in store next. It was an eagerness Jasen could not hope to match. TX struggled to maintain his balance as he made way across the ramp. "Oh my!" the mechanic exclaimed as he made a momentary dip to the right. His legs went rigid, holding himself upright, then scurried along into the ship. Mont'gar boarded the craft last. The weight of his massive build seemed to sink the ship as he stepped on. The ramp hissed closed. Jasen felt the growing moisture between his palms once again as the ship darted down toward the home of the Mulvain's favorite spectacle. 

 

Chapter 16: Birth of a Champion



   There was little change in the shifting of the cage and bumps in the path for the rest of their trek. After a while, Cal had lost all perception of time, unsure of how many hours he had been confined in the back of the tumbler. When the vehicle finally came to a halt, the sounds of a bustling community played outside.
 For once the pale overcast light seemed blinding as it poured into the darkening space. A Mulvain stood in front of his cage, unlocked it, and dragged him onto the dirt. Cal took in his surroundings for the first time. Misshapen huts of brown and grey stones made up the squalor. Mulvain of all sizes walked through the streets, seemingly unconcerned by the Human being dragged off to a life of slavery. Mulvain children wrestled in the middle of a marketplace. By the look of their conflict, competition was bred in them from a young age.
   Various cuts of meat and alien plants were traded in small sales stands spread throughout the market. Mulvain walked up ready to barter. Many brought with them weapons past their prime, hoping to give them their final use. Others dropped fistfuls of black korite stones beautifully polished to a smooth finish. As common as the shimmering black rock was, its hardness made it rather difficult to shape as one desired. In such a way, the material reflected their own tough exterior and became a key ingredient to their culture. And as Cal had seen here, once the stone was polished up into neat spheres it was even used as currency. The Mulvain continued to drag Cal further into the heart of the city. As the marketplace became a distant point behind them, the eruption of applause and violent roars of the Mulvain grew in intensity. With great effort, Cal twisted his body to look ahead of him. There stood a massive arena forged from the blackened shade of stone. Columns bordered around the outside, supporting the structure and pathways into its center. Cal could tell by the Mulvain's path this was their intended destination. In such a moment, it would have been easy to let the grip of fear consume him—to let the highlights of his life play out in his head. Instead, Cal saw in stadium of battle an opportunity. The Mulvain admired strength the Legionnaire always told him. If he could conquer whatever waited for him in the arena, he might be able to prove himself a worthy warrior to these people. Cal looked up to the top of the mountain watching over the city in the valley below. Perched high on top of the cliffs was the stronghold of Mulvaire Keep—the place he had heard so many tales about. Cal knew that the Bane waited within its protected walls. To honor the Legionnaire's wish, that was the Mulvain he had to win over. Lines of Mulvain formed outside the entrance to the stadium. Their spectacle of the day was nearly beginning. Cal was taken off to the side toward a back entrance leading underneath. When they reached the archway, two Mulvain standing guard muttered a few words then parted way to allow them access. As they descended into the tunnel, the hard impact of the stone stairs took their toll. Every drop onto the next step battered his legs like a hammer. By the end, his ankles and shins felt sufficiently bruised. Walking it off did not seem a viable option. At the bottom was a narrow passage of barred cells lined along the walls. Chunks of glowstone dispersed haphazardly across the cells, highlighting particles of dust floating in the air. Rain water trickled down from the cracks in the ceiling. Cal watched as the stream dripped down and froze before his very eyes. On such a frost covered world, shrouded from the heat of the Legion's sun so far away, how could they have liquid water in this alien realm?
   Cal felt the passage rumble by the thunderous response of the crowd above, shifting the rocks slightly with every cheer and pounding of the stadium stands. Finally, they came to a stop in front of a metal gate embedded in the wall. The Mulvain opened it and threw Cal inside. He slid into the dirt floor and laid there, relieved he had a moment to rest. The gate slammed shut, followed by the thumping of his captors' footsteps disappearing down the tunnel. 

"Now you don't look shiny enough to be one of my delusions." Cal nearly jumped at the sound of the Human voice. He jutted his head in the direction of the man's tone. In the cell adjacent, a figure sat on the floor staring at him. His face was covered in a fine layer of grimy ash that had become difficult to distinguish from his scraggily hair. A wild gaze gleamed in his sunken eyes. Venturing a guess of how to respond, "I'm as real as you are. Name's Cal. Who are you?"
   The man came closer to the rusted bars separating their cells. "I've taken a shine to Sand. Yes, call me Sand—ha shine! Yes, I like shiny things—not the dark and rusty." He made a momentary face of disgust. Sand backed away from their shared wall. His movements were slow and animalistic. Cal watched him carefully. "How long have you been here, Sand?"
   Sand dropped his eyes down to the floor. "Long enough." The eccentric tone of his voice was overridden by a melancholy whimper. Cal spotted the various scars across Sand's skin underneath the dirt and tattered clothing. His real identity must have been lost to him long ago, replaced by an alter ego of insanity as he served as the Mulvain's Human entertainment.
 "Do they fight fair?" Cal found himself asking.
 Sand laughed, spiraling into a short lived sonic whine. "As fair as one could when facing a being so feeble in their presence."
 The Mulvain's physical supremacy alone would make for a formidable match. Cal recalled his hand to hand and melee combat training at the academy. He remembered how easily he had dispatched the other students—practical experience from fending off the beggars and thieves of Luxarus all his life. This was different now. This would take everything Cal had. "You wanna help me out, Sand? I have an urgent mission from Legionnaire Cade Farrow himself." He paused a moment. "His last order actually. He was murdered—murdered by traitors within the Legion." Sand looked back with concern. "The Legion." He listened to the way it sounded in his mouth. "Do you remember the Legion, Sand? The Legionnaire? Empria?" Cal searched for a word that might trigger his memory. "It was a good place—a better place."
 "It was." Cal's mind drifted into reminiscence. "But it's been corrupted by men who don't have the same values as you and me. Those men killed our Legionnaire and kidnapped Rianare Mara. I have to get her back," Cal said, thinking out loud by the end. "Save the girl," Sand spoke to himself, his neck twitched to the side as he bounced slightly in his crouched position. "Too late for me, but you... you can get out of here. Have to get out of here so you can find her." Sand gripped the bars tightly, pressing his face between as if he might squeeze through. "Whatever it takes. That girl is everything," Cal said firmly. He thought of Mara lost somewhere out in space. His heart floated away with her. "How do I get out of here, Sand?"
 Sand shook his head. "Only one way out. Have to fight. Slay whatever they put in your path... only way I've survived this long." Sand's eyes stared a thousand miles into the distance. "We can do this together— show the carthing Mulvain what happens when you put Humans in a cage."
 "No. They have two Humans to play with now. One of us will die in the pit. And it must be me... already died a long time ago," Sand said, so much defeat in his voice. He leaned back, sliding down the crumbling cell wall. "You must live. Must save the girl—save the Legion."

             They turned to the doorway at the sound of rattling metal. A Mulvain guard stood there with key in hand. The cell door opened, and the guard barked at Cal. He was going with him. The guard grabbed Cal and shoved him forward into another group of guards, hitting the massive barrier of muscle. The Mulvain removed Sand from his cell and walked the two of them down the dim tunnel toward a large lift at the end. They herded onto the platform like cattle and the guard pulled the lever. Gears grinded together as the lift slowly carried upward towards the cheering crowd. Cal glanced at Sand standing beside him, his head twitching, lost in some sort of trance. Sand knew exactly what was coming, and it ate away at him a little more every time. Cal felt a swell of despair rise up inside him and wondered if it would be the end. He swallowed it back down, hid it away—a distraction he did not have time for. When the lift reached the top, they came to a dead halt, the supports shaking back and forth as it struggled to stay stable. The guards walked them into a staging area. Sets of weaponry and equipment were placed on tables in front of them. Cal glossed over the massive armor plates clearly intended for the Mulvain and instead found himself in front of something more his size—a black armored chest piece that extended over his shoulders and down his right arm. He tied the strap across his waist and over his left shoulder to secure it in place. A small forearm guard came accompanied, intended for the opposite arm. One of the guards shoved him toward the gate at the far side of the room and handed him a makeshift dagger. He took the small blade and tucked it away into his belt. The guards held Sand back as he took a step forward—it was not yet his turn. As the gate lifted upward, Cal looked back to Sand. The crazed man wore guilt on his face, like he was regretful for not preparing him further. Cal took a deep breath and stepped through the archway as his chest returned to stationary. The small tunnel opened into the center of the arena—a vast pit beneath an endless amount of stadium seating. Cal stared up at all the Mulvain eager for the next fight to spectate. Perched over the top of the arena were balcony seats separated from the stands below. A large throne resided there with a perfect vantage of the warrior's pit.
   Mont'gar climbed the steps to the balcony platform and took his place upon the elegant chair. Beside him, his guests were lost in a state of awe. Ambassador Dien and his translator took place beside the Bane. Talc scurried up the steps behind them, using all his effort to catch up.
 Mont'gar turned to Jasen. Pointing to the pit below, "Would you like to claim your man now?" the Mulvain teased. Jasen remained silent, seeking to avoid the confrontation associated with the obvious disrespect. The pure thought of stepping foot down there petrified him. Such anxiety was far from irrational in this instance. It consumed him. Cal searched his eyes frantically along the circular area. A gate on the other end of the arena slowly rose up and stirred a cloud of dust. From behind the entrance stepped a giant four-legged beast covered in a thick layer of black fur. A Mulvain rode aback the creature aboard a leather sattle, gripping the reigns tightly to steer him forward. The beast barred its teeth, stacked like a thousand needles along its mouth. The crowd roared as they witnessed the mighty creature enter the arena.  A wanotaur: one of the most ferocious beasts on Karkken. The predators were notorious for hunting in small packs across the wasteland, patiently stalking on top of high cliffs overlooking the valleys below. Their dark fur expertly camouflaged themselves into the korite rocks as they waited for their chance to strike.
 The Mulvain took a spear and tossed it across the pit toward Cal. The spear laid at his feet while the rider waited for him to pick it up. Cal took the long spear in his hands and assumed a fighting stance. The Mulvain jerked up on the reigns, making the wanotaur lift onto its hind legs. The beast roared up to the fiery crowd before landing hard back on its front paws. The Mulvain taunted Cal as the beast prowled around the arena. Cal followed its movements carefully, waiting for the inevitable advance. 

             Examining the beast more closely, he stared into its milky white eyes. Cal noted the way the rider steered the wanotaur around as it pointed its nose to the ground. Its nostrils continuously flared up and down like a steady heartbeat. Assembling his observations together, there was no doubt in his mind—the creature was blind. With the endless twilight of Karkken and complete absence of light in the many cave formations, there was little surprise such a sightless hunter might evolve. Instead, the wanotaur relied heavily on its sense of smell to navigate and hunt down its prey. The scent of a Mulvain must be rather familiar to the beast, but a Human would surely smell like a rancid, exotic treat. The Mulvain rider barked a command at the beast and whipped the reigns forward. The wanotaur dashed across the field and swiped at Cal with one of its monstrous claws. Cal rolled out of the way, avoiding the assault by a scarcely narrow margin. His heart was racing as he gripped his spear ever tightly. This would quickly become a tireless game.
 "So that's how we're gonna do this." Cal planted his feet firmly into the dirt, preparing for the next attack. "I'm right here!"
   The rider charged forward on his mount with fire in his eyes. Cal gripped his spear in one hand and steadied his aim with an extension of the opposite arm. The spear flew free from his grip and sailed directly into the chest of the Mulvain. The rider launched backward off the wanotaur with a cry of agony and laid motionless on the arena floor. The beast quickly wandered off like a lost puppy riddle with confusion. Cal watched the animal carefully, then slowly took steps toward the fallen rider. He lay there, spear in his chest, looking up at the man standing over him. Taking no pleasure in his death, Cal removed the dagger from his belt and traced it across the scaly throat of the Mulvain. A spray of blood misted onto Cal and covered his armored chest piece. He retracted his face away in disgust and backed away from the now deceased warrior. Behind him, Cal heard the predatory growl of the wanotaur creeping closer. Without his rider, the animal had a limited sense of direction. His nose reached out towards Cal as he slowly came near, backing him against the outer wall of the pit. Cal remained deathly still as the beast's snout reached his face. He could feel the moisture coming off from the creature's heavy exhales. Each tooth in the wanotaur's mouth gleamed prominently mere inches from his throat. Cal began to wonder why the creature delayed his conquest, before he realized his luck. The blood. With the amount of Mulvain blood stained over his body, the creature was confused by his scent. It continued to sniff him up and down, unable to distinguish him as friend or foe. Cal slowly slithered his hand to his belt and removed the dagger. With one swift motion, he impaled the dagger into the creatures exposed neck. Gripping his head with the other hand, he drove the blade in deeper and gutted the beast's insides. The wanotaur let out a sorrowful yelp as it collapsed onto the ground, shaking the dirt like a bolt of lightning. The audience above cried in outrage. Their roars echoed through the pit as Cal walked out into the center. He dodged out of the way as rocks hurled down at him. A single voice boomed above all others, issuing their cease fire. Mont'gar stood up on the balcony as he addressed his subjects. "The Human has proven against beast and warrior," Mont'gar declared. "Surprising," he whispered to himself. "But now let us see, for the first time, Human against Human!" Mont'gar motioned to the gate opening below.              Peering across to the other end, Cal swallowed nervously as Sand stepped through the gate into the arena. Sand paced forward a few steps as he drew his dagger. A mighty horn blared overhead, signaling them to fight.              "I don't want to fight you," Cal told him, holding up his hands in a showing of peace. Sand slashed at Cal with his dagger. Reflex guided him to dip out of the way of the advance.              "We don't have a choice. Never a choice." The wild man executed a series of jabs and slashes toward him. Cal narrowly evading the strikes, having no choice other than to draw his own dagger. He held it outward in an aggressive stance. The pair circled each other—eyes locked and daggers drawn. Sand rushed him, clumsily overextending himself. Cal grabbed his arm to hold back his knife as it fluttered ever closer. Sand threw Cal onto the ground, towering over him as he attempted to force the knife down against Cal's resistance. Their arms shook frantically, locked in a duel of fates.
 "Have to make this look good," Sand gritted through his teeth. Cal realized his part to play in this performance. He headbutted Sand hard in the face and spun onto his feet in the aftermath. With a smooth flick of his wrist, Cal slashed across Sand's shoulder. The man winced in pain. Cal grabbed him from behind, his arm gripped tightly around Sand's torso with his blade to his throat. He waited there a moment, unsure of the next move in their dance. "Do it. Save the girl," Sand told him. The Legionnaire's last words—his dying wish.
   Save the girl. It rang through his mind in an endless loop, until he thought it might drive him mad. Cal wondered if they shared in that madness. Seeing the pleading look in Sand's wild eyes told Cal all he needed to know; there was nothing left for this man. But Cal still had a job to do. Someone counted on him. Perhaps in some way, Sand believed allowing Cal to live so he might save Mara would fulfill him. Cal looked up at the Bane high above the stadium. His head sunk down and his fingers stretched to release the dagger. As the metal left his grasp, Sand rushed him and tackled him to the abyssal floor. The mad man climbed on top of him, gritting his teeth with fury as he drove the knife closer to Cal's chest. Cal held the dagger back with his last breath. Blood poured from his face, breaths turning into screams. Slowly the dagger rotated until the tip pointed up towards Sand. Cal stared with wide eyes as he lost control of the blade. With both their hands tangled around the hilt, Sand thrusted upward. The rusty blade met his flesh, blood spewing down like a fountain. He used Cal's hands to string the blade across his own throat. They both released their grasp and Sand's body fell back onto the arena floor. A pool of blood slowly formed around the body. Cal's hand shook, covered in crimson red. He dropped the dagger and backed away. His throat sealed up. There were no words. He had taken lives before—swift ends by the force of his plasmer bolt. But this was different—messy, more personal. His own hands had been used as a suicidal instrument. It made Cal sick to his stomach.
   The crowd roared with enthusiasm, satisfied by the showing Cal had given them. Or so it appeared from the world above. Overhead in the sky, storm clouds parted and the shriek of burning metal and wind amplified through the stadium. All the spectators looked up to see the approaching dreadnought nose diving rapidly toward them. The Mulvain desperately scattered in an effort to escape the impact. Cal ran to the edge of the pit, seeking out the little cover he could as the massive hull collided with the side of the stadium. Massive chunks of debris exploded outward in all directions. Scraps of metal rained down into the pit below as Cal weathered the storm. He closed his eyes, unable to hear his own thoughts over the intensity of the exploding starship. The rumbling of the stadium crashing down—it went on into eternity. 

 

Chapter 17: The Cloaking



   The echo of continuous debate lingered all throughout the council chamber. A normal council meeting would always prompt a high degree of controversy in their proceedings, but an emergency meeting such as this only further increased the separation of views. With the Legionnaire dead, the Legion was left in a state of disarray. And without an heir available to take up the throne, the responsibility of picking a new leader fell upon the councilmen gathered around the circular metal table stretched across the chamber.
              The doors slid open as Kane strided into the meeting room, his chest puffed out a little more than usual. He took his place at the table and looked at the men seated around him. Many wore expressions of great worry on their faces. Others were red with contempt as they barked away their plans of action.              "Enough!" Kane yelled, silencing the remaining councilmen. "It is our duty to come together as a single voice. We must make a single decision. Our Legion counts on us to lead them through this turmoil—their leader has fallen. They're scared and uncertain—and they should be." Kane met each councilman's eyes, scanning along the table as he delivered his speech. It sounded rehearsed. He looked at Councilman Darren, a man in so deep with the EVO corporation that the green glow might be permanently burned into his retinas. Then there was Councilman Gareth and Porid—two unremarkable aristocrats. Councilman Osad would be the only real troublemaker.
   Kane ended his speech with a mighty pound of his fist against the metal. "Now is time to give them their hope back."
              The councilmen nodded in agreement. Kane stood up and walked about the table, his arms crossed behind his back and head held high as he circled around. These people needed someone to take command—he considered himself the one to do it. Gradually behind the scenes, under the cover of all the unrest throughout Emperion and the rest of the Legion, the Infinite Empire seized control. Paratores roamed the city as the new enforcers of law, rounding up any politicians and military leaders that openly opposed the Infinite Empire or questioned the matter of the Legionnaire's death. Rionaughts branded as traitors were promptly executed on distant islands. Some were simply lined up along the skybridges while the Paratores let them sail over the edge, their bodies forgotten in the surf below. With the leaders locked away in Legionary prison, their opposition had been all but eradicated.              "I believe there is no time to delay. I motion for the vote to appoint a new acting Legionnaire immediately," Kane proposed, sparking controversy yet again among the politicians.              Councilman Osad spoke up over the cries of argument, "Have we already exhausted every effort to locate the Rianare? Rianare Mara is our rightful heir." The sentiment achieved large agreement from the other members. Nods and amiable hums came from all.              "You are right, councilman. Unfortunately, the Paratores have searched tirelessly throughout the Legionary system. An ambassador has been sent to Karkken to retrieve the traitorous former Captain of the Guard. We have done all we can. I fear our Legion will have torn itself apart by the time our Rianare is found... if she is even still alive," Kane replied. "That is exactly my worry. The Legionnaire's stance on Paratore involvement was paramount. Patrolling them through the streets, using them as our private police force, its madness," Councilman Osad warned, his face an angry grimace. Kane smiled to himself. "Perhaps you read a few too many bedtime stories as a child, councilman. The Paratores are not the monsters they are made out to be. Have they been forced to make hard choices? Yes. But they have done so in service to our great Legion. They are servants of the Legionnaire just like us. Only now, there is no Legionnaire to lead us." 

             Kane knew Councilman Osad was the only one who could stand in the way of his appointment. The old man was proving to be an issue already. However, making a councilman disappear would attract a lot of attention, otherwise he would have given his Paratores the order long ago.
 "And this new Legionnaire, who should it be? You, Councilman Kane?" Osad taunted.              "That is for the council to decide here— though I would humbly accept such a burden and consider it a privilege were it bestowed upon me."              Councilman Darren interjected, "I can think of no one better among us." The table appeared to be in agreement of the proposition. Councilman Osad simply remained silent, unwilling to oppose the otherwise unanimous decision.              "Then we shall prepare for the cloaking ceremony," Councilman Gareth said. When a new Legionnaire was appointed, it always became a grand showing. Legionites of any importance gathered in the citadel's throne room, where the new Legionnaire was shrouded in the royal cloak for all to see.              "No sense wasting time on formality. I wish to be able to begin serving my Legion as soon as possible. We have the Legionary cloak here. We need nothing more to perform the rite," Kane argued. "Traditions are very important, Councilman Kane. Surely you understand the purpose in—"
 Kane slammed his fist down on the table. "Enough time has been wasted already!" Kane yelled. He settled down immediately, an apologetic look rushing over his face as he became conscious of his outburst. The other councilmen stared back in hushed silence. "Apologies, the Legionnaire's death has put us all on edge."              "Yes of course," Councilman Porid said meekly. "We shall proceed with the ceremony at once then." The Councilman retrieved the cloak laid across the center of the table. The very same cloak all previous Legionnaire's wore— pure white with edges accented in gold. Kane dropped down on one knee in the center of the room. The Councilman walked over with the silk draped over his hands. Kane rested his head down, the satisfaction of his accomplishments burned brightly inside of him. The Councilman pulled out an evosheet containing the rite and read from it verbatim. "He who kneels before us today has been deemed worthy and honorable in their character. They have been blessed with the strength to lead the Galactic Legion forward against any who would stand in opposition across the galaxy. Honoring all those that have taken the Legionnaire's mantle before them, they will serve and protect their Legion to their dying breath. What say you?"
 "To my dying breath, I will," Kane declared proudly.              The Councilman draped the Legionary cloak around him, securing it to his shoulders. The cloak flowed over him, blanketing him like a layer of snow. Kane rose up, his posture tall and confident. He smiled—a crooked smile that made lesser men uncomfortable, and greater men weary. Kane made his way toward the exit to the council chamber. "If you will excuse me, gentlemen." The door slid shut behind him. The Councilmen watched as their new Legionnaire hastily left the room, leaving them in a state of incompletion. Kane ventured onward to his private starship docked on the landing pad in front of the council building. Commander Basilar waited in his suit of armor at the bottom of the ship's ramp. Kane's cloak blew behind him like a set of angelic wings as he approached the Paratore Commander. 

             "Suppose congratulations are in order," Basilar said. "Everything I promised is slowly coming together, Commander," Kane told as they walked up the ramp. The door closed behind them.
 "So far yes."
 "You seem less than pleased."
   "My duty has always been to the Legion and the Legionnaire. I have little patience for politicians."
 "I am your Legionnaire now, Commander. I was the one that restored the Paratores to their former glory. Do not forget so easily, as much in your nature as that is." Kane signaled to the pilot to take off. The rumble of the ship's engines cascaded through the cabin as it lifted into the sky.              "That beast is the one pulling your strings. You fear him. But you promised me my home. That, I do not intend to forget," Basilar stared him down. "Halla is yours, Basilar—once this is done. You have a duty to the Legion first."
 Basilar felt rage simmer up from inside as the full consequence of his deal sunk in. He believed to return his people to the light, he first had to plunge them farther into the filth. However, the hope that he could crawl himself out of the depths was dwindling further by the day. Basilar felt another surge inside him. A pain—a memory. He stood on the white sand beaches of Empria. He looked at himself in the reflection of the water. His hands moved to slide off the helmet... the water rippled—the reflection disturbed. And he returned to the present, looking at Kane from behind his mask. The memory faded before he could discover what lied beneath. An uncertainty rose up in him. Who was he? A question so obvious, and yet it was as if he was conditioned never to ask, not to see the hole in the corner of his mind. His hand went to the damage on the side of his helmet—the implant further sizzled away. What prevented him from returning to Halla? And what was waiting for him there? Basilar realized for the first time, he didn't have an answer. Kane steadied out his hands as the ship rocked back and forth. They reached their destination, docked to the side of the starship orbiting above Empria. Kane proceeded to the ramp and waited for the docking mechanism to engage. He heard the release of hissing steam and the attachment of the mechanical locks in place. "He's in there, isn't he?" Basilar said.
              Kane looked at him, stopping a moment with mouth half open ready to say a word, but decided better of it. Kane fled through the passage between the two ships. Basilar was not proud of what they had done. He had done so for the good of his men and the Legion as a whole. That's what he continued to tell himself. But why? The questions continued. The answers evaded.
   Legionnaire Farrow was a good man, but not a man of action; ruthless men would be needed for war in times such as these—men like Kane and the Paratores. Basilar had learned well how to be ruthless. And when the dust settled, the Infinite Empire would span further across the stars towards an endless horizon—a dream the Legion had been founded upon so many galactic years ago. Letting it all run through his mind, Basilar could hardly give a damn.
              Kane moved slowly through the sinister ship, the lighting in the halls nearly nonexistence. Only the occasional dim lastube shone a red hue along his path deeper into the ship. The lone sound was the steady hum of the artificial gravity generator. As long as Kane searched, he did not see another soul, with no crew to speak of. Kane stopped at the entrance to the chamber at the end of a long hallway. He pressed the button and paused there in the doorway. The Nebulae rested on his knees in the middle of the small, dark room in a state of deep meditation. In front of him, a hexagonal podium with a strange diamond shaped relic rested on top. The object appeared ancient in appearance, crafted from bronze metal and etched in unknown symbols. A cloud of dust projected upward above the podium, extending out from the alien artifact. The cloud swirled around like a living storm, emitting flashes of colorful light—a model of a Nebula, of the last. Kane heard whispers from the Valmera, "I've tried speaking to Arcturus. But he no longer hears my call. The Procyon, Sirius, even Altair, they've all given their last light to the cosmos."
 The Nebulae waited, listened as the Nebula before him twisted and gleamed. It's movements and radiance was his reply. Kane watched, a conversation more alien than he had ever seen. But the Nebulae understood.
 "No, not yet. We were your faithful servants for millennia. You will grant us this," the Valmera gritted through his teeth. The Nebula pulsed a purple light and faded away into submission. Only a dark celestial storm remained hovering above the pedestal. His dark hood dipped down toward the floor, and he went silent. "Voidan." Kane awakened the Nebulae from his meditation. The creature brought his head up slowly and drew back his hood. The Nebulae stood up as a monster disturbed in his lair. He turned to Kane, still nervously planted in the doorway readied to speak, but was immediately cut off.
 "Where is the girl?" Voidan's deep voiced echoed through the chamber.
              Kane stepped into the room. "Safe on Canopen— hidden deep within the jungle surrounded by a hundred Paratores. No one will find her." His hands motioned to the Valmera as if each word was a friendly gift. "I agree it was smart to keep her alive, but I still don't understand your special interest in the girl."
 Voidan directed his gaze back to the cloud of swirling mist pouring out of the artifact, entranced by its movement.
   "She still was her role to play," the Nebulae said ominously. "Yes of course." Kane pretended to understand his cryptic response.
 "And what of the Chromarian Captain? Cal Cabor?"
 "I sent an ambassador to Karkken to negotiate his return. There has been no communication since they landed. Regardless, it's unimportant now. I have already been named Legionnaire. Once the Goliath project is finished, Cal Cabor will be dealt with along side all the Mulvain on Karkken."
              "Cal Cabor is anything but unimportant. But very well, Legionnaire Kane. The Goliaths, how soon will they be ready for invasion?" Voidan moved back and forth across the room as he received Kane's report. His gaze never truly left that cosmic cloud. "We've had some trouble with noncompliance from the engineers... should be on schedule once they fall back in line." Kane swallowed at the thought of delivering the bad news.               "I suggest you make your engineers understand the consequence of their failure, should they not complete their project soon." "Yes... yes of course." Kane hesitated as he prepared to leave. He turned his head away, cocked halfway between the door and his master. "You know how this is all going to end don't you?"
 Voidan's eyes gleamed in the reflection of the Nebula's light. "I know enough. Through the mist I have seen... troubling glimpses. I have seen life come to the brink and persevere. I have seen rebirth. And I have seen death..." He turned to Kane with a blank expression. "Even yours. But now... I fear I may not be as alone as I once believed." Kane backpedaled out of Voidan's private realm. Perhaps some revelations were best withheld. 

 

Chapter 18: The Mystic

        Dreadnoughts patrolled high over Karkken's atmosphere in a uniform barrier of dark metal destroyers. The devastating starships left the planet well protected as a cosmic blockade. Mulvain on board walked about the dimly lit halls. Several checked the navigators for incoming signals and moved forward with their daily lives. For most of course, that meant fighting. On board the bridge, two Mulvain clamored their thick domes forcefully together. Barely batting an eye, the others continued to monitor the terminals in front of them and stare out the large viewport that spanned the front of the bridge. A perfect shot of Karkken and the Nebula beyond centered firmly in their view. Even the narrowed focus of a Mulvain warrior could appreciate the ominous beauty of such a sight—a blackened globe set afire by a sea of cosmic mist.                      The bridge door slid open as a dark shadow leeched through. The fierce white glow of a Nebulae's blade ignited as the brown cloaked figure appeared in front of the Mulvain. In one fluid motion, he slashed the pair of Mulvain down with his blade. The shadow materialized over the bridge as a deadly black wisp, appearing in front of each Mulvain in sequence as he delivered a fatal salute. Thunderous grunts and groans echoed across the bridge as each warrior lined up to meet their demise. The bodies fell to the floor simultaneously with a heavy thud. The Nebulae retracted his blade into the golden sheath on his wrist, content with the completion of his work. His brown hood obstructed his features from view as he made his way to the navigator at the bridge's center. The Valmera sat down in the chair positioned in front of the terminal displaying the ships readings. Shield levels, hull integrity, oxygen supply, gravity stasis, and a plot of its intended course all recorded on the digital screen. He brushed his clawed hand over to course correction, currently set for orbit. With the press of a few buttons, he sealed the bridge and altered course for the surface below. Error reports popped up on the screen, informing of potential danger of the invalid course. After a simple override command, the dreadnought's engines fired toward the planetary depths. The hull of the destroyer burned a molten orange as it rocketed through the atmosphere. The ship broke through the layer of storm clouds and the Nebulae strapped himself into the chair in preparation for the inevitable impact. Warning lights and sirens blared throughout the bridge as the Mulvain city grew larger in the ship's viewport. Continuous banging exploded from the other side of the bridge door. Word of the imminent disaster had reached the crew. The Nebulae gritted his teeth as he spied the proudly standing stadium in the valley below. Its tall, black korite columns stood as a deathly reminder. He gripped tightly around the arms of the chair as the dreadnought collided with the fighting arena. Sections of the metal hull splintered out in every direction as the stadium's stone walls flooded down in a landslide. The dreadnought sank down into the pit, swallowed up by the ground itself. Half the starship remained as a massive tower jutting of the rubble. After a few minutes, the shifting of rock and roaring explosions ceased. Dust immersed the area around—a thick veil of gray ash. In the pit below, Cal stirred out from under the bits of rubble encased around him. He brushed the fine layer of ashen dust covering his face as he stumbled back on his feet. In front of him, the colossal dreadnought had been torn open, eclipsing the view of the sky above. The impact sealed off the gates leading out of the pit under a mountain of rock. Surveying the crash site, the ship was his only option—a newly formed ramp out of the cavern.              Cal made his way over to the mangled hull of the starship. He climbed up through a gigantic tare in the side of the dreadnought, holding on to the twisted metal for support. Sparks flew through the air from decaying remnants of the ship's interior. Cal walked up through the ship against the steep incline, with each step the pull of gravity sought to reclaim him. 

Reaching the first door, Cal punched the button in haste. He dodged to the side as debris flew through the doorway. Cal dangled by his fingertips wrapped around a pipe as he lay pinned against the wall. He felt the collapsed metal brush the air on the way past—closer than he would have liked. The scrap crashed down at the end of the corridor, echoing on endlessly.  He sighed in relief and carefully ventured on through the door. Beyond the next hallway, Cal came across a large, open room—a common area by appearance. There in the middle of the space, a Mulvain lay dead, crushed underneath a failed support beam from the ceiling. Cal knelt beside the corpse. Never had he seen a Mulvain so still, so peaceful. It was a strange look for the monstrous creature. He wrestled a plasmer rifle from its hands. "Won't be needing this anymore, big guy." Cal brought it up into his arms and tested the sights. The plasmer rifle was different than those of Legionary make he was used to—slightly longer and bulkier. The body lacked the sleek, silver aesthetic most possessed, instead replaced by a matte grey shading. The overheat scales were a dark shade of black—korite like most everything else of Mulvain design.              Continuing his journey up through the ship, Cal proceeded down the next expanding corridor. He wondered how this ship managed to fall right out of the sky—how it collided with the stadium at the most opportune moment. It didn't feel like coincidence. But it was certainly overkill for a single target. Unless... could it have been an attempt on the Bane? He wondered. A door around the corner hissed open and two Mulvain warriors walked out into the clearing. Zero hesitation, they raised their plasmers and fired down range at Cal. He dashed behind a cargo crate positioned against the wall and fired a few blind shots overhead. Cal peaked out and popped the first Mulvain in the chest. His companion fired another volley of plasmer bolts in retaliation, none quite finding their mark. The Mulvain were some of the most skilled fighters in the galaxy, but marksmanship was not their specialty. The Mulvain looked down at his plasmer rifle as steam poured out of the overheated ventilation chamber. Cal stood up and fired a charged shot right at him. The blast hit hard, compromising his mortality. His armor melted, smoked, and burned. He dropped down, defeated.              Survivors within the ship appeared to be scarce from then on. Cal scaled his way up the tower towards the surface. The air grew colder the closer he came as frigid winds found their path through cracks in the hull. He eventually came to a broad gap in the ship where it contacted the ground outside. Cal could see the city through the massive chunk taken out of the ship. This was his exit. Across the other end of the chasm in the ship's hull, a squad of Mulvain stormed onto the scene. Their plasmers trained sights directly on Cal. He stood their motionless—captured yet again. Cal readied to drop his plasmer as a familiar cloud of black mist appeared before his eyes. The amber cloaked figure drew his blade from its sheath and dismantled the entire squadron in one coordinated dance of teleportation. The Mulvain all dropped to the floor dead as the Nebulae rematerialized from the black mist. Cal barely had time to blink. His heart beat with rage as he drew his plasmer at the Valmera standing before him. The Nebulae retracted his blade and brushed away the brown shawl draped across his shoulders. He rose his hands above his head and withdrew his hood. Those same Valmeran features Cal had seen on the Legionnaire's murderer were revealed, though the fur a lighter tan and the mane a rich brown. Most noticeably, he lacked the deep scar across his cheek. A different Valmera— two of them.
 The Valmera smiled. "Perhaps you have me confused for someone else, friend." He held up his hands in an offering of peace.
   Cal kept his plasmer fixed on him. "You here to kill me?"

"Quite the opposite."
   Cal did not waver. "Then who are you?"
 "My name is Ducarn. And yes, I am a Valmera and a Nebulae like the one you have seen. Though I assure you we do not agree on much these days. This escape of yours was my doing, Cal Cabor."
 "You crashed the dreadnought? Almost killed me," Cal spoke with contempt.
 "That was never a possibility. The mist showed you by my side. It showed us freeing Rianare Mara." He scratched the fur on his chin. "The mist favors her greatly it seems."
 "She's alive? Where is she?" Cal demanded an answer.              "I do not know. Not yet. Visions through the mist are clouded, like spying through a veil of thick fog."
   "You're speaking in riddles just like him."
   "I promise I can explain everything soon enough, but it is not safe here, Cal Cabor. We have to move." Ducarn motioned with a wave of his hand to the city beyond. Whether to danger or safety, it was hard to say.              "How can I possibly trust some kind of mystic like you?"
              "Well for one, I'm the only person you've met on this planet that hasn't tried to kill you."
   Cal surveyed the Valmera—the same burning yellow eyes that mauled the Legionnaire right in front of him. The same shadow trickery that made it impossible to fight back. Yet here he was, backed into a corner on this alien world. The Mulvain were proving to be more challenging to deal with than originally predicted, and without this Nebulae, Cal may never get answers about the enemy he was up against. His mysterious new friend had made quite the spectacle to reach him. Perhaps he could follow for the moment.
              "Fair enough," Cal spoke plainly. He motioned down to the ground beneath the ship. "Lead the way. And none of that smoke teleportation nonsense. Want to be able to keep an eye on you."
              "Understandable, Cal Cabor. I will do as you request."
 Ducarn leaped down from the crashed ship, landing softly on the ground. Cal noticed the way he absorbed the shock as he landed, barely making a noise. Stealth was embedded into their nature. Cal jumped down next as they navigated through the ruins of the arena. Many of the nearby buildings had been leveled entirely. Now the dust had finally begun to settle. The city was eerily silent, as if all the Mulvain had up and left as the dreadnought collided at its center.              "So, what's next in your master plan?" Cal asked. Ducarn made a purring noise— his audible pondering. He gradually decided which tokens of knowledge to unravel. It was a well that ran deep. "I have no love for the Mulvain, but the mist has shown me—as you similarly believe—we need them for what is to come." Ducarn replied knowingly.
   "What is to come?" Cal questioned. Ducarn turned to him, offering no answer. "You have a history with the Mulvain?"
   Ducarn laughed silently, but a smile did not follow. The weight in his eyes beckoned. Cal could almost touch the memories bleeding from his face—reach out and grab them, maybe then he would begin to understand. "My people knew them very well. Back when we still were a people."
 Cal gathered his meaning. The Legionnaire's killer claimed he was the last of his kind. The Nebulae might have been wrong, but clearly something had driven the Valmera to near extinction. Long ago, the Mulvain ventured across the stars in their daring fleet of dreadnoughts. The fierce warriors challenged every bit of life they came across. Some put up more of a fight than others, but the Mulvain's conquest was absolute—their victims lost everything. The Valmera were just another species on the Mulvain's casualty list.              "I'm... sorry," Cal found himself almost sympathizing with the beast.              "A long time ago. The Valmera are all but gone now. As a Nebulae however, I still have a duty to honor." "A duty to who?"
              Ducarn locked with Cal's gaze. "To the cosmos." The weight he placed on those words... it sent a chill down Cal's spine. He got the sense Ducarn was cryptic for the sake of his understanding. The more details he explained, the more questions Cal would have. The Valmera was right, for now they needed to move. Answers would come soon enough.

 

Chapter 19: Reaves and Rydons



   Mont'gar bellowed a deep groan as he lifted a boulder pinned across his chest. The impact had sent them all spiraling down with the landslide during the collapse. Mont'gar looked to Jasen next to him, battered but otherwise largely unscathed. Talc scurried up through a hole in the rubble. The Gawn brushed the dust off as best he could and let out a panting sigh.
 "That's not a normal occurrence here is it? Was thinking of making this my new vacation spot, but honestly falling dreadnoughts... might be a deal breaker," Talc said out of breath.
              Mont'gar made a low growl, slowing rotating his head toward Talc.
 "Yeah, no it was rhetorical." Talc side stepped away from the Bane.
   Jasen scanned the pile of rubble for the Chromarian guards, eventually finding a few limbs lying motionless beneath the weight of a hundred stones. He was on his own now it appeared. His frightful gaze loomed over the twilight world he inhabited—not a place to be without friends.              A voice cried out from under a pile of rock, "Over here! Help!"
              Jasen rushed over to the pleading sound. TX-42 lay trapped beneath the landslide, his legs sticking out of the rocks like two flagpoles in the wind. His mechanical limbs flailed helplessly in the air.
              Jasen sighed, then turned to Talc. "Help me get him out of here."
              They bent down and dug the mechanic out of the shallow rubble. Jasen lifted TX back onto his feet and brushed the dust off his face. Slowly, they made their way down the ruinous mountain to the city street below. The devastation had extended beyond the immediate vicinity of the stadium. Mulvain children quickly hid away inside their homes as Mont'gar angrily marched through the rampant town. A fleet of tumblers rolled through the city streets, storming down from Mulvaire Keep. The tumblers came to a steady halt as Warlord Rallow stepped out of the leading vehicle. His fellow Reaves filed in behind, spreading out to lock down the scene. "You alright, Bane?" Rallow asked.
 Mont'gar's expression was one of fury—a bright red passion in his eyes. "Who did this?" Mont'gar demanded. The Bane turned to Jasen and his companions.
              Jasen's eyes went wide, his hands went up. "No no! I'm a diplomatic ambassador. It was one of your dreadnoughts that fell from the sky. I have no control over anything," Jasen rambled, begging for forgiveness.              Mont'gar let out a loud snort and turned back to Rallow. The Human was too feeble to have maneuvered such a plan into action.              Rallow squared up with Mont'gar. "Return to the keep, Bane. Think you've done enough." Rallow motioned to his tumbler.               "If I find any Reave had a hand in this..." Mont'gar leaned closer, his mandibles stretching.
               Rallow grinned. "I like my dreadnaughts. Don't need them dropping out of the sky."
   On a better day, Mont'gar would have picked a fight over a Warlord giving him orders, but not today. Mont'gar roared and proceeded to the vehicle. The tumbler drove off through the city towards the path up the steep mountainside. Rallow signaled his men to set up a perimeter by the marketplace. Jasen felt a sense of helplessness as his entire purpose for coming to this world had been shattered. His protection was gone, and his remaining allies were a Gawn and a Mechanic; Jasen did not like his current odds. He stood their nervously among the squad of Mulvain warriors, all too preoccupied by the state of the situation to take much notice of the Human. Perhaps that spoke more to how little they thought of him.

   "Don't know about you," Talc whispered to Jasen. "But at this point, I say we forget the whole 'mission' thing and figure a way off this rock."
              Jasen nodded, for once agreeing with the pesky little creature. He found his deviation from authority truly curious. He began to wonder... but now was not the time. Jasen nudged TX as Rallow began speaking to one of the warriors in the Mulvain tongue. "What are they saying?" he asked.
 "Oh my. I'm afraid they're discussing what to do with us. I don't find any of the
   options very favorable, Master Jasen," the Mechanic replied.
 The repeated crunch of dirt echoed off in the distance, growing in intensity. Rallow and his men raised their plasmers and gathered position behind the tumblers spread across the market. A cloaked figure came into view, his hood drawn, head lowered. He stopped several feet from the Mulvain firing line and pulled back his veil, revealing his feline features to the warriors who nearly jumped at the sight. Rallow stood center stage, a conscious effort to take control of his men.
              "You look like you've seen a ghost, friend," Ducarn taunted.              Rallow snorted. "Heard the stories. Legends of the great war from long ago. Always believed that's all they were," Rallow spoke in wonder. His curiosity outweighed his desire for violence.
              "I am quite real, Mulvain. And so is he," Ducarn motioned to Cal perched on the roof of the building above. His plasmer fixed right on the Warlord as he spoke.
              Rallow grinned. "The champion of the arena." He lifted his arm in Cal's direction as if presenting him for his next fight. "And the Valmeran legend." He turned back to Ducarn. "Proving to be an interesting day."
   Mulvain stationed throughout the market waited patiently for Rallow's order; most still too stunned to think for themselves in the moment. Rallow was a well-respected warrior—Mont'gar's right hand man by decree of the people. The relationship between him and the Bane however, was a curious one. During the Mulvain civil war, Rallow and Mont'gar found themselves on opposite sides. Rallow sided with Gorn, his spawn father, and leader of Clan Reave. But Rallow never shared Gorn's unquenchable bloodlust and endless rage. He was a proponent of the traditional Mulvain values of strength and honor. It made him noble. His father thought it made him weak. When the war came to its final chapter, and Mont'gar and Gorn squared off against each other, the fight seemed to rock the stone itself. At the conclusion, Gorn stood over Mont'gar—beaten and bloody—and Rallow drove a sword through his father's chest. Without his intervention, Mont'gar would have lost his life then and there. Mont'gar made Rallow one of his leading Warlords—a plea for his silence—and they never spoke of the incident ever again. This act of swapping sides in the final hour was not lost on all however. Clan Luthara resented Clan Reave even more after the war, for what they felt was an unjust acquisition of the power that rightfully belonged to them. Cal's eyes stopped on Ambassador Dien and Talc tucked away behind one of the food stands. TX stood beside them stricken with confusion, as if his programming did not extend to such standstills. "What are you doing with them?" Cal demanded an answer from the leader.
 "The Human and Gawn are my property. Metal man I can scrap for parts," Rallow said plainly in the Legionary tongue.              Cal peered behind the food stand at the pair of them, wondering if they had been sent here for him. Kane must be looking to cover his tracks, and he was acting fast. Cal did not recognize the ambassador, but he often strayed from politicians. Though that Gawn—Cal had seen him before. His face had been plastered throughout the Legionary archives, his charges broadcasted on all the Guard evostreams. One of the few Gawn who violated the Gawn civil rights laws.

   "You, Gawn. It's Talc, correct?" Cal called out.
 Talc hesitantly stepped out from behind the stand and into the spotlight. Jasen took this as cause to follow. "Yeah... that's me," Talc spoke slowly. He was smart enough to know the former Guard Captain had pinned him for a criminal. If you could call him that. Cal paused a moment before replying. He pushed his past instincts away, the ones of a law enforcer, the ones that told him to reprimand a Gawn who dreamed too high. Instead he smiled softly to himself, realizing the harmless being he now examined. "You know, a few of my friends in the Guard got a good laugh out of that little mechanic stunt of yours in the council building," Cal told, a slight humor to his voice. Talc released the tension in his shoulders. "See, I knew not everyone in the Legion was that uptight." Jasen shot Talc an accusatory glance beside him. "You're the Gawn the Legion was looking for." No humor in his voice. Talc threw up his arms. "Oh, come on. You're telling me when I earned a degree in plasmology, mechanic design, starspace engineering..." he stopped his list as if it might have continued on much longer. "That I can't own my own home in Emperion? That I can't live the same life as a Human?" He stared Jasen down as the questions hung in the air.             Before finding himself on the ambassador's ship, Talc attempted to use his intellect to bypass the unjust laws he spoke of. Forging evosheets, he bought property in Emperion. When he was eventually discovered, Talc was forced out of his newly acquired home. As a retaliating thank you gift of sorts, Talc programmed all the mechanic servants in the council building to sing his favor Gawn folk songs. Humorous for many, but the authorities did not think so.
 Once they traced the evo signature back to Talc's evopatch, he was officially a wanted man. He may have been defiant, but like all Gawn, Talc was no fighter. At first chance, Talc stowed away on a starship headed out of the Legionary system. He figured he could start over someplace far away. Someplace besides Karkken might have been a better choice. Jasen stood silent. Long had he been raised with the Gawn at the bottom of a pyramid of Human design. Now here they were, trapped among the same desolate of circumstances. Here they were the same. Here he was no one—certainly no one to judge.
 Rallow roared above the chatter. "Enough." The Mulvain marched toward the bickering pair. Ducarn misted again into smoke, appearing between them and Rallow. The Warlord's eyes narrowed, his stance turned defensive, yet curiosity still surmounted any primal drives. Rallow was no scholar, but he was far from a fool. The Reaves behind him stirred, hungry to lunge at the mystic invader, but they wouldn't dare without their Warlord's command. "As much reason as I have to seek conflict with your people, we have come to make peace. We wish to meet with your Bane," Ducarn told Rallow.
 Rallow let out a low growl. "And is that what you want too champion? Peace?" Cal realized the Mulvain was speaking to him. "That's always been my intention with the Mulvain. It'd be unwise to seek your wrath," He replied.
   "Hmm... very well. Come with us to Mulvaire Keep. See if the Bane will hear your proposal," Rallow said. Finally. Progress, Cal thought.
   The ground shook as the stadium further collapsed, tearing open a hole in the bedrock beneath. High pitched shrieks emerged from the newly uncovered cavern below; the same frightening cries Cal had heard earlier. The look of dread among the Mulvain grew with the rising intensity of the sound. Jasen and Talc ducked behind one of the tumblers for cover. 

Rallow shouted for his team to assemble. "Norwraiths!" The Warlord held his plasmer in one hand and brought out a lasguard in the other. The size of the rifle was massive compared to ones Cal had seen—a hunk of bulky metal with three separate barrels. Not something he wished to be caught in the way of. Cal turned his gaze to the sink hole off in the distance, dust circling around its entrance. Cal brought his plasmer up to his shoulder. They remained silent as the cries grew louder. Ducarn stepped forward and activated his frozen blade. Rallow stared at the glowing claw with wonder, always showing appreciation for a good weapon. Rallow moved to join Ducarn at the front line. An unspoken agreement came over them in that moment; they would join forces to hold back whatever monsters were coming for them. A swarm rose out of the chasm. A dozen creatures crept like spiders stalking on four legs. They seemed almost intangible, their bodies slightly transparent, outlines wavering into wisps of black smoke. The cries erupted again as their jaws opened wide to reveal their sharp teeth. The Norwraiths moved in short, rapid bursts towards them across the divide. Cal struggled to track them as they moved from the ground to clinging onto the walls in an instant. The spirits ran across the sides of buildings so effortlessly, bounded by no physical limits. The manner in which they moved alone told they were no natural creatures. It reminded Cal of the way he used Grav boots to scale the depths of the Luxarus mines—a lifetime ago. One of the creatures leaped off the building and flew towards Rallow. He batted it away with his lasguard and sent it spiraling backward into the dirt. The Norwraith flipped over onto its legs in a blinding motion. Rallow fired a charged bolt directly at the creature causing it to disperse into a wisp of smoke. Right before his eyes, the smoke reshaped back into the creature. Its jaws spread wide and charged at Rallow yet again. The swarm of Norwraiths came down fiercely on the squad of Mulvain. The creatures latched onto the Mulvain with their razor claws, digging into their armored plating. They came for them as if they wished to steal away their very life force—surely they did not possess the same essence of living. The Norwraiths lashed out at them, bleeding them dry and suffocating them in a layer of black smog. Talc ran as fast as he could, taking cover inside one of the tumblers. Jasen immediately followed suit, eager to escape from the ensuing blood path. Ducarn shifted towards the Norwraiths in a puff of smoke. "I am truly sorry." The Valmera expertly danced through the plasmer bolts surging down the firing line. His blade sunk into the ghostly body of one of the Norwraiths. The creature lit up with the same white light his blade emitted, and dissipated into the air with a thunderous roar. The other Norwraiths became enraged, bolting toward him like rabid animals. Ducarn dispatched them one at a time, rematerializing before each one with a shift slash of his blade. The creatures remaining darted back in fear of joining their fallen friends. Cal and the Mulvain ceased firing as the Norwraiths retreated down the dark crevice from which they came.  Ducarn's blade slid up into its golden sheath as he turned to Rallow, surveying what was left of his men. Rallow smashed his fist into the side of his tumbler, a deep imprint of his hand molding into the metal. No Mulvain stood standing among the corpses of his squad. Cal climbed down from the top of the building. "What the carth were those things?" Cal demanded.
   Rallow growled. "Norwraiths: creatures of shadow. Terrorized our settlements for ages. Nothing we throw at them keeps them down long. Always return." He looked at the new chasm in the rock. "Normally they keep to tunnels underneath the rock, and the wastelands. Looks like we have a nest right under the city."
   Cal wasn't satisfied with his explanation. "Those... things. They weren't natural. You have to know where they come from." Rallow hesitated. "Legends always told us they were ghosts."
   "Ghosts of whom?" Cal asked.
    "Tortured souls." Rallow told.
   Ducarn reached down and scooped up a pile of ash the Norwraith had left behind. He squeezed the powder in his palm, then let it slip back through the slots in his fingers. He rose back up. "If we don't join forces here and now, those creatures will swallow you whole—your world crashing down around you," Ducarn said.
   Rallow stared down the Nebulae. "Your blade, it can kill them?"
   "It frees them from the endless agony they have been submitted to. Perhaps they could even return to the great Nebula your people have neglected all these years." Ducarn walked over to the tumbler. "You can come out now, friends." Talc poked his head over the tumbler door and climbed out. Jasen met eyes with the Valmera before him. The cloaked feline man was certainly not the most surprising thing he had seen as of late, yet it sparked his scholarly intrigue. Cal moved to his side, coming into Jasen's full view for the first time. "So these are the ones you're in league with now? Was the Legionnaire's murder all part of your plan?" Jasen's anxiety filled exterior had been replaced with an anger rising from beneath. Ducarn looked at Jasen curiously, as if studying him. "Cal Cabor did not kill the Legionnaire. He was struck down by a Nebulae, like me." Turning to address Rallow and Jasen together, "A Nebulae that means to destroy both your ways of life." Cal moved in on Jasen, speaking a mere breath from his face. "Legionnaire Farrow was the greatest man I've ever known. Would have given my life for him in a second if I could. I came here to honor his last request. And get Rianare Mara back."
   Jasen seemed unconvinced by Cal's defense. He had heard stories back on Empria about Cal Cabor's dedication to the Legionnaire, but Jasen knew all the same such closeness would provide the perfect opportunity to strike against him. The Infinite Empire grew out of the politicians and military men that surrounded the Legionnaire. To Jasen, Cal Cabor seemed no different, as regretful as the treasonous action may have made him. "Boss, let's keep in mind this guy did just help save our skins against a pack of wild smoke monsters," Talc said to Jasen. Talc extended his hand to Cal, half the size of his. "Name's Talc. Pleasure to meet you." Jasen shot Talc a darting glare he returned with a simple shrug of his shoulders. "Just trying to make friends here, ambassador. Might want to give it a shot."
   "I am also quite pleasured to meet you, sir." TX walked over and offered a friendly wave. Cal left the mechanic's greeting unacknowledged.  Rallow's deep voice cut through the argumentative banter, "If you Humans are done quarreling, should be on our way." He signaled for them to file into the rugged tumbler, deep gashes carved into the body, sat up on massive tires painted in a layer of grey dust. Rallow hit the engines and zoomed away from the city towards the rocky path along the mountainside. With each turn of the tumbler, they came closer to Mulvaire Keep and the Bane waiting above. 

 

Chapter 20: The Damned 

        A thousand different species of animal lived within the depths of the Canopen jungle. Every one of them cried out through the trees with their own unique song. A symphony of exotic life teemed within the lush oasis. A breathing soul hung from every branch and vine. Birds fluttered overhead as the Paratores patrolled the overlook of their fortress. The polished metal stood in stark contrast to the rich greens of the copious foliage that surrounded them. Deep claw marks were etched into the columns that held the structure off the ground—a reminder to anyone who ventured into the vast expanse of nature: this was the beast's domain. Such vicious, territorial behaviors from creatures of the jungle made it a dangerous trek anywhere across the planetary surface, shrouded under a dense natural canopy. The Legion's base was tucked away inside a great ravine with a perfect view of the bright blue waterfall across the way. The cascading stream emptied out into a round pool at its end. Various animal inhabitants made their way up to the edge to drink from the clear body of water. Brightly colored fish swam around in the pond, darting between the rocks lined along the bottom.
   Looming above at the peak of the waterfall, Voidan waited beneath the cover of the massive jungle trees. His dark hood melded into the shadows of the dense underbrush. The glow of his yellow eyes pierced the shaded veil, searching across towards the Paratores at their post. Voidan activated his blade and watched the frozen dagger form on command. With an effortless blink, he teleported across the chasm toward the overlook like a plasmer bolt, rippling the air around him with a cloud of smoke. Voidan reappeared between the two Paratores and slashed both necks in a single motion. Their bodies fell to the floor, drowned out by the sound of rushing water. A lastube above the base door flashed green as Voidan pressed the button on the keypad. Inside was strangely quiet as he made his way down the corridor. Eventually opening into some form of planning room, Voidan examined the terminals spread across. He stopped at a large grouping of monitors spanning the length of the back wall. Security footage displayed of all angles around the interior and exterior of the base. The stronghold was well secured against any normal intruder—had the surveillance streams not been disabled. Between the surveillance malfunction and disappearance of the rest of the guards, Voidan came to an immediate conclusion. Someone had beaten him here. Voidan lashed his blade through the terminal. The machinery sliced clean in half, sending sparks flying as it crashed onto the floor. Voidan felt a shiver within him—a mystical knowing that what he sought after was still here, calling out like a siren song urging him to venture nearer. He hurried through the next set of doors down to the holding cell area. As the containment door opened, he did not find the woman he was expecting—instead greeted by a Faen standing in the center of the room, her lasclaw ringed around the throat of the Paratore in charge. The man clung desperately to his throat as he lay helpless at the Faen's feet. His eyes pleaded for release as they locked with the burning embers of Voidan's expression. His blade slid down from its sheath. "And who might you be?" he asked the woman. "Sirelle, servant of Helia. Could ask you the same question though." the Faen assassin seemed unphased by his presence. "You work for Kane?" A wide grin encompassed Voidan's face. "Legionnaire Kane is my creation. He works for me. Now why are you here, child?" "Kane hired me, but I got the feeling he was holding out. I don't like being played." She pulled back tighter on her whip, making the man squirm as the burns arced through his nervous system. Paratores could not feel empathy, but they could surely feel pain. Voidan looked over to the holding cells. Locked away behind the containment fields, a dozen Paratores paced back and forth in their cells. Behind their helmets, the rage burned within them, waiting to be freed. Sirelle had been busy. A stack of weapons piled up on a table at the other end of the room. Scorch marks from plasmer bolts could be seen littered across the walls. Sirelle however, stood there unscathed—a hard target to hit.

"Kane is merely an instrument I require to move certain pieces into place. It seems he has underestimated you." His face studied the Faen woman. "I will not do the same—come join me," Voidan offered.
   "As lovely as that sounds, I don't work for free. And Legionnaire's tend to pay well."
   "Kane's desires are short sighted. He values riches and influence. I care not for such material things. I could give you the wealth of the entire Legion and not bat an eye. Because what I seek cannot be bought." Voidan circled around her as he spoke. "Do my bidding and serve your God—your galaxy." He motioned to the Paratores. "Starting with command over these men."
   "Command to do what?" Sirelle asked, becoming intrigued by the prospect. "What you do best. Hunt down anyone that tries to find this base of ours. Protect its contents at all costs."
   Sirelle looked at him curiously, not having searched the entirety of the base yet. Whatever was so valuable to Voidan here, she had yet to uncover. "What am I protecting exactly?" She asked.
   "A very important girl. One that people will come for. Including Cal Cabor. I trust you remember your original target." Voidan's stare penetrated her core. The burn on her abdomen sent tingles down her spine. She pressed her hand to the wound, remembering the pain, remembering her failure. Sirelle realized Voidan's motivation to remind her of that tragic mistake, and ensure it would not be repeated. "If he comes here, this time I'll finish it," she said menacingly. "I trust you will. Soon I will call on you." Voidan disappeared through the door, venturing further down into the holding area. Sirelle released the Paratore leader from the grip of her energy entanglement. He fell to the ground in agony, holding his throat. Heavy gasps of air pulsated from his lungs like a man saved from drowning. The Paratore looked up at the Faen assassin with anger and disbelief weighing in his eyes. She bent down, leveling her face with his. "You and your men will be taking orders from me now. Unless you want to mess with me and my new hooded friend."
   The Paratore shook his head vigorously but did not dare utter a word. Sirelle stood back up and twisted her head toward the other Paratores held behind the containment fields. They waited for her next move. To them, this assassin was unpredictable, a quality she prided herself on. She gazed at them with a smile. "Same goes for you." They didn't flinch. Voidan stepped into the room at the very end of the hall. Not the most secure, with the two viewports sitting at the back, but it was more than enough for its intended purpose. Curtains of light poured in through the small viewports, blanketing the room in a warm glow. A bed was pushed into the corner with a pile of sheets bundled on top. Movement stirred from underneath as Voidan stepped into the middle of the room, looking at the table with dozens of evosheets and Mem-stims spread across. "You always find a way to keep yourself busy. I admire that," Voidan said. Mara sat up in a daze, not used to visitors during her short time in captivity. Her fatigued expression morphed to pure fury as she saw the hooded figure in front of her. Voidan removed his hood, meeting her face to face. She caught a glimpse of the monster's features during her capture, but this was the first time she saw in the light of day. Her lip twitched with anger as she struggled to form a reaction, a single sentence or word that could encapsulate her misery, her loss. Nothing came to her.
   "I understand your rage, child. I was born into a world of rage. Like you, I never knew my mother. She died giving birth to me quite the same. And my father..." He pointed to the scar on his cheek. "He blamed me." Voidan waited for a response from the girl. She stood up from the bed and paced a few steps forward. The difference between their two sizes was incredible, yet her stance was one of a fighter, her boldness and refusal to kneel before the Nebulae's might palpable. "Am I meant to pity you?" Mara scoffed.
   "A father is meant to nurture their child, to mold them into something greater than they ever were. A father's strength is that of their children. Without them—" "You murdered my father," Mara cut him off with a harsh tone.
   "Because of what the mist showed me. You have no idea how many people would have died if your father did not. I saved them," Voidan said, a level of sadness in his voice.
   "You don't get to be the hero." Mara stared him down. Her nose crinkled with rage, her teeth gritted together. For all the death Voidan had caused, the lives he had taken, he always convinced himself each one served a purpose. In his mind, he was the last of his species, the last of the Nebulae, it was his obligation to uphold their sacred duty and honor what remains. In a galaxy of stars vastly fading into oblivion, Voidan believed he would be the one to light the way. "No. I am not a hero. Heroes are basked in fame and glory. They are beloved and respected. I am the one who will do what heroes can not: the hard thing, the necessary thing. I will gain no friends or admirers in my quest. History will not praise my memory. But there will be a history to remember. And they will know it was because of me," Voidan declared. Through all his words, Mara heard only the rambles of a monster shrouded in her father's blood. She wondered in his grand design, why had she been left alive. A small girl such as her would have been so easy to snuff out, to extinguish forever, yet here she remained.
   "What do you want from me?" she demanded to know.
   "The mist surrounds you in a way I have never seen... not a Nebulae... but something else. Some day soon you may become the hero I could never be, Mara Farrow." Voidan pivoted towards the door.
   Mara stopped him halfway, the ray of light from the window outlined her in a brilliant shimmer of gold. "If Cal's still alive—and I bet he is—he's coming for you." Voidan looked at the girl one last time with a tip of his head in acknowledgement and drew his hood once again. Mara watched as he passed through the door, locking behind him as he did. Back to her solitary cell in the prison designed to pass the days and weeks to come. But she was a patient girl. Cal had taught her that. 

 

Chapter 21: Death of the Valmera

        The tumbler continued its journey up as it rounded each corner along the serpentine path. Rocks slid off the side of the ascending trail and crashed down into the valley far below. Cal sat strapped into his seat, his head jolting back and forth with every bump in the road. He looked to Ducarn sitting next to him—the mysterious, spiritual warrior that seemed to hold all the answers. Cal had been left in the dark for too long, and now he was ready to make the Nebulae deliver on some promises. "Alright Ducarn, we have our moment of calm. Time for you to start spilling some answers— for all of us." Cal motioned to the others seated inside the tumbler. Ducarn sighed. "Yes, now would be as good a time as any. I suppose you wish to understand what I am."
 Cal nodded and sat forward, awaiting his deliberation. Jasen and Talc both listened eagerly, hanging on Ducarn's every word as he prepared his long tale. Rallow turned his head, careful not to overly express interest, but curiosity often got the better of him. Ducarn gathered his thoughts. "I am a Valmera, a race born on the planet Karkken many centuries ago. And now, I am one of the last. Karkken was a beautiful place once— paradise... before the Mulvain came."
 Cal saw Rallow out of the corner of his eye. Even on his scaly, reptilian face, Cal could recognize remorse. The past weighed heavy on those Mulvain seeking to live by the newfound code of honor the younger generation sought to usher in. Crimes Rallow held no part in continued to tarnish the Mulvain legacy. "The Mulvain came to Karkken. Their massive dreadnoughts filled the sky, plunging it into the eternal twilight that exists here today. The war raged on for years. I was only a child then..." Ducarn's mind was filled with flashes of conflict.
 His home lay peacefully in the center of a beautiful field of green and gold. The wind breezed through his fur as he ran through the tall grass. His parents stood atop of the hill behind their farm. A four-winged bird sailed over his head, chasing a furry bowrat scurrying through the weeds. He heard the bird's call, felt the grass on his fingertips. He smiled. He laughed. Ducarn walked towards his parents beside the hill and the land over the horizon came into view. Flashes of fire and death filled his mind. The once gorgeous fields of green burned into ash, littered with the ruins of his childhood home. Bodies of his friends and neighbors left abandoned on the barren plains. An entire world reduced to a desolate rock, and the Mulvain proudly marching over. Years of Valmeran history washed away in an instant. "The Nebulae stood up to defend the other Valmera, but even when each one killed a hundred Mulvain, they only kept coming. We fought back hard, but there were just more of them..." Ducarn's voice trailed off. Ducarn envisioned the way the Nebulae held their own in battle, dashing across the battlefields in a blinding storm of smoke, laying waste to every Mulvain in their wake. A dozen Mulvain would surround the Nebulae fighters, assaulting them with their swords and plasmers. Armed with only their menacing blades and the powers of the mist, Nebulae slashed and teleported their way to victory. Countless Mulvain warriors laid dead at their feet—until one final, lucky blow landed home. The Nebulae fell, and thousands more Mulvain descended from the sky. "The Nebulae were established as an order of peace here on Karkken. The Nebula surrounded our world, gifting us with knowledge— a foresight lesser minds couldn't comprehend. And powers... powers we could hardly begin to understand ourselves. The Nebulae formed to study the teachings of the mist and protect the Nebula from any who would harm it."

             The Nebulae always hoped one day they could unlock the knowledge to breathe life back into the universe through their celestial entity. But the mystery of deteriorating stars across the universe was no more understood by the protectors of the Nebula. The cosmic cloud simply remained in its silent beauty while bestowing upon them glimpses of greater revelation. "Without us, the last Nebula in the galaxy lies dormant." Ducarn leaned back in his seat.
   "And you believe Mara is going to help with that somehow?" Cal inquired.
   "I do not know. The mist has merely shown me she is important—connected somehow yet unclear."
   Rallow cleared his throat, directing their attention to the front of the vehicle. "The war was... a long time ago. Didn't know it happened that way. Ancestors tend to embellish their side of history," Rallow confessed in an effort at reconciliation. "I have accepted what happened and will dwell on it no further... Unlike Voidan," Ducarn replied. The emphasis he placed on the name told a story in itself—a whole history behind the tone of his voice.
   "The other Nebulae. The killer," Cal said riddled with malice. "My brother."
   "Your brother?" Cal seemed outraged. Suddenly his mistrust in the Valmera heightened. The already personal stake he feared Ducarn invested in the situation now appeared to increase tenfold. The possibly of the two in league together became a sharp cause of worry in his mind—an absolute he could not dispel. "Together we are the last of the Valmera. When the Mulvain had all but decimated our planet, it was clear none of us would survive. The dreadnoughts began bombarding the remaining settlements scattered along the mountainsides with their artillery. My parents knew an attack on our village was imminent..." Ducarn told.
   Ducarn transported back into the memories of his childhood self. He sat outside the small village dug into the side of one of Karkken's steep mountains and felt the cold winds rising up the face of the cliff. Ducarn sat on the rocky ground, his knees tucked into his chest, rolling a pebble between his hands before dropping it off the side. The stone seemed to fall for an eternity, disappearing into oblivion before its final fate could be discovered.
    Driven from their homes, these pocketed settlements were dispersed throughout the planet in secrecy as the Valmera desperately hoped to survive the invasion. Off in the distance, Ducarn's parents wandered outside their wooden shack of a home. The look on his father's face was one of great concern. Ducarn wanted to cry out—to comfort him. But his cries had been exhausted as of late. High above in the sky, a shadow quickly descended upon them, looming over the mountain peaks. Ducarn looked up with shock as in an instant day transitioned to night. His father ran towards him, scooping him up into his arms, and pulling his mother along with his free hand as he hurried them both up a narrow path carved out in the mountain. The dreadnought's artillery adjusted it's positioning, taking aim at the helpless village down below. The plasmer cannons rocketed toward their target, blanketing the small structures in molten plasma. A thunderous roar marked the execution of the destruction as previously standing homes were diminished to melting piles of charcoal in one shallow breath. What little the Valmera had left to cling to was no more—plucked away and burned. Ducarn clung to his father's shoulders, burying his face as if everything around him might just fade away. His mother and father stopped at the end of the path, looking back at the trail of smoke rising into the air. He could still remember the stench of fire and ash. Ducarn's father pulled back the tarp draped over a large object hidden from view. The dull grey color of the fabric blended in with the similarly bland shading of the rocky cliff face. Beneath the tarp resided their last hope and key to survival: a small Valmeran starship. It was his father's security measure—his failsafe for when the devils inevitably came. 

             His father urged Ducarn's mother into the ship and quickly followed behind with Ducarn still tightly wrapped around him. He sat Ducarn down next to his mother and dashed into the pilot's chair. The engines on the rear of the starship ignited, emitting their royal blue lantern of light. The ship lifted off the ground and the dreadnought's plasmer cannons shifted toward them as the starship appeared on their scanners. Before it could fire, their ship soared away through the clouds, leaving the hulking dreadnought far in the distance. Soon, the rest of Karkken was behind them and nothing but the emptiness of space presented along the horizon. With no mercy from the Mulvain army, their dreadnoughts continued to sweep every crevice of Karkken looking for surviving Valmera. Help from the Mulvain warriors marching along the surface all but insured their success. There were no survivors. Ducarn and his parents were all that remained of the Valmera race, the three of them floating aimlessly among stars. They had no home, no hope, no purpose—all that had been taken from them. In time, Ducarn's mother realized she was carrying another child, but what should have been a delight offered nothing but dread. They struggled to provide the necessities for her pregnancy as they traveled as nomads across space. Ducarn was forced to grow up fast, taking on the weight of an entire civilization at his young age. When time finally arrived for his mother to give birth to his new sibling, the complications become apparent.
    Delivering his new baby brother, she died, and his father was lost in despair. When the reality sank in, it grew into rage and agony. There they were, the last three Valmera in existence— three men. His father knew with his wife's passing, there could be no more Valmera. With the loss of his planet, his wife, and now the future of his very species, he turned to madness. The father drew his blinding blade with a burning fire in his eyes. He lashed out with his blade toward his newborn child. Ducarn reacted in an instant, taking the golden device secured around his mother's wrist. Without another thought, just as the blade scrapped across the baby's cheek, Ducarn ignited the device and drove the claw into his father's back. Ducarn felt a fierce shiver ripple through his core as the sound of the baby's crying filled the air and the consequence of his action surfaced. His father turned towards him, the blade sunken into his ribs. In a state of disbelief, he collapsed onto the ground. Ducarn stared at his father, motionless, not moving— not for a long time. His brother's crying lulled him into a trance. The image of that frozen scar burned into his mind. Ducarn took his baby brother in his arms, searching for the means to calm him.  "My father blamed my brother for the end of the Valmera. With no more females, it was inevitable." Ducarn looked to the blade holster on his wrist. "This is all I have left of my mother. We call them novas. Devices capable of housing the immense energy contained inside a novablade." He tapped on the solid metal. "It's said every novablade is a star that might have been." The rest of them inside the tumbler fell eerily silent, merely watching Ducarn as he slowly unraveled the mystery of his being. Ducarn continued to fixate on the nova he wore across his wrist, rotating around as he marveled in it for a long moment. "What happened after that?" Talc found himself breaking the silence. Ducarn looked up from his rush of memories. "I did everything I could to take care of my little brother. Voidan and I found asylum with the Faen monks on Althea. For years, we remained hidden away in one of the temples. I taught him everything I could about the Valmera, about the Nebulae, but there was always an inherent sadness in him... and a rage—a rage he could rarely control. In time, he became obsessed with the demise of the Mulvain, with taking back our home and restoring the Valmera. He carries within himself the weight of all that pain and loss... perhaps the most tragic part of all this." "Then he's unhinged," Cal said. Ducarn sighed, a heavy sorrow on his furred face. Jasen sat in silent appreciation, reveling in the vast well of untapped knowledge he had accessed. Even stuck in the middle of a war zone, he had found himself a purpose, an opportunity to learn the unknown and not yet understood. In all his years of study, scouring every inch of the archives, he never came across any mention of the existence of Nebulae or even Valmera. To the rest of the Legion, they were an entirely undiscovered entity. Now here he was, a mere young ambassador, with the secrets of the universe unfolding before his eyes. Rallow stopped the tumbler at the gates to Mulvaire Keep. They had reached the peak of the mountain. Rallow sighed as the atrocities of his people were all laid out in the open. "Mulvain are a race of warriors. Competition is in or blood. It's primal. But we're changing—evolving. Fought a war to make ourselves better, more civilized; a war I ended with my own spawn father's death." He paused as his plea sunk in with the others. "We're not so different you and I, Valmera." Ducarn spoke, his voice full of unwavering contempt, "Perhaps not. Perhaps nowadays the sole difference of our species lies in the number of us left." 

 

Chapter 22: Mulvaire Keep

        Rallow stepped out of the tumbler and gazed up at the medieval palace of blackened stone. At the top of the mountain, the ashen smog loomed overhead, close enough to touch. Grey plumes shrouded the sky as lighting arched through the clouds. Somehow on Karkken, the higher up one traveled, the darker it seemed to get. But that never stopped a Mulvain. Darkness was second nature to them. Mulvaire Keep had been the place Rallow called home since the civil war ended. After changing sides in the final battle, he could not bring himself to return to Clan Reave's stronghold, not yet. But by customary rights, Reave's Descent belonged to him. Mulvain tradition told whoever strikes down a Clan's Warlord in battle is bestowed the title of Warlord himself. No matter their traditions, Rallow believed there was no honor in a son killing his father. Instead, Rallow took up residency in the keep overlooking their grand city. He suspected perhaps Mont'gar liked keeping him close. It would go both ways. Rallow opened the tumbler doors and ushered the rest of the party out. Cal looked upon the Mulvain architecture for the first time. Somehow it stood less impressive than the massive stadium that had reduced to rubble underneath his own head. Such was the perfect representation of the levels of importance in Mulvain society—battle before anything, even government. For Jasen and Talc, this return to where they had begun their journey allowed them to reflect on how much their circumstance had changed in such a short amount of time. It seemed unlikely to become any easier from here. "Come along, Mont'gar is waiting," Rallow said. They followed Rallow through a large gate positioned along the perimeter of the keep. Black banners hung over the top with the crimson trident insignia burning brightly. Mulvain guards stood prominently at each side, watching as idle sentries. Talc's tiny fingers tinkered with the wires inside a device as they walked along. He pulled out an extra part from his gear pouch as he applied the finishing touches to his newest invention. Talc seemed overjoyed as the last piece went into place and the device emitted a satisfactory beep.
   Talc tapped Cal on the arm. "Here look, this should help us all out quite a bit." He presented the small metal cylinder.
   "What is this?" Cal asked, examining it between his fingers. "Let's call it a universal translator. Made a few of them." He pulled another out of his bag. "Just pop it inside your ear canal, like this." He inserted the small cylinder into his ear and gritted his teeth slightly as the translator burrowed inside, establishing a direct line to his brain. "The processor automatically translates any language you hear and sends the proper translation to your brain. Basically, you only hear the language your brain already understands. Likewise, it analyzes the language being spoken to you and rewires those synapses to speak back, so those scaly aliens can understand you too. It's all seamless." Cal stared back with incredulous amazement. "You're a crafty little guy, aren't you?"
   "Designing genius tech is what I do. Simply downsized the language processor inside TX and made some minor adjustments to allow for the neural uplink. Wasn't too hard," Talc said, seemingly brushing it off. The casual demonstration of the Gawn mind. What would he come up with next?
   Cal popped the translator into his ear and felt a surge of pressure as it tunneled inside, latching onto the walls of his inner ear. Suddenly the murmurs of the Mulvain guards around him became clear. Their deep and gritty voices came across in the Legionary language he had always known. Seeing the look of wonder on Cal's face, Jasen and the rest took a translator from Talc and installed it in their ears. Finally, they would all be on the same page. 

"You're certainly a genius, pal. I'll give you that," Cal told Talc with a smirk. "Little guy might have a use after all." Rallow laughed. TX-42 waved his arm up. "What about me?" an aura of concern in his mechanical voice. "Maybe you can carry my gear. You'd probably make a nice coat rack," Cal replied. "Oh my," TX exclaimed with sorrow. As they made their way to the broad set of doors at the entrance, Cal felt on edge. This Mulvain seemed far more reasonable than any other he had come across, but he could still be leading them straight into captivity yet again. Cal noticed Ducarn's similar mistrust as they stood waiting for the door to rise up and grant them entrance. His yellow eyes scanned along, darting towards every minor movement from the Mulvain guards. Among those he now traveled with, Cal found it almost humorous that he trusted the Human least, and the Valmera perhaps the most. Regardless, it was a trust derived from necessity. Waiting at the entrance, a group of Mulvain obstructed their path, arms crossed and grimacing glares on their faces. By the blue arrowheads decorated over their armor, Rallow identified them immediately as members of Clan Luthara. Haren, the Luthara Warlord, positioned himself firmly at the head of the pack. The bright blue arrowhead shined brightly on his wide temple, glowing over his brown scales. Cal and the others stopped several feet in front of them. Rallow pushed past towards their new welcoming party, his shoulders jugging along as if winding straight up for a punch. "Out of my way, Haren," Rallow ordered the Mulvain.
   "Outsiders have no place here. The Bane already humored the diplomat—that was enough." Haren pointed to Ducarn. "Now you bring this... creature, into our walls?" "The Valmera has the means to kill Norwraiths. Makes him a formidable ally. But Luthara's never were one for strategy," Rallow barked back.
   "No not like you, Rallow. Always plotting your next move. Scheming in that head of yours." With every word he seemed to inch closer. "Just like a true Reave. Maybe you're planning to betray the Bane just as you did your spawn father," the Mulvain sneered.
   Rallow clenched his fists and smashed his shelled dome into Haren's head. The Mulvain fell backward onto the ground. The other warriors scattered away, allowing room for the fight to proceed. Haren charged forward, his head a battering ram. His hard skull smashed into Rallow's armor plating. The harder surface was not determined. Rallow grabbed hold of his opponent and took his feet out from under him, collapsing hard on the courtyard. Rallow picked Haren up off the ground, grabbing him by his legs, and tossed him like a rag doll. The strength the feat required failed to impress none in attendance. Haren rolled across the dirt covered ground and landed in a small divot. Rallow growled and pushed his way through the other Mulvain, now fully compliant. Rallow signaled for the rest of his party to follow, knowing further conflict here would be swiftly punished by the Rydon's. The monstrous metal door drew upward. Pale twilight poured into the darkening passageway. Cal's eyes took a moment to adjust to the near total darkness as Rallow led them inside the keep. Further in, the dim hue of lastubes became evident. Dark and rusted metal walls, jagged edges on ever surface seemed to perfectly compliment its inhabitants. The place radiated of abrasion—Cal's first glimpse into the world of Mulvain hierarchy. It was much as expected. When they reached the Mulvain statue in the central chamber, Ducarn visibly seethed with anger and disgust. As Jasen looked closer at the statue for the second time, he understood its depiction now. The furred hands desperately pleading beneath the warrior's boot were that of the Valmera. Jasen's scholarly intrigue heightened as the relic transformed into a painting before his eyes, more evidence to analyze as ancient history unraveled into understanding. To Ducarn, it was nothing more than a shrine to the Mulvain's act of genocide. 

Cal stood next to Ducarn. "Rarely do we get to be proud of our ancestors. History seems like one atrocity after another. And the survivors get to decide what was for the better."
   "Best left in the past then," Ducarn spoke in a low, muted tone as he walked away from the statue. Best left in the past. As Rallow escorted them through the chamber down to Mont'gar's private quarters, the rest of the Mulvain watched curiously at the odd group of beings parading through their passageways. When their attention fixed on Ducarn, many of the Mulvain nearly jumped right out of their scales. The Valmera and their mystical ways were a nightmare story told to Mulvain children growing into the world. For all these years, they had little reason to believe the Valmera were ever more than that: a ghost story. Now when the evidence stared them in the face, it suddenly became impossible to ignore. "I'm not the only one surprised by your presence—or existence for that matter," Rallow explained as they neared the end of the tunnel. "They'll all believe soon enough," Ducarn said. Two guards were posted on either side of the door—motionless, heavily armored gargoyles. They anchored their massive swords onto the floor, holding them by the hilt like columns supporting up a temple. Rallow came to a hard stop in front of them. The interaction played out as a performance, the way he puffed out his chest and shoulders as he approached the Rydons. Every exchange between two Mulvain showed they had something to prove. But the transition to his boasting stance made his demeanor increase in intimidation exponentially. Jasen worried at what this showing would mean for him, praying he was still in their good graces. "The Bane wishes to speak with our guests," Rallow told the guards. "He asked not to be disturbed," the guard droned back.
   Rallow flexed his mandibles as he came within breathing distance of the guard. His short neck stretched out from his massive shoulders, his oral claws reaching out toward the sentry. "He'll make an exception," Rallow threatened. The guard backed down, silently stepped aside to make way as he pressed the button and the Bane's private quarters opened in front of them. Through the doorway was a grand, dimly lit room. Lastubes hung from the ceiling, highlighting the expansive array of weapons displayed on scattered pedestals—a fully stocked armory. By the look of it, Mont'gar could provide arms for an entire army here alone. Talc stared with his wide black eyes at an old metallic shield propped up. The shiny surface of the riveted metal reflected beams of light raining down from the lastubes. Walking up to the display, he was barely taller than the pedestal it rested on. Talc extended his chubby fingers, reaching for the hypnotizing metal. "Wouldn't do that," Rallow snapped.
   Talc recoiled his hand at lightning speed and looked back at Rallow with a guilty expression worn over his face. Cal could not help but crack a smile at the nosy Gawn. Even Jasen seemed amused by the troublemaker. As they made their way further through the maze of deadly instruments, the sound of cracking became evident—a cadence of snapping bones. A smaller room in the rear of the quarters poured out a ray of light from the open doorway. Rallow stepped inside, Cal following closely behind. The sight before them felt indescribably intimate as they gazed at Mont'gar knelt down in the middle of the room. Infrared waves radiated off the machines lined along the walls of the claustrophobic chamber. The heat pouring off the massive incubators hit like a storm. Circled on the floor around Mont'gar was a batch of large, grey colored eggs, almost the size of a Human torso. Mont'gar held one in his hands as the tiny creature broke its way out of the protective coating. A hand popped up through the eggshell, followed by a small Mulvain head. As the hatchling freed itself from the shell, the slimy lubrication coated all over its body. Mont'gar wiped some of the vicious fluid off his child's face and set him down on the ground. Hands and feet sporadically burst out through the other eggs around the breeding chamber. The slippery new hatchlings slid over the smooth metal floor like a sheet of ice. Noises so small and strange they could only be described as cute filled the space. Watching such innocent glee from these miniature Mulvain brought a near smile to Cal's face. 

Mont'gar stood and turned to his guests. "Warlord Rallow, do you have your report on the attack?" he asked before noticing Ducarn standing next to Cal in the doorway. The Bane's expression was one of wonder, which soon morphed into a devious grin—the kind that warned of a dangerous idea. "We scoured the ruins of the stadium, when Norwraiths—" Rallow was cut off. "It was my doing." Ducarn boldly stepped forward. "I hijacked the dreadnought and crashed it into your arena."
   Mont'gar made a low growl. "Always hoped you people were real. Closest Mulvain ever came to a true rival." Mont'gar sized Ducarn up with his eyes. Ducarn met his calculating gaze. "I think you'll find there's a lot of fight left in us." "His blade can slay the Norwraiths—scatter them to the wind," Rallow informed Mont'gar. "And I trust you're going to ask me once again to proceed with your quest. 'Destroy the Norwraiths once and for all'." Mont'gar spoke mockingly. "Don't have warriors to spare. Too much destruction to clear up in the city now." He pointed to Ducarn. "Thanks to your new friend here." Mont'gar walked back into his armory. Cal felt unease at this reunion, underlying hostility littered in every word. He realized how strong Ducarn's will must truly be, how driven to his duty he was to stop himself from striking down the Bane right there. After seeing his combat prowess, Cal reckoned the Nebulae could take down all the warriors inside the stronghold before they could end his bloodline at long last. At the same time, Cal knew from his presence and speech of confidence, Mont'gar was not to be trifled with. Even still, he would bet on the Nebulae. "You doubt my capabilities, Bane?" Rallow growled. "Quite the opposite. But others do. We both know you have little favor outside your own clan," Mont'gar told.
   "Result of childish politics and jealousy. No place for such nonsense on Karkken." Rallow spat onto the stone floor.
   "I agree. And so I'll grant you your expedition. But I can send none of my warriors. You wish to go? These creatures here can accompany you." Mont'gar motioned to Cal and the rest.
   "They know nothing of what lies in the wasteland! I need knowledgeable warriors," Rallow yelled back.
   For years, the Norwraiths had roamed over the Karkken wasteland. Between the dangerous phantoms and highly frigid temperatures among the plains of barren rock, it was a place few dared travel. Lately, the Norwraiths had begun to crop up in small numbers inside the tunnel network beneath the city, presenting them as a more immediate threat. The tunnels beneath Mulvaire were even more full of thriving community than the city above. With thermal insulated environment of the underground depths, it was ideal for Mulvain growth. Children spent their early years in the tunnels being nurtured to full health, amassing their strength under the shroud of the massive heat engines. Those responsible for the hatchlings care were known as sages. By Mulvain tradition, those deemed the most fragile by combat trials were thrusted into the life of a sage. These Mulvain studied as healers and historians. They raised the Mulvain hatchlings in the safety of the tunnels, sharing collected knowledge with others. The vital role of sages was the pinnacle of civilized Mulvain society.  "Norwraiths have been here for as long as our history records. We don't know if they could even be eradicated." Mont'gar playfully swung a broadsword between his claws. "There are problems right here—in my city I can address now. I intend to build a better Karkken, Rallow. Just as promised." Mont'gar's decision was final. Rallow rolled his clawed hand into a fist, squeezing the life out of the air in his palm. He locked with Mont'gar's eyes. "Very well, Bane." In a storm of rage, Rallow turned and marched toward the exit. Mont'gar hollered after as he furthered away. "If you speak true of the Valmeran's blade, suspect you may find luck yet."
 Cal saw the notion in the Bane's expression that they should follow the Warlord out. He hurried down the hall to catch up with Rallow, angrily stomping his way through the passageways. Cal grabbed Rallow's shoulder to motion him to stop—a grave mistake. Rallow spun around and grasped Cal by the throat, lifting him off the ground by the weight of his neck. Ducarn ignited his novablade and materialized right behind Rallow, his frosted blade pressed to the back of his scaly head, the cold freezing some of his scales, causing them to crackle and molt. "Cal Cabor does not die today," Ducarn said. Rallow released his grip on Cal as he collapsed onto the floor. Cal held his throat, taking a second to compose himself and instill air back inside. Ducarn relaxed his posture and withdrew his novablade. Rallow emitted a low rumbling sound—a cry of subduing stress. "We're the best shot you have. We have a common goal now. We help you. You help us. That simple," Cal told Rallow. Rallow's nostrils flared. "What do you get out of it, Human?"
 "A chance to earn your trust," Cal began. Rallow emitted a low growl in reply. "The Infinite Empire's coming for both of us, whether you realize it yet or not. We're gonna have to work together eventually. And just so happens my ship crashed out in the wasteland. Need to get something from the wreckage... a power cell of sorts."
 This might be Cal's only chance at recovering what he left behind during his capture, the Gravity Well Trev very well may have died for. He convinced himself the device was safer in his hands than lost out in the frigid Karkken desert. Now Rallow could lead him right to it. "Alright, champion. We head for the wasteland. Maybe we come across your ship along the way," Rallow offered. Jasen spoke up over them, "Listen, I'm no help to you out there. Just let me find my way back to Empria."
 Cal turned to the cowering voice behind, disbelief in his eyes. "Back to Empria? After all you've learned? The Infinite Empire controls all of it now, and Voidan pulls their strings." The fear in Jasen's expression shaped into guilt and uncertainty. "You think I wouldn't do anything to go back? If I knew where those animals took Mara, no power in the galaxy could stop me from getting to her. But there's too much we still don't know—too much against us. So there's no going back. Not without an army."
 Cal's words burned into Jasen's mind, flooding paralyzing thoughts. Jasen was no soldier, yet he had found himself right in the middle of a war. MaybeCal Cabor had not murdered the Legionnaire. The man of shadows did not seem as unbelievable as it once did. However, one certainty rang true in Jasen's mind; Cal Cabor might just be the death of him. Ducarn placed his hand on Jasen's shoulder, a reassuring touch. He bestowed upon Jasen a look of confidence he interpreted as belief in him. For what, he was still unsure. "Alright," Jasen simply put. At least if he died now, he wouldn't have to die a coward. When he imagined his death, during his sessions of deep thought, he always feared it would be a fruitless end. Jasen never thought he would have the opportunity to fight for a cause that mattered. Fate had given him the chance. Maybe this was his purpose. "Well count me in." Talc ecstatically chimed. "A Gawn like me isn't gonna get another chance at adventure anytime soon."
 "And what are you going to do?" Rallow sneered.
 Talc tapped his tool belt then pointed to the device in Cal's ear canal. "I'm your tech guy. You've already seen the kind of stuff I can scrounge up. Just might come in handy out there." Rallow nodded. "Very well."
 "So where do we start?" Cal asked Rallow. The Mulvain looked ahead with a calling arcing through his gaze. An explosive twitch movement and Rallow stormed back through the main chamber. "To the tumbler!" he yelled, encouraging all to follow. 

 

Chapter 23: To Climb a Ladder



   For once, as the tumbler raced back down the shear drop-offs of the Mulvaire mountainside, Talc sat rather quietly. He was a Gawn of deep thought, as were they all. But here, so far away from home, he only dreamt of what he had left behind. Talc reminisced of the only person on Empria worth much of anything to him. Arguably the most famous Gawn in the Legion, and the Gawn that had apprenticed his unique mind. Volk, a creator who single-handedly ushered thousands of new technologies into the galaxy. Volk was a Gawn of endless dreams for the future, believing with more time he might have even been able to achieve them. In his old age however, the steady hands that once manipulated his devices so beautifully began to fail him, and so he looked to take upon a student. As the hourglass of Volk's life slowly ran out, he taught Talc all he knew.
 Volk never had real children of his own, instead choosing to leave his work behind as his legacy. His most vital creation of course being the mechanics that roamed across the Legion. In the early stages, Volk saw the mechanic as a mere means of developing a new workforce to alleviate the heavy strain placed on his fellow Gawn throughout Legionary society. As time went on however, he realized how far he could push the bounds of the mechanic design. He made them smarter, faster, and more life-like. Volk continued to strive to improve their fundamentals. He believed in his work perhaps with all his miniature heart. "Pass me the plasmer torch, will you?" Volk asked Talc.
 Volk looked older and more rugged than most Gawn. His skin was a darker brown that had begun to dry up. His beady black eyes did not seem to gleam with youthful exuberance in the same way. But the intelligence behind his ever movement was unparalleled, only capable of being amassed from years of experience. Talc reached across the workbench and handed the tool to his teacher. Volk ignited the torch and continued fusing together the limbs of his newest mechanic. Talc's eyes wandered around the vast garden of metal machines and sparking wires. He questioned what revelations he might spawn into this world himself one day.
 "Not sure why we keep making these things better. All Legionites use them for is serving trays half the time," Talc said.
 Volk set his plasmer torch down on the table. He sighed and looked at the young Gawn. "As much as it pains me to know this, when I look to our people, it seems these mechanics might be our only hope of rising from the bottom. You're smart, Talc. Smarter than you give yourself credit for. I know you've seen this too."
 Talc nodded. "Yeah..." He picked up one of the mechanic heads. The solid metal rested heavy in his grip. He spun the helm around until he stared it in the face. Its bulbs were powerless now, just two dim spots in the center of its faintly human façade. "If I could go back and meet our ancestors—" "You'd thank them for making the most of a bad situation. They did what they had to do to preserve our people."
 "Not quite what I was going to say."
 "We both know what you were going to say." Volk shot him a sideways glance that Talc could only return with a sly grin. They both laughed quietly to themselves.
   Volk outstretched his arm. "Head."
   Talc handed it over. Volk clicked the last piece onto the metal chassis. The orange glow of the plasmer torch lit up the dim space once again as he welded the helm onto its shoulders. Talc cleared his throat, hesitating to begin his statement, as though he had rehearsed one too many times. "Listen... uh Volk. I've been thinking it might be time for me to move on—get out of Emperion."
   Volk stopped. "And go where?"
   "Maybe offworld. Whole galaxy of options out there." Talc threw his arms up in the air before they collapsed back at his sides. "Carth, maybe I'll join up with a pirate crew and plunder Arks in the Nebulous system." He paused. "We're both more capable than we ever gave ourselves credit for."
   "All Gawn are capable of more than they are permitted here, but—" "So let's go take what we deserve."
   Volk laughed to himself. "What are you going to join up with those loons on Canopen?"
   "Well I'd be lying if I said I hadn't thought about it."
   Talc moved to wander away. Volk wasn't ready to let him off so easily.
   "Running away from our problems isn't the answer. Our people have built a life here. We can't just ask them all to leave and take a blind leap of faith into the jungle. We must build a better life for them. Here."
   Talc shook his head and scurried up one of the columns supporting up the workshop. His tiny feet gripped the footholds leading to his hammock slung between two posts. He climbed inside and laid down, Volk now several feet below him as he completed his work.
   "I wish I knew how to do that. I really do," Talc finally said.
   Volk finished the last bit of adjusting to the mechanics evo signature and clicked the program panel shut. The mechanic's bulbs lit up as it rose from the table. Volk smiled at the success of his newest model and stared into the face of his progeny. "Something tells me we'll only figure it out together."

 

Chapter 24: Goliath Initiative

 A steady song played in the dark. The incessant rhythm of clawed fingers tapping against the metal console echoed over the low hum of the starship. Voidan's face lit up a bright shade of blue by the holographic map in front of him—the only beacon of light against the black. He stared intensely at the projection of Karkken, his gaze reaching to the end of the universe and fading into oblivion. His barbed claws dug into the metal paneling, leaving behind trails of fresh steel. Voidan looked down at the nova secured to his wrist and longed for the chance to use it against his true enemies. He felt the cold metal freezing against his fur. A pain he was used to, though he doubted he could stand it against bare skin. The frozen energy siphon rested inside, waiting to be awoken. Voidan returned to reality, straightening his stance as he anticipated the door opening behind. The metallic hiss chimed on queue as Kane stormed through the bridge. Voidan did not flinch, nor even look. Nothing to greet his guest. The inaction spoke wonders. "Why are you here?" Voidan asked, seeming impatient.
 Kane stepped forward in visible outrage. "I received word from my Paratores stationed on Canopen. They're telling me you came to them and put that bounty hunter in command. You're directly undermining my authority in front of my subjects!"
 "Your subjects?" Voidan spoke quietly. His tone was one of sarcastic confusion. "All the power you have disillusioned yourself into believing you wield is a gift I have given you. You are my subject. And now the bounty hunter and the Paratores are mine as well."
 Voidan turned to judge Kane wearing his Legionary cloak like a badge of pride. Every movement he made was an attempt to display his newfound royalty. But Voidan saw through. Kane cowered behind that cloak—just a spineless shell of a man. In that moment, Voidan thought less of the mischievous human than ever before. "You told me when I gave you Karkken I could rule uninterrupted," Kane's speech reflected the understanding of his role. "And where is my planet? Do I hold it in my grasp?" His claws crushed into a fist. "I killed your Legionnaire to let you rise, yet your army stands idle. The machines of war you promised me are still incomplete."
 "The progress is steady, Voidan. The engineers just need more time to perfect the Goliath's design," Kane pleaded.
 Voidan stepped closer, looming over the wannabe king. His ember eyes burned through him and Kane swallowed away the fear with a silent gulp. "Every last Mulvain will die. That is the condition of our bargain. I do not compromise."
   Kane nodded, visibly stepping back from the Valmera. "Once the Goliaths are fully functional, I will organize an invasion force. It'll be the massacre you desire." Voidan motioned to the door. "Show me. Let's see what your men have accomplished on your precious Empria." Voidan knew as well as Kane that the Rionaught's were formidable, but victory over the Mulvain would be far from guaranteed with ordinary soldiers alone. No, they needed an edge. They needed to play to their strengths. The Mulvain had the fighting spirit and brute force, but sorely lacked in technology—an area in which the Galactic Legion excelled. When mechanics were created, they were designed as service machines. When Kane looked at the robotic beings, like with everything else, he saw an opportunity for weaponization. The Goliath initiative spawned from the desire for such a mechanical arsenal. Kane saw the creation of these new instruments of warfare to be his best chance at delivering on his promise to the Nebulae. The Rionaught's were finite, tangible, flesh and blood. But these Goliaths were an endless production line of expendable soldiers, able to be thrown at the enemy one after another.

Kane cleared another knot in his throat and nodded in agreement. He slowly backed up to the door and led Voidan down the long hallway to where his ship had docked. The docking hatch opened as they passed through and closed again behind them. Commander Basilar waited there patiently, his helmet masked darting glances as Voidan stepped into view. Basilar did not stutter, standing firmly planted in his place. Merely his head pivoted as Voidan passed by. The mechanical eyespots on his helmet constricted—tunneling— heightening his focus. The two renegades locked gazes for the first time. There was a kinship between their souls—an unexplainable similarity. Basilar did not trust it. "Emperion city. Gawn district," Kane told the Commander. Basilar moved to the front cockpit and signaled the pilot to disembark. He wandered back into the main cabin, assuming his post leaned silently against the back wall. Basilar lingered in the shadows. His presence was one of mysterious intrigue, yet the kind that would only be noticed if he desired it. The Paratore's hand never traveled far from the holster strapped to his hip. His arms crossed over his front in a guarded position, the closest he came to a relaxed state. For him, the war never ended, though he was hardly sure what war he was fighting anymore. Why couldn't he remember?
   Voidan sat in a deep meditative sleep as they made their way through Empria's atmosphere. Basilar found himself studying the hooded creature in his conscious trance. Yet something told him the Valmera would be ready and alert before Basilar could blink. Such was an enemy Basilar had never faced. A true challenge at long last. Kane did not utter another word until they descended above Emperion. As they neared the landing pad, geysers of grey smoke appeared in the ship's viewport. The ship hovered above the numerous factories scattered about the industrial area of the city and docked down outside the main mechanic processing facility. The bustling factory had been converted over time into a massive assembly line, pumping out more mechanics with each passing day. Thousands of Gawn crafted tirelessly with their nimble fingers to reach the demand.
   The overseer of the processing plant waited for them outside on the landing pad. Basilar ventured down the ramp first, with Kane and Voidan close behind. The Nebulae but melded into the scene, attracting little of the overseer's attention. He appeared nervous, overly distracted by the Legionnaire's visit to notice the dark figure. But the Paratore's presence made the man similarly weary. "What an honor it is to show you around the facility, your majesty," the overseer said. His tone was friendly, but forcibly so. Not a bold or confident man, he was scrawny and overall nothing impressive to behold. As was the law, a Gawn could not reside over the factory's production, and thus a Human was instilled with the vital management position. With growing unrest in the Gawn population, the need became more evident. Kane doubted the overseer's qualifications extended much beyond the species he belonged to. "Please, lead the way," Kane said politely through his façade. As they proceeded through the facility, the hallway entrance quickly grew into the cavernous factory floor. Precise instruments condensed laser film to be shaped into more las tech. Giant arms descended from the ceiling moved pieces of metal and fastened the parts into place. Suspended in the air, half-finished machines roamed down the parallel assembly lines to complete their transformation. Grav engines hovered the manufacturing belts stacked over top each other— a vast tower of machine assembly. Further below the production lines, massive vats of molten metal and Gawn tinkering with the intricate inner workings of the machinery. In the center of the room between the two lanes of towered conveyors, a large platform presided full of monitoring terminals. Several of the Gawn engineers stood viewing the influx of evo, furthering the assembly progress. 

The overseer led Kane and his guests to the center platform with an enthusiastic flare. Volk, serving as the lead engineer and mechanic scientist, stepped forward to greet them with a sense of confidence absent in most Gawn. His look informed everyone he knew exactly what he was doing, perhaps more than anyone else ever would. "Volk," the Gawn introduced himself. "Pleasure to meet you Legionnaire." His voice was one of respect, not genuine admiration. A subtle differentiation, but Kane picked up on it nonetheless. "I trust you know why I am here?" Kane asked, right down to business. "The mechanic production I gather," Volk replied.
   "The Goliath Initiative," Kane said bluntly. Volk feared he had been called out on his attempt to play dumb. For weeks, Kane had been placing added pressure on his team to complete the project. The Legionnaire assumed the delay lied in their inadequacies, still unaware Volk himself had been halting progress wherever possible. A pacifist in every manner of the word, Volk had no interest in building hulking war machines for the front lines of Kane's crusade. Volk found himself to be one of the leading voices in the growing movement to free the Gawn—end the oppression. For generations the Gawn had served the Humans without thought of a greater life— lulled into complacency.  Through all their achievements over the ages, one could only imagine their limitless potential if stepped out of the shadow of humanity.
   Voidan came forward, his presence now known to the Gawn. His otherworldly demeanor presented a silent threat to the old engineer. The way the shadowed creature stood there, unaddressed. Somehow it made him all the more menacing. Volk stepped up to the terminal accessing the assembly line. "Yes of course." For all his boldness and years of wisdom, the Gawn was never suited for a fight. He wasn't foolish enough to start now. With a press of the digital display, the machines evacuated off the conveyor. A panel opened on the far wall and a long metal rack extended out like a tree branch. Hanging on were a series of monstrous metal giants, armor plates thicker than most tumblers, the Goliaths appeared indestructible.
 "Shield capacity is currently frying the system in testing. Targeting systems are similarly problematic," Volk reported. The helm of the mechanic soldier wore an infrared visor slung across its face. Any form of organic life or machine movement could be detected by the heat signatures of the Goliaths targeting interface. The core of the juggernaut contained a powerful shielding device capable of absorbing plasmer fire before ever reaching its heavy armor. The right arm was substituted by a powerful plasmer cannon, while the left held a mighty metal fist.  Undoubtedly, this brute was bred for war. "And who is responsible for these failures?" Voidan questioned, his voice echoing throughout the facility. The overseer stepped forward. "I'm prepared to take full responsibility, and would also like to offer my guarantee that the project will be finished on time." "Hmm... interesting."
   The Nebulae paced slowly across the platform before coming to a stop in front of the overseer. Voidan came a stride closer. Each step forward the overseer withdrew one back. The man's back flushed with the edge of the platform. Voidan grasped his chest with his clawed hand, tearing the fabric of his shirt as he threw him over. The overseer cried out in terror, sailing down to the vat below. Voidan stood over the edge. He silently mouthed the seconds he traveled downward until exclaiming a satisfactory hum as if reaching the proper number. Voidan disappeared into a wisp of smoke. The overseer stopped, suspended mere inches from the boiling metal. His skin began to crackle from the proximal waves of heat, his hair singing away. Above him, standing on the edge of the vat, Voidan held the overseer upside down by his ankle. 

Basilar peered over the platform's end. The orange glow of the vat reflected off his lustrous armor. The overseer squirmed in agony as Voidan held him in place, and Basilar wondered if he should intervene. He questioned if he would save him, as if unsure he was in control of his own actions. Or maybe, for the first time, he truly was. The Nebulae did not have to speak a word. Everyone understood the message, the threat of death that loomed over all should they not comply. Voidan tossed the overseer onto the factory floor below, discarding the heap of trash. He rematerialized on the platform and gave a knowing look to all his spectators. Kane struggled to maintain his unwavering presence. Volk sensed the tension and knew his charade could not be maintained much longer. Someone would pay the price soon enough. "I expect a finished product next time I return," Kane commanded. Volk nodded weakly and looked at Voidan as he withdrew from the platform, eager to exit the facility. Kane quickly followed, leaving Volk and his engineers alone once again. He breathed a sigh of relief—for now. Volk looked up and turned his head. Basilar stood there on the platform like he struggled to find his words. The Paratore took a step close as he tried to compose himself. For a moment, Volk was afraid what he might do. So much uncertainty lied beneath that mask. The dipping of his head, the twitching of his fingers, told Volk even Basilar did not have those answers. Basilar pointed to the damage on the side of his helmet. "I need you to tell me what's happening to me."
   "I... I can try," Volk replied.
   Volk motioned for him to sit down at the chair in front of the terminal. The rest of the engineers scurried away to help the overseer down below. They had their moment of privacy on the platform. Volk examined the cracked helmet closely, careful not to touch. The black scorch across his white armor was no foreign sight. He retrieved a small instrument from his tool belt, "Plasmer bolt?" Volk asked. "Yes," Basilar replied blankly.
   Volk probed the instrument into the blasted crevice formed in the side of the helm. He pushed some armored debris out of the way to score a better vantage of the inner wirings. Nanites fizzled around the sharp edges, seeking to compose themselves back together.
   Volk placed his hands to try to move the helm. "If I could remove the helmet I could—" In a blinding motion, Basilar grabbed Volk's hand, turning his head toward the Gawn. The Paratore's golden lenses locked with Volk's beady little eyes. "No," Basilar said sternly. He released his grip. The Gawn was paralyzed for a moment. He lowered his hand to his side and took a pause of calm. His curiosity in discovering what lied beneath would not be fulfilled today. Volk saw how the thought terrified even Basilar himself. "Alright. Let's see what I can do," Volk said.
   Volk removed another tool from his belt to open the hole wider as he glanced inside. A layer of blackened soot coated the mirror neuron disruptor embedded in his helmet. The connection between his brain and the implant appeared almost completely fried, destroying the evo uplink that carried the disruption signal into his cerebrum. But Volk looked closer at the device. Etched on the side was an evo signature he had never seen before, the coding too advanced. He pulled up the evopatch on his wrist and scanned the signature. The upload completed. Restricted. The message flared on his screen as he tried to read its contents. Project Gold. Beyond that, only more walls. Volk compiled the diagnosis of Basilar's condition. Without access to the evo, he could only assess the physical. "Your implant has been almost entirely destroyed. The part of your brain it was intended to suppress is now active for the first time... you can feel what others are feeling for the first time," Volk tried to explain.
   Basilar did not move from his chair as the clarity washed over him. Seconds stretched on into hours as he felt fear of everything that lied beyond the platform. Suddenly he could play the role of the victim, he could absorb everyone's suffering just by staring into their eyes. And the remorse, a flood of regret came for him as he recalled every deed he had ever done. Perhaps the Legionnaire was right to run his kind into extinction. "Does Project Gold mean anything to you?" Volk asked. Basilar drew a long pause. "No," he finally responded.           Volk knew no method of comfort for such a man. Instead, he patched up the hole in the side of his helmet, using a plasmer torch from his belt to seal the wound closed with surgical precision. All that remained was the black streak of burned plasma across the side. "The implant in your helmet... it was doing more than just suppressing your mirror system. I can't read the evo, but it delivered some kind of... programming," Volk attempted to share what little information he possessed. Basilar did not speak, just gazed out towards the rolling conveyors. Halla. It was not his home, but a birthplace of a different sort. There would be answers there—a certainty at last. He felt the need to question at last. The obvious queries dancing in front of his eyes he could finally reach out and grab. Who was he? Where did he come? And who condemned him to this life?
   Basilar jolted up from his chair and turned towards Volk. "Thank you." The Paratore started his way towards the exit when Volk stopped him.
 "Maybe this is your chance to finally do the right thing," Volk said.
 Basilar looked back at the Gawn, the turn of his head expressed enough for him to feel his conflict. He disappeared out of the facility without another word. 

 

Chapter 25: Descent

        Mulvain warriors lined the city street around the ghostly ruins of the arena. Huge boulders and piles of rubble gradually shifted out of the way by their sheer strength. Though moving the thunderous piles of stone seemed to be the extent of the Mulvain's care. Their city was not one of exquisite architecture. Structures were created with only their application in mind—presentation hardly a consideration. Nevertheless, the work of cleaning up the city had begun. Rallow stopped the tumbler in front of the rubble. He climbed out and stared at the dreadnought shooting diagonally into the sky. Cal rose out of the passenger' seat and stood beside him. "So what are we doing back here?" Cal asked. Talc chimed in before Rallow could speak, "Better question: When do I get a plasmer?"
 Cal glared at the Gawn pleading next to him like a small child. Talc looked back with a shrug of his shoulders and an apologetic expression. Cal motioned to the spare plasmer pistol on his hip. "Do you even know which way to point this thing?" "Figured I'd try in the direction of anyone shooting at us," Talc said, riddled with sarcasm.
 "Give little man his plasmer. Might prove amusing," Rallow chuckled.
 Cal reluctantly unholstered the plasmer pistol and handed it to Talc. The Gawn snatched the plasmer enthusiastically. He gripped the foreign handle, rolling it through his small hands.
 Rallow walked over to Jasen. "Better take one too. Need all the help we can get." Rallow handed him his plasmer pistol. Jasen took the plasmer, hesitant on how to handle such a weapon. Admittedly, he was a novice in firearms training to say the least. But he knew where they were headed that would have to change. Following Cal's example, Jasen slid the plasmer into a holster beneath his jacket he had forgotten was even there—standard issue in a Legionary ambassador's outfit for an extraplanetary mission. This would be the first time he found himself in a situation truly warranting its use. Loud thuds pounded from inside the rear of the tumbler. Rallow sighed and walked to the back of the vehicle, opening the storage area. TX rolled out on the confined space as the door lifted up. His mechanical torso landed hard onto the dirt and struggled to get to his feet.
 "I don't believe such accommodations are acceptable for an extended journey. Am I not permitted to ride in the back with everyone else?" TX questioned, incapable of true outrage. Rallow laughed. "Maybe next time, metal man." The Warlord marched over to the chasm torn in the bedrock. Rallow stopped at its edge, looking down into the lightless passageway. The Norwraiths came from here in numbers and left the same way. Cal took one look at him and understood. This was their first lead. The trail started here. "How far down is it?" Cal asked Rallow.
 "Hmm..." the Mulvain left out his usual growl of contemplation. He kicked a stone down into the hole, waited a moment. A soft clunk sounded moments later. "Huh. Probably live."
 Ducarn stepped toward the abyss. "Allow me." His body blew away as a cloud of smoke in the icy wind and recongealed at the bottom of the pit, taking a moment to gather his bearings. The tunnel was wider than expected, a whole expansive walkway carved through the black stone. Ducarn looked up and saw the others jutting their heads over the edge. The drop seemed survivable. "Brace your fall correctly and it should be safe for the rest of you to follow," Ducarn told them.

             They replied with a silent hesitation, glancing around as if waiting for the first one to take the plunge down the rabbit hole. Cal took a deep breath and readied himself. Here goes nothing, Cal thought. Before his legs could take him forward, Rallow dived down into the hole like an anchor dropping down into the surf. His large, clawed feet crashed onto the rocky floor with a shattering impact. He held out his hand to stabilize himself and absorb the bulk of the shock. Remarkably, he stood up and walked over to Ducarn unscathed, the surface around him riddled with cracked stone. Cal took the next leap of faith. Immediately the rush of freefall filled his senses and the nostalgia of his time on Luxarus came once again. The memory of saving the Legionnaire rang true in his mind, and the painful sting of failing the second time. Cal drew the dagger from his belt and drove it into the rocky wall of the tunnel as he made his descent. The deep scrapping echoed throughout the dark space as he sailed down, his arm extended outward. The extra frictional resistance seemed to slow him down just enough to come to an orderly stop on the landing below. Jasen, Talc, and TX remained standing over the edge of the hole on the surface, none of them appearing overly eager to make the plunge next. Jasen's eyes reflected the same rich blackness of a Gawn as he peered down into the void. Talc broke the steady silence and hollered down into the pit, "Alright I'll just come out and say it. Metal man and I aren't going to be able to make that jump. My tiny legs would probably snap in two, and TX would be reduced to nuts and bolts."
 Ducarn sighed. "Very well." He teleported back up to the top and snatched Talc in a single motion, setting him down safely on the bottom. Talc felt dazed and disoriented as he returned from this new method of transportation. Ducarn made another trip to grab TX, who somehow appeared even more confused on arrival. Ducarn settled back down at the bottom of the pit as they all looked up at Jasen, his impatience beginning to grow.
 "You going to help me down next?" Jasen asked, attempting politeness in his voice. Cal looked to Ducarn as he stood there examining the situation, patiently waiting for Jasen to make a move. Up on the edge, Jasen grew agitated at the Valmera's refusal to offer assistance.
 "We don't have time for this," Rallow said as he picked up a large stone and hurled it into the air. Hitting its mark at the edge of the hole below Jasen's feet, the rock crumbled the ground beneath and sent him into freefall. Jasen cried out in shock and terror as he spiraled downward. Cal reacted in a flash, running up the side of the wall the several feet he could. With acrobatic precision he hardly knew he possessed, Cal back ejected off the wall with a prompt kick and caught Jasen toward the end of his descent. The two flopped down onto the rocky floor, Cal absorbing the impact through his dense armor. But the heavy fall still left a lasting impression on his abdomen. Jasen's panting lingered over the sound of dropping rocks as Cal slowly rose onto his feet. Jasen rolled over with a groan and Cal pulled him upright.  "Thank you," Jasen said with sincerity, followed immediately by a heavy exhale. Cal merely replied with a friendly nod. Ducarn stood still watching Jasen with an inquisitive look. Once he collected himself, Jasen shot Ducarn a hostile glance. It did not faze him— too distracted by his analysis of the ambassador to develop an emotional response. The rest of them pushed their way past Ducarn as Rallow eagerly proceeded down the tunnel. The Nebulae placed his hand on Jasen's shoulder as he tried to walk past.

"There is more strength in you than you yet know," Ducarn told him. Jasen stared into the Valmera's fiery sockets, a cold expression spread across his face. "Next time, just help me down," Jasen said bluntly as he trudged past. Rallow stormed down the hallowed space, no fear or hesitation in a single step. Cal followed closely behind, noting the surroundings. The air was much warmer down in the cavernous system. Pressing his hand to the rock lining the walls, he could feel the heat radiating through. Wherever this tunnel led, Cal reasoned it must be to the source of all that heat. There was more to this frozen desert than the Legion knew. "I must say this is much better. My circuits don't fair so well in the cold," TX yammered on as they walked.
 "Yeah where are we going anyway, chief?" Talc directed to Rallow at the front of the group. Rallow stopped and turned toward them. "Need to know where this tunnel leads. Find that, we find the Norwraiths."
 "Ok, so I don't usually like to use the phrase 'suicide mission'... but this is a suicide mission, isn't it?" Talc asked. "Only if you wind up dead," Rallow said as he continued through the narrowing passage. Talc rose up his arms in protest, slapping down at his sides and echoing through the cave. "He's probably just gonna eat me," Talc murmured to himself. Cal cracked a grin at Talc that quickly erupted into a full smile. Once the Gawn finished his little fit, Cal moved after Rallow, now slowly squeezing himself through a slit in the rock barely wide enough for his bulky stature. Rocks chipped away as he grinded his armored plates the rest of the way through. Ducarn blinked across the gap in an effortless motion. Rallow growled in annoyance at the Nebulae's easy answer to all obstacles. Cal removed the plasmer rifle stowed on his back and held it in his hand as he slid sideways through the crevice. He waited on the other side for the last of them to break past. "We need to make learning what's happening back in the Legion a priority. We're still operating entirely in the dark here," Cal announced. "I do believe I may be able to help with that," TX said, stepping forward with enthusiasm. "As you may know, part of my processing allows me to have a direct line to access the archives. However, there is also a backdoor that was installed: a network that allows communication between mechanics." "What kind of network?" Cal asked.
 "Think of it much like placing an evostream to someone through the archives. It's a constant open channel all mechanics share," TX explained.
 Talc recognized the grand design immediately, knowing only one person could have pulled that off. Only one person that would have had the motive for such a dream: Volk. Talc knew how the weight of Volk's creation weighed heavy on him, with the advancement of the mechanic mind. A race born to serve had now given rise to an entirely new race and thrust them into a life of servitude much the same. The revelation never sat right with his old mentor. "Volk did this, didn't he? How did he pull something like that off? Why did he never tell me?" Talc asked, each question turning more towards himself. "He believed if we could talk to each other, we could decide our fate for ourselves. I believe, he wanted us to be free," TX said. "So you can... talk to other mechanics? Even right now?" Cal asked in an effort to understand this new development. "Yes. Though I often choose not to. The noise can be... overwhelming." Volk created the network as a means for the mechanics to share knowledge and information across space. In effect, they could establish their own digital community, advance their collective understanding, and establish themselves as something more than the Legion's new edition of slaves. The way Volk viewed it, he had given the mechanics a fighting chance, knowing full well that discovery of this act would cost his life. In a blur, Cal drew his plasmer at the mechanic. Everyone jumped back, startled by the sudden hostility. Rallow merely reclined against the cave wall in enjoyment. Talc stepped in front of the mechanic with hands outstretched, though still well below Cal's firing line. "Whoa hold on. What are you doing, boss?" Cal kept his plasmer raised. "He just admitted to being able to communicate with mechanics all over the galaxy. How do I know he wasn't sent here to spy on me?" Pointing to Jasen, "Two of you were sent here to find me after all."
 "The Galactic Legion is unaware of the network. It is a, what I suppose you would call 'mechanic secret'," TX said.
 "Then why tell us?" Cal questioned. "Because I believe in your cause. I have seen your innocence, Master Cal."
 "What are you talking about?"
 TX played with the buttons on the evopatch transcribed to his forearm. "When I heard of the crimes brought against you, naturally I grew curious." An evostream projection emitted from the mechanics display. "The last transmission before this mechanics death revealed the perpetrator you described attacking the Legionnaire and his men. The recording is cut short, but the evidence here is quite damming to Kane's story."
 Cal lowered his weapon as the murder relayed through the mechanic's eyes. Voidan dashed across the room, slaying all in attendance before smashing the mechanic to bits. The rest of the tragedy was filled in by jarring memories. "This... this proves what happened that night. My innocence..." Cal drifted off with the thoughts he had not wished to relive. Ducarn moved beside him. "When you return to Empria, it will be with honor."
 Jasen looked at Cal. "I'm...sorry. I only knew what they wanted me to know."
 "Well now you know better." Cal turned to the rest of them. "We all do. And we're going to make this right. Cause I'm getting real tired of carthing murderers."
 A deadly grin grew on Rallow's face.
   TX continued. "As for news of Empria... I'm afraid it is less than celebratory. Kane has been sworn in as Legionnaire of the Galactic Legion. The Infinite Empire has been deemed the ruling governing party. Paratores patrol the streets of Emperion. It is all quite grim." The news reel burrowed deep into Cal's brain, his worst nightmare transmuted to reality in a single moment. His fist curled up into an iron ball. He released it, for fear he might crush his hand under the force. In Cal's mind, his cause had never been more urgent, more justified. "Then our timeline has moved up." Cal looked to Rallow. "I need the Mulvain's support."
 "Always up for a good fight, but a deal's a deal. Hold up your end first, then we see if any Mulvain will follow you," Rallow told him.
 Cal nodded in reply. The confident tip of his head told the others of his dedication. Such a bold willingness to stop at nothing to achieve his goal shocked the party into distraction of how impossible the task ahead would be. And so they carried on down the lightless tunnel towards whatever end in sight, and whatever horrors waited for them there. 

 

Chapter 26: Welcome to Sanctuary

        Surges of blistering heat washed over in periodic waves as they ventured further down the path. The tunnel seemed a slight incline, gradually taking them deeper beneath the rocky surface as they winded around. Jasen brushed a bead of sweat of his brow with the sleeve of his jacket. He felt tired and breathless, in disbelief of the thought that not long ago he suffered from the opposite temporal extreme. Up ahead a shimmer danced in the corner of Cal's eye, bright blue mineral veins running through the walls of the rock. Cal had harvested enough in his youth to recognize the sapphire shade of colyne in an instant. He traced his finger down the lightning stream. Cal pulled out his necklace and matched the polished stone against the raw material. Kane was prepared to go to war over the possibility of colyne in Karkken's crust, though he suspected there was more to it than that now. The feats this precious mineral could achieve, and consequently the deaths that it caused, never felt worthwhile. Rallow led them at a steady pace from the front of the pack. As a light glimmered down the tunnel, he quickened into a near sprint. The others sped up to follow the hasty warrior as he came to a halt at the edge of a vast cavern. Standing erect in the center of the deep pit before him stood a massive spire venting out waves of steam. Glowing red filaments ran up the length of the towering structure, and suddenly the source of all that heat became clear. Radiating off the spiral machine, the dense layers of rock insulated the heat inside, creating the Mulvain's own brand of paradise on this frozen world. Spread out around the spire in circular formation, levels of homes nestled into the cavern walls like an expansive skyscraper. Lichen farms were cultured here, providing much of Karkken's vegetative food source. Mulvain hatchlings ran through the streets of the underground utopia. Sages set up shop, caring for the children and healing those on the less fortunate side of a fight. Where up above was the Mulvain's showing of strength and battle prowess, below the surface lived the more modest side of their people—a personal and unfiltered view of their lives. As Cal stopped next to Rallow at the edge, the realization struck him that he might truly be the first Human to ever witness this. Much of the Mulvain was unknown for so long, scientists speculated at their survival beneath the surface of Karkken. Now he knew for certain. "Ahhhh!" Rallow screamed, throwing a rock towards the distant spire. The stone melted on impact with the intense heat of the machine and sizzled away into a wisp of smoke in the air. Talc jumped at Rallow's outburst, but was quickly impressed by the amount of energy the spire produced. "This only works if you keep us informed. What's going on, Rallow?" Cal asked. "Tunnel leads right to Sanctuary. Norwraiths could be in here with us right now." Rallow breathed. "Our hatchlings are down here."
   "Then let's assess the situation. How do we get down?"
   As Cal peered below to the various levels of buildings layered down the side of the deep abyss, he found himself wishing he had his Grav boots. He doubted Ducarn would be up to the task of ferrying them all across the gap one by one. Cal looked to the others for alternatives.
   Talc tip toed towards the drop off, noting the gradual curve of the rock jutting out below them. "Can't believe I'm about to suggest this... but I think we could slide down and land on one of the lower levels."
   Rallow shifted his position for a better angle on the angular rock shelf. Sure enough, there was an area for them to land right underneath. The friction from the rock would slow them down just enough to drop onto the carved-out section of rock. From there, the rest of Sanctuary would be open to them. 

"Carth knows I've heard worse ideas," Cal said with a shrug of his shoulders. "You're kidding me. You want to slide down into the abyss," Jasen complained.
   Rallow shot Jasen a dirty glance and Jasen immediately settled into submission. The plan would proceed regardless of his approval, the realization sinking in that he would not be calling any of the shots in this band of misfits. Jasen turned to Ducarn, hoping his aura of unspoken wisdom might shed some light on the shaping of this course of action.
   "You must trust the stars," Ducarn told him. "What about TX?" Talc asked, realizing the problem with his proposition.
   "Leave him," Rallow said plainly.
   "Not a chance. The mechanic just more than proved his worth. That mechanic network and the evidence he has makes him vital to all of this," Cal said. "Thank you, Master Cal," TX replied.
   "I can take him down with me. The rest of you can take the adventurous route. Though I do suggest the Mulvain take the lead. I doubt people here look kindly on outsiders dropping into their home unescorted," Ducarn told them. Rallow took a running leap. "No time to waste." The armored plates on his rear grinded against the korite, sending out sparks as he descended the incline. Rallow braced himself as he reached the end of the ramp. The world fled from under him and he fell off into the abyss. Rallow dropped off the edge like a water droplet from a leaf, pattering down softly onto the ledge below. Around him was the Sanctuary he had sworn to protect. A narrow street with a plethora of buildings carved into the side greeted his eyes. Already he could hear the bustling sounds of the Mulvain community, hatchlings running around, people conducting trade and daily business. The others followed, some more hesitant than others, and eventually made it down to the ledge with Rallow. Once they all cleared, Ducarn shifted in with a puff of smoke, TX safely secured in his arms. He dropped the mechanic down with a sigh of relief. Transporting others across space appeared to wear him down. His powers of the mist were far from limitless. "So I take it that wasn't the front door," Cal said.
   Talc laughed. "Let's call it an express elevator."
   "No, the passageway opens from the bottom of Mulvaire Keep. Knowing undocumented tunnels lead in to Sanctuary is... troubling," Rallow explained.
   Several Mulvain approached from the market area further down the cavernous stretch. As they neared, their intentions became clearly marked as unfriendly. The Mulvain leading the group was quickly recognizable as Warlord Haren, the same Luthara Warlord that harassed them at the gate to Mulvaire Keep. After their last encounter, this could only end even worse. "Speaking of trouble," Ducarn whispered. Haren came to a halt in front of the group, two Mulvain stopped on either side of him. Cal noted the bright blue arrowheads decorated across their armor. They had yet to draw their weapons, instead prominently displaying them as a method of foreshadow. Menacing grins encompassed their scaly faces, their mandibles twitched like an itchy trigger finger. "Taking these aliens to the Bane wasn't enough, Rallow? Now you dare bring them to Sanctuary? Clan Reave was no honor," Haren accused him viciously. Rallow growled. "The Bane sent us on a mission to locate the Norwraiths. It led us here. That is what requires your limited focus right now."
   "They've no right to be here. And neither do you, shine scale," Haren snarled back.
   Rallow inched closer. "Remember what happened last time you got in my way."

"I'm not asking nicely this time." Haren signaled to his men. The Mulvain drew their rifles and took aim. Rallow head butted Haren and sent him staggering backward. Jasen and Talc dashed out of the line of fire and took cover in the alley between two buildings. Rallow pulled out his lasguard and charged at the volley of plasmer bolts sailing towards him. Cal took cover along the edge, popping off shots from a safe distance while Ducarn activated his novablade and presented the ominous white glow as warning. Immediately at the sight, Haren drew a launcher from his back and fired out an immobilizing shock collar towards Ducarn. Wrapped around his throat, the metal device sent a surge of electricity arcing down his body. Ducarn fell to the ground in agony.
   Haren marveled at the weapon in his hands. "Usually use this thing for taming wanotaurs. Figured it'd work just as well on one animal versus another."
   The Nebulae thrashed his body in vain until rendered completely inert.
   Cal quickly scanned the battlefield from his fortified position. Rallow appeared to be holding off the Mulvain for now, his armor absorbing the scorching blows his lasguard could not. Cal saw TX lying limp on the bare stone floor, the mechanic's limbs separated from his body, only a panicking head and torso remained. The bright bulbs in his helm pleaded for help. Rallow drew the korite broadsword stowed on his back and slashed with all his might towards the first Mulvain. The warrior's plasmer cleaved right down the barrel as it reverted to pieces of useless metal. Rallow's blade struck the back of the Mulvain warrior, sending him crashing onto his knees. He picked up the defeated opponent and hurled him off the ledge towards the spire at the cavern's center. A blood curdling screamed pierced their ears as the Mulvain greeted the lava like heating filaments of the spire. Cal dived out from behind cover into a barrel roll, landing behind a nicely placed rock along the path. Aiming overhead, he fired two charged shots at one of the Mulvain. The plasmer bolts hit the Luthara warrior hard, melting through his chestplate. The force of the impact sent the Mulvain flying backward, where he laid motionless on the bed of warm coal. Haren whipped his korite sword at Rallow, colliding with his back as he attempted to feint to the side. Rallow arched in pain of the forceful strike and let out a deep roar as he dropped to the ground. His blade parted from his grasp as he fell. Haren raised his sword over his head, prepared to finish off his opponent. The sharp tip of the blade sat mere inches from Rallow's throat as Cal dashed for the fallen sword. He grabbed the hilt in one hand and swung for all he was worth. As the edge of the blade connected with Haren's neck, his head leapt from his shoulders, his life fleeing with it. A misting of blood sprayed across Cal's face as he executed the Luthara Warlord. He stood there, suddenly conscious of the heavy rising and falling of his chest as Haren's headless body crashed to the floor. Cal dropped the sword and offered out his hand to Rallow, helping him back onto his feet. The Mulvain gripped firmly and pulled himself up. "Thanks, Cal," Rallow said. Cal noticed the first time Rallow had called him by name. Small, but it was progress. He quickly turned around towards the others. Jasen and Talc had crawled out of their hiding place to help nurse the wounded. Talc removed the collar from Ducarn's neck with one of the tools from his belt. As the metallic device released the Valmera's throat, he breathed a deep sigh of relief.
   "Thank you, friend," Ducarn gasped. Cal walked over to TX's shattered remains, his head and upper half of his torso seeming to be all that survived the skirmish. Sparks glistened off the intestinal wires spilling out from his chassis. TX slowly rotated his head, a loud clunking in the gears of his neck. He looked up at Cal kneeling over him. The mechanic gargled static as he pleaded softly for help. 

"So much for sanctuary," Jasen said plainly. "Not sure how this is going to play out now," Rallow said in a low growl. Cal pointed at TX. "Talc, can you fix him?"
   "Assistance—would—very much appreciated," TX's voice skipped through static. Talc glanced at the mechanic. "If we can move him somewhere I can work."
   Rallow picked up the mechanics tattered remains and slung him across his back. TX rotated his head as he viewed the world from this new angle. The Gawn moved behind Rallow to take a second look at the damage, cycling between rustling through his toolkit and examining the mechanic's body to pick out each instrument required. He was a surgeon at work. Ducarn turned towards the marketplace Haren and the rest of the Luthara's had come from. Faint footsteps approached. A small Mulvain hatchling, only a little larger than a Gawn, strided over to them. As the child walked closer, they stood in paralyzed uncertainty. By the time he arrived, his intentions appeared friendly, which was perhaps even more unsettling. Mulvain had wandered out of their homes to spectate during all the commotion. These people seemed more hesitant than the Mulvain they met on the surface, many of them young or newborn hatchlings, not used to visitors. The child walked right up to Cal, extending his hand towards him. Instinctual reflex brought him to take it, as the child pulled him to follow. "The Grand Sage requires your presence," the child said. The hatchlings voice was more soft and innocent than the full grown Mulvain, yet it carried the same level of confidence and strength. Such qualities must have been engrained in their blood. Cal noticed the shiny silver coat layered over his scales—infant skin. As the Mulvain grow, this smooth film is replaced by the hard scales representative of their species. Cal looked to Rallow for guidance in their next course of action.
   "We best follow," Rallow said, responding to Cal's uncertainty. Ducarn nodded to Cal, submitting his agreement. The hatchling led them past the market and up a stone staircase parallel to the deep drop-off beyond the ledge. The Mulvain passed along the staircase all stopped to stare at the strange intruders in their home. They scaled the levels like traversing the rings of a tree, until reaching their desired floor. As they climbed the top, they arrived at the next level in the endless system of stacked homes orbiting around the massive heat generator. The hatchling led them out of the stairway toward the street. Further along the stone path, a building stood out from the rest. The tanned stone did not appear to contain the usual korite that made up Mulvain structures. The architecture itself harbored a spiritual attitude that hinted of a temple of some kind—a place of peace. Such an asylum seemed strange on this treacherous world of violence. But strange had often become their destination as of late.
   The hatchling trotted up a series of steps to the broad set of stone doors. Two Mulvain sat on either side, their attitude too relaxed to be guards. The calm demeanor appeared peculiar on the face of a Mulvain. But these sages look elsewhere for their means of purpose—a role of healing. In turn, they stood in direct opposition to the preconceived notions of their people. Yet sages were the lifeblood of the Mulvain—the true cause of their people's prosperity. Three loud knocks on the door signaled their intent to enter. The doorway opened, and the hatchling ushered them inside. Behind them, the doors closed shut with a heavy thud, startling Jasen as he attempted to take in the surroundings. The room was dimly lit, torches hung from support pillars provided the only light, calling back to a simpler time. Furnishings inside the temple were minimal, with a long table spread across the room and a grouping of stone chairs formed into a half circle. In the vertex of the seating arrangement, sat a Mulvain wrapped in wintergreen cloth. Cal noted the Mulvain's appearance, how drastically different the lack of armor on the alien's body presented their features. They seemed softer—more fragile. 

The hatchling walked around the table toward the Mulvain seated at the back of the room. Cal tried to listen closely to whispers the hatchling planted in the sage's ear. After a moment, the hatchling waved them over. The sage was ready for their audience. As Cal walked over to the sage, he noted the other Mulvain dressed in their similar garbs, some were curiously watching the new visitors, while others went about their normal practices. These Mulvain seemed perfectly peaceful in the middle of a culture of warriors. Such departure was odd to behold.
   Ducarn saw the gentle ways of the sages, their methods of healing, and wondered where these gentle souls had been when they decimated his people. Did they stand idly by? Or perhaps the sages grew out of realization they would destroy themselves eventually all the same should they not break free of their pillaging ways. Either way, these sages could not heal the scars of time. The Grand Sage marveled at them standing there. "It's been many galactic years since I've laid my eyes on an alien. And now such a variety."
   Rallow tipped his head in a shallow bow. "An honor to see you again, Grand Sage."
   The Grand Sage, the prestigious title given to the most revered of all sages on Karkken. As such, she was centuries old, amassing a great deal of knowledge throughout her life. They were pillars of wisdom and trusted confidants in the Mulvain community. Not having any clan allegiance themselves, the sages worked in service to all the clans as a neutral party—peacekeepers of a sort. The Grand Sage in particular, stood as a symbol for a united Mulvain kind, and longed for the prosperity of their people. "Ah yes, Warlord Rallow. Quite some time indeed. But sadly, I did not call you here to reminiscence." The sage turned her head to Cal. "I wished to speak with you, Human."
   "Can't say I'm quite used to the popularity," Cal replied with a dry chuckle.
   The sage did not appear to enjoy the attempt at humor and instead continued, "As is our custom, the slayer of a Warlord becomes the new Warlord of the clan." She paused. "By right, you are Clan Luthara's new Warlord."
   Cal looked at Rallow, both suspended in disbelief. Cal knew little of the ways of Mulvain clans, but he doubted such an occurrence was precedented. This entire journey he had set upon was aimed at the goal of gaining the Mulvain's trust and respect. Though how could he be expected to lead these people when he was yet an outsider himself? "I think there's been some kind of mistake..."
   "All of Sanctuary watched you slay Warlord Haren outside the marketplace. Many will not like it, but we all know the custom," the Grand Sage explained. In that moment, Cal realized his luck—a pleasantly surprising gift fallen right into his lap. Clan Luthara would follow him no matter their heart's desires, and if he continued his journey with Rallow, Clan Reave might as well. Two of the three largest Mulvain clans rallied under his banner; it would be a fine start. "What do I have to do?" Cal asked, a stern readiness in his voice. "Meet with the elders of the clan. Let your command be known. Word spreads fast around here, Warlord Cal."
   The title sounded strange paired with his name, but the power behind it felt thrilling, like a call signaling him to battle. As Cal sat there pondering his next move, sages approached him with carved out bowls in hand. Inside flowed a rich, fluorescent blue liquid that appeared slightly more viscous than regular water. The sages dipped rags into the liquid, taking up some of the brightly colored substance. Much like the Legion, the Mulvain used colyne, but their applications were rather different. Sages had developed a way to refine the mineral to a fine powder and dissolve it into liquid. The result was a cobalt fluid with extraordinary regenerative capabilities. As the sages applied the colyne lubricant to his face, he felt a warm tingling across his body, a rejuvenating euphoria. After washing his face, they took the bowls and retreated into the far room.
   Cal pointed to TX on Rallow's back. "My servant here was damaged in the fight. Do you have a place we could repair him?"
   "There is a work space in the back we will make open to you," the Grand Sage replied.
   "I'll go with Talc then," Jasen told Cal with a nod. Rallow handed TX's mangled body to Jasen. The wires hung down through his arms, vines entangling around him. One of the sages led Jasen and Talc to the room in the rear of the temple. Their footsteps faded down the stone hall until they disappeared behind the closing door. A sage walked up to the Grand Sage with a ceremonial sword locked away in its sheath. The blade was a deep shade of black that informed immediately of korite. The edges looked razor sharp, and the hilt seemed firm and sturdy. The Grand Sage held it out on his hands, presenting the sword to Cal. "Every Warlord receives a new sword when they claim the title. We thought this one would be more suitable to your stature than the tradition broadswords. Though just as deadly I assure you."
   Cal reached out and received the gift, the weight of the weapon perfectly balanced in his hands, the grip beautifully suited to his contours, as if somehow crafted specifically for him in this short time frame. He strapped the scabbard secure to his back and slid the sword inside for safe keeping. "Thank you, Grand Sage," Cal said, appealing to their sense of tradition. "I believe you are a chance for something new, Warlord Cal. Something prosperous for the Mulvain. For centuries we have been a warring race, but when we ran out of aliens to fight, we turned on ourselves. The constant fighting between the clans of Karkken has driven us back centuries in technology. The dreadnoughts in orbit are all that remains of the mighty weapons we once wielded. Mont'gar's uniting of the clans has done some to negate the damage we've done, but it's a temporary fix. The Bane still breeds conflict, erecting monuments to its glory." She wore a look of disgust. Her nostrils flared out, before returning to a stay of soothing calm. "And meanwhile Clan Reave and Luthara have been more at each other throats than ever before. It must end."
   Pieces of history formed together in Cal's mind, forming a more complete picture for the first time. He saw the Mulvain, not as a proud race of warriors, but a self-destructive tragedy, held back by their own beliefs and values, and driven backward in time. Too prideful to save themselves—too foolish to save the universe. Human and Mulvain: perhaps both societies could learn something from each other. Ducarn confronted the Grand Sage. "You knew my people then." He stood boldly in front of the spiritual leader as if to make his presence indisputably known. The Grand Sage met his eyes. "No, I hatched soon after. Though I have read up on all our history since. Including our atrocity against the Valmera. It is my deepest regret I could not be there to council against it. I wish I could say we've learned better, but I think we've just become less ambitious."
   Ducarn looked away. His mouth parted, ready to bring words into the world, but it closed shut just as soon. His head pivoted back to the Grand sage. A trail of mist trickled from his fingertips. "Ambition is something my people never lost. Not even in death," Ducarn proclaimed.
   "That we know all too well, good Valmera." The Grand sage looked back to Cal. "Help us rediscover our own ambition. Direct it toward a brighter future." Cal met Ducarn's gaze. The Nebulae nodded softly.
   "Then you will join my cause?" Cal asked.
   "I am not the one you need to rally, Warlord," the Grand Sage replied. Cal looked at Rallow, retreated to the dark corner of the room, skulking and seemingly observing the conversation rather than taking part. "I suppose you're right," he replied. Cal pondered in that moment just how wide spread the Grand Sage's beliefs were. Would her influence be enough to light the spark?

 

Chapter 27: Hail the Warlord

        Cal stepped out of the sage temple to clear his head, if such were even possible in light of everything. He stood at the edge of the abyss, staring across at the spire radiating from its core. Sanctuary's endless levels above and below spawned a feeling of insecurity with him. Cal wondered as he began counting the thousands of homes across the carved-out sections, just how many of those Mulvain were a part of Clan Luthara, how many he now held dominion over. How swift and casually the transfer of power flowed in the Mulvain rankings. It did not sit right with him. After seeking only to defend the Mulvain he hoped to call friend, he was promptly thrusted into a new position of authority. He was unclear on his responsibilities, how the clan hierarchy operated, what his first moves should be. There were no instructions or guidelines engraved on his Warlord blade, though desperation nearly drove him to check. The shifting of pebbles along the rock behind alerted him of an approaching visitor. Cal turned to lock eyes with an older, fierce looking Mulvain warrior. His muted grey scales looked dried and flaking. His green eyes were sunken further into his thick dome. The armor he wore was even more disheveled, with dents and fragments falling off. A grouping of three, deep claw marks slashed diagonally across the chestplate with a bright blue arrowhead painted over—an elder of Clan Luthara.
 "Taller than I expected... for a Human," the old Mulvain said.
 "Glad I'm already exceeding your expectations."
 The Mulvain let out a snorting chuckle. "Name's Hesh. Suppose I'm your new right hand."
 Cal extended his hand to meet the empty air. Handshakes were not a Mulvain custom. A headbutt would perhaps be the closest equivalent in Cal's mind, but he was not prepared to shatter his skull in the attempt. "It's Cal. I'm... sorry about Haren. I was defending a friend," Cal offered, unsure if he should address the issue.
 "Haren was nothing more than a rash lichen-smoker. I'm too old to put any stake in politics. Luthara, Reave, even Humans, we all bleed the same way."
 "Suppose we do."
 Hesh retrieved a leather pouch from his belt. When he pulled the string to open it, bright blue paint pooled out into a shallow pond in his palm. Hesh looked at him head to toe for a second, contemplating the best spot to make his canvas. Looking at Cal's head, "Too much hair. Won't work there," Hesh spoke out loud to himself. Hesh dipped his large fingers into the paint and outlined the signature arrowhead onto the center of Cal's black chestplate. Cal looked down at the rapidly drying paint. The symbol burned fiercely on his chest, fueling him with power and a strange sense of pride. Hesh sealed the pouch and wiped the remainder of the paint onto his legs. "Lived a long time, seen a lot in my days. Doubt I have much time left, certainly didn't think I'd see anything I hadn't before... then you came along: a Human Warlord. Ha! That's something I just had to see."
 "Think I'll surprise you," Cal leaned in closer, his voice barely above a whisper. "I can give you the greatest fight you've ever seen."
 Hesh's mandibles rubbed together in excitement of the idea. An all-out assault against the Legion would be a massive undertaking. The death and destruction would be untold, though Cal regarded it inevitable now. He doubted there had been a war on this scale since the Mulvain's original invasion of Karkken. As if reading his mind at the arrival of the topic, Ducarn came toward them with Rallow in tow. Hesh stared down Ducarn like an optical illusion. "My... never dreamt I'd see one of you." Nodding to Cal, "Making my life more interesting already."

             "Yes, disbelief seems to be the common reaction of your people," Ducarn replied. "So, we're working with Luthara's now?" Rallow asked, a slight annoyance in his tone.
 "I'll do what my Warlord tells me," Hesh snarled back.
 Cal stepped between them. "Yes, and we're all going to play nice. We need allies, Rallow. You have your clan." He motioned to Hesh. "Now I have mine. Together we can rally the rest."
 "Just point me in the direction of this fight of yours." Hesh mashed his hands together in anticipation. "I have a promise to keep first." Cal nodded to Rallow. He turned to Hesh. "Have there been any sightings of Norwraiths in Sanctuary?" Hesh shot him a puzzled glance. "In Sanctuary? Gave it that name for a reason."
   "Been following the trail of a pack of Norwraiths. Led us right here," Rallow informed. Hesh rubbed his chin as he thought of recent news, pacing back and forth slightly. As one of the elders around the city, he kept himself well connected with the current state of affairs. For Hesh, the youthful energy coursing through the residents of the underground metropolis and the well of Mulvain knowledge rejuvenated his decaying soul. Mulvain were capable of living immensely long lives, but they could not cheat death. Though Hesh knew he was not long for this world, he would not go quietly. "Could be nothing... some hatchlings said they heard shrieks echoing through a break in the tunnel wall," Hesh said. "Take us there," Cal demanded, exercising his newfound authority. Ducarn watched as his vision grew closer to reality. Cal's increasing boldness and command of the Mulvain folded into fruition. The mist had showed him by Cal's side as they marched against the Infinite Empire, an army of Mulvain at their backs. He saw them save the Rianare Mara and somehow... the universe. Ducarn's visions were still clouded—incomplete. To truly see the future is a power no Nebulae had ever mastered. Slowly, Ducarn had begun to understand why. There was only madness in the pursuit. Hesh nodded to Cal and led them to the lift beside the sage temple. They stepped onto the wide platform used to transport people and cargo alike across Sanctuary. The lift was carved into the side of the deep cavern like a vast chimney ascending into the sky. With the pull of the lever, Hesh brought them rocketing down to the lower levels. Air blew up around them as they accelerated faster, picking up more speed. Cal's body jerked back as they came to a sudden halt. They had reached their destination. Hesh led off the platform and out along the path of the cavern ridge. The level seemed all but abandoned as they followed their guide to the far wall. Hesh came to a stop in front of the dark space in the rock. Behind the obsidian stone, a void of even deeper shades of black. How far it traveled back was impossible to determine, the hole barely sized to fit a Gawn or maybe a small Human—a Mulvain would be impractical. "Think they just have to create their own excitement down here. But if there really are Norwraiths down here... that would be the place," Hesh said. Cal acknowledged. "Well, doubt we're gonna fit in there. Ducarn, can you dash through?"
   The Valmera shook his head. "I cannot mist through what I can not see."
   "Maybe Talc if we—" Cal was cut short by an explosive crackle. Rallow blasted the hole with a charged bolt from his plasmer rifle. The steam vented off through the retracted scales, the tri-barrels glowed red as a new hole burrowed out of the rock. He tossed the rifle over his shoulder and stormed forward to be first through the passage.
   Cal stepped in front, placing his hand on Rallow's chest. "Hold on. We're gonna need all hands on deck for this one. We go back, get Talc and Jasen, check on TX, then we move forward."
   Rallow made his usual growl of annoyance, but understood the logic, taking a step back from the mysterious void. Whatever happened once they went through that hole, the only certainty remained to be prepared for anything. Cal motioned Hesh to lead the way back to the temple.
   "Slow down there, Warlord. You want the Luthara? Then go to The Claw and declare your claim. Only way you'll get the clan to follow," Hesh told him. Cal paused a moment. He looked up, a fierce determination in his eyes. "Lead the way." No question or wavering in his voice.           "I'm coming with," Rallow announced.
 Cal turned to him. "Sure that's the best idea?" he inflected with his tone.
 "For this alliance to work, Luthara needs to start accepting the Reave's. Feud has gone on long enough."
 Cal nodded, a silent agreement. He met Ducarn's gaze. "I need you to sit this one out. Go back to the temple. Showing up to this place with their ancient enemy won't make the best first impression."
 "Very well, Cal Cabor," Ducarn walked back toward the lift. "No time to waste," Rallow said.
 Hesh pressed on. Cal and Rallow followed close behind. 

 

Chapter 28: The Claw

        Luthara's Claw, ancestral home of Clan Luthara rested in the chasm of the Frag mountain range beyond the wasteland. A journey nearly impassable by tumbler or any means of ground transportation. As such, Hesh sat at the front of the dropship, flying over the barren plains of frozen rock beneath. In the distance, the mountains drew into view, sharp black peaks standing like a spiked fence—a wall warning not to pass. Grey, woolen storm clouds loomed above, ominously sheltering the horizon beyond. Tucked away in the deep split in the rock, the entrance to The Claw called them nearer. Cal sat in the back across from Rallow, strangely silent most of the flight. But what did two aliens discuss in their downtime? Surely there were many questions Cal could pluck from the plethora swimming around in his cerebrum. His answer surprised even him.
 "Do Mulvain actually use their mandibles to eat? You already have teeth. Seems like overkill," Cal said.
 Rallow grinned. "Everything we do is overkill."
 Cal laughed to himself.
 "But yes, traditionally mandibles are for grabbing and tearing. A lot of work to break through Mulvain scales. Better to just rip them away and dive into the flesh." Cal listened, amazed. "Though mostly they're just for show now. I've always enjoyed the theatrics," Rallow said.
 "So I've seen. Well maybe we have that in common."
 Rallow polished the tri-barrels of his rifle slung across his lap. Rubbing across the jagged metal surface seemed to bring him immense excitement. Rallow looked up from his plasmer. "That we do, Champion."
 Hesh shouted ahead from the cockpit, "Coming in! Hunker down." Cal leaned into the cockpit ready to form a reply when the ship sharply dipped toward the ground. He flew forward, grabbing a hold of the back of his seat. Hesh steered the ship low across the flat wasteland as the mountain pass vastly approached. Cal clung tighter to the bottom of the bench. Rallow wore a devilish grin across his face, shifting up his mandibles. The passage looked far from inviting. A dark tower of empty air carved out in the side of the massive korite wall. Little joy radiated from this place of perpetual midnight. Cal filled with a feeling of dread and wondered who would dare call that cave home. Hesh docked the ship down on the landing pad beside the entrance. There was no way the dropship could make it through that treacherous path. For a moment, Cal feared the Mulvain might try. Hesh lowered the ramp onto the surface. The sound of rain immediately poured into their senses. Cal walked out onto the landing pad. A thin film of rain water coated the ground in every direction. Droplets descended from the storm clouds above, speckling the puddles with tiny indentations. In moments, Cal was soaked, his hair hanging down in his face. He brushed it away with his hand as the rain water stung slightly on his fingers. The burning on his fingertips... not normal water he gathered.
   "What I wouldn't give to be fishing right now," Cal said.
   Rallow glanced at him sideways. "What is a fish?" Cal stopped and pivoted back. "You really need to come see an ocean sometime.  Fish is about the best eating you can get." "Hmm... I would try this fish," Rallow murmured.
   Cal had seen liquid water before on this frozen place. But never did he understand why. He doubted the Mulvain had ever thought to ask. The realization ushered him to venture on toward their destination. The Claw waited for their claimed leader. As they greeted the dark chasm, Cal understood the acquisition of its name. Resting at the top of the rock gateway, stone claws reached out toward any who dared enter—a sign the place might swallow you whole.

             "After you, champion," Rallow joked from behind. The Mulvain jerked him back to reality, his voice a near shout over the constant downpour of heavy rain. The Claw was far from inviting, but Cal bet it was warmer inside if nothing else. As the rain soaked every inch of him, heat became an all-consuming lust. Hesh led them through the haunting pass, his eyes finely tuned to the unique darkness of the cave. Were it not for how closely Cal clung to the Mulvain's tracks, he might have been forever lost in the black. Under the cover of the mountain, Cal finally brought his shivering under control. He could still hear the steady drumming of rainfall crashing down outside the mouth of The Claw.
   As they walked through the cavernous tunnel, Cal became alerted to every shuffling in the rocks. So frequent and sudden they surely were not artificial. What small creatures scurried around under the cover of darkness? For an instant, Cal caught the glimpse of a thin tail. The tiny rodents darted in and out of their little tunnels, knowing better than to confront the predators. They came to a halt as the tunnel expanded into a vast chamber. Storm waters trickled down through cracks in the stone canopy. In front of them, stood the proudly standing stronghold of Luthara's Claw. A militaristic barrier of blackened stone, the walled compound called of intrigue. "Might be best I do the talking for now," Hesh told them. They came upon the gate imbedded into the giant wall of the encampment. Guard towers perched on each side of the gate. Luthara warriors trained their plasmer rifles down below, weary of the strange Human bidding their colors. The Reave Warlord beside him did not help ease their suspicions.
   "Hold your fire, you dull stones!" Hesh barked at them. "This is Cal Cabor, your new Warlord."
   The guards lowered their rifles, never leaving their gaze from Cal's face. He might very well have been the first Human they've seen. How strange this encounter must have been for them—a mutual feeling Cal could share. The gate drew open, lifting to the sky. Hesh stormed through, secretly thrilled to be home. Immediately the colorful smells filled their nostrils. Smoked meats, scorched metal, burning piles of lichen—a live and bustling community. The town square rested just beyond the gate entrance, buildings built up high toward the cavern above surrounded the open space on all sides. As Cal stepped into the center, the eyes of every Luthara in the square fixated on him. The armorsmith removed his korite sheet from its plasma bath. A hatchling dropped the fur pelt it dragged across the ground. Two warriors ceased roasting their wanotaur steak over the open flames. They licked their teeth with those long thin tongues as their eyes made contact. "And who have you brought here, Hesh? This really him?" a Mulvain boomed from a balcony above. The warrior jumped off the edge and landed with a thud in the rocky square. He walked toward them, stopping in front of Hesh. The two sized each other up with curious glances.
 "Warlord Cal, like you to meet Novire, my offspring," Hesh explained. "Haren was the only warrior to ever best me in combat. That made him a friend." Novire pointed his head to Rallow. "Now you show up with one of our enemies." The Reave had been strangely quiet since they arrived. He found himself surrounded on all sides in a den of wolves. "I came here—" Rallow was cut off. "I brought him here as a symbol. A symbol that things are going to be different under my leadership—better under my leadership," Cal declared. 

             Rallow growled under his breath. He did not take kindly to interruption. "You know nothing of our ways, outsider," Novire told Cal. Hesh stepped toward his offspring, close enough Cal thought they might bash each other with their foreheads. Hesh stayed close, locking eyes with Novire. "He took Haren's head clean off. Grand Sage presented him with a sword. You know custom as well as I."
 Novire grew a smirk across his face. "Been away for a while, father. You're nothing more than a dry scale these days."
 Hesh growled. "All those years didn't come easy. We came to see the elders. A shine scale like you is too young to understand."
 A moment of silent tension lingered between the two Mulvain. Laughter broke the silence like a whip. Deep bellowed chuckles emitted from the pair, slapping each other on the back and embracing each other, foreheads pressed together. Novire withdrew. "They're waiting. Should be interesting."
   Novire moved to the side, signaling their permission to pass. Ahead of them a set of stone stairs led between the houses bordering the town square. They started on toward the steps, when Cal turned behind him. Rallow stood by the armorsmith, seemingly dazed at the beautiful pieces of korite armor. Black scaled sets of every shape and size displayed along the back wall of the small shop. Crafting armor was an honorable trade here on Karkken. "How much for those shoulder pieces back there?" Rallow pointed to the armor he desired. "Mine are getting a bit scuffed up." The armorsmith met his eye, a disinterested, annoyed look spread across his image. "For a Reave? Fifty stones," he said bluntly. Rallow growled, removing his hand from the stone pouch along his belt. The smooth korite balls slipped from his grasp. "Was asking nicely. Shall I ask again?" He flexed his mandibles at the Luthara. Cal rushed over, holding Rallow back with placement on his chestplate. He looked to the armorsmith. "And how much for your new Warlord?"
 The armorsmith turned his gaze begrudgingly from Rallow. "Ten stones." Hesh walked over to the shop. "Quite the discount, Brael. Glad you're playing nice. Novire's doing well, even through your awful motherhood." Hesh dropped ten polished korite stones onto the shop counter. Brael snatched up the stones, tucking them away into his pouch. "Actually, fathered two hatchlings of my own now, Hesh."
   "Ha! You'll never spawn a good hatchling with your father blood."
   The armorsmith growled. Hesh insulted him deeply, but Brael knew his place. Hesh had already proven himself dominate once before. Novire was the living proof of that. Rallow grabbed the shoulder pieces and tore them off the wall in a huff. He removed his old shoulders and tossed them into the plasma vat. "A gift," Rallow mocked, then secured the new shoulders to his armor. "Let's go before you find more trouble," Cal said. Hesh stomped up the cobbled stairway. Each step they took, more Mulvain rushed out onto the balconies running parallel on both sides. The city stopped as they approached, pausing their lives to watch the arrival. A new Warlord declaring his claim was a monumental occasion in any Clan. At the top of the stairway, the elder hall waited. It stood as a hunting lodge, a large stone shack draped over in various animal pelts. There was no door to the hall's entrance, just a barren tunnel to venture through, blooming into an expansive dome. Torches hung along the passage leading inside lingered a faint aura of orange glow in the air. The hall was a testament to Clan Luthara's prowess as some of the most skilled hunters among the Mulvain. Their culture had ingrained the tradition deeply. Trophies of monstrous beasts Cal had never seen were tacked against the walls. Heads with more teeth than one could count stared back. 

The main hall filled with white smoke radiating out from the tall firepit in the center of the room, traveling up through the chimney at the apex of the belled ceiling. One of the Mulvain elders reached into the firepit, tearing off a handful of vegetation from the giant lichen bush. He held the smoking pile up to his nostrils, inhaling the rich fumes. The elder crushed it in his hand and discarded the ash into a metal pale. "Always loved that little habit, Hermore," Hesh said. The elder looked up at Hesh before turning his attention to his other guests in the archway. Two more Mulvain walked out from a passage at the rear of the chamber. Their gazes were inquisitive, yet no sign of intimidation fled from them. The three elders sat down on their carved-out bench in front of the firepit. A loud roar erupted from the adjacent passage. Cal immediately went on guard, but Hesh stayed his hand. Three wanotaurs ran out, kicking up dust as they trotted toward the fire and laid down, curled up by their master's feet. Those milky whites peered in their general direction, but these beasts had no interest in their company. Hermore reached down and scratched his wanotaurs head. He gazed up at them again. "Been awhile, Hesh. Tell me, how does our Warlord wind up dead in a place there hasn't been a fight in ages, the same day he goes to Sanctuary to meet you?" Hesh glanced down at his feet. His response came like a volcano boiling over. Hesh swung his broadsword free from his back and growled a thunderous cry as he plunged the blade through the rocky floor. Everyone went silent. The wanotaurs shot their heads up, flaring their nostrils to survey the room, ready for assault if need be.           "Haren is gone. He loved picking fights and the last one finally got him killed." Hesh pointed to Cal. "This is our Warlord now. Come to stake his claim before the elders."
 Hesh nodded to him. Cal stepped forward, walking to the center of the room. The flames crackled, embers hopping onto his blackened armor plates. He felt the heat warming him inside, and for the first time here he developed a sensation of home. Cal stared across the flames at the elders. Each one studied him intently. "My name is Cal Cabor. I was born on the planet Luxarus in the Legionary system. I thought I might die on the barren plains of that mining world, but I have seen a great many things since then. I've seen men betray the morality of their heart for their own ambition. I've watched creatures manifest from forces I never knew existed. I've seen innocence stripped right before my eyes. And I've seen a race of what the universe believes are no more than savage warriors value that same innocence. It lingers in the corner of your eyes, in the voice you speak of your hatchlings. And if what I've seen is true, you will follow me as your Warlord."  Hermore hummed his soft low tone, flexing his mandibles as he digested his thoughts. "This one intrigues me," one of the elders said to Hermore. "Yes, no doubt you wield a unique perspective, but you have much to learn of our ways, Human," Hermore replied. Cal walked around the fire, the orange glow lightly him up fiercely. He stood only a few feet from the elders, his gaze locked with theirs—green eyes that spoke pure truth. His stance told he was not backing down, not now.           "If your pride won't let you fight for the innocence of your children, then at least fight for their future. The Mulvain can hold a mighty seat in the universe once again. We both want that for our people. I can give you that chance," Cal began. He told the elders the story of his betrayal, of Kane and his Infinite Empire, the Paratores, and the Nebulae that pulled all the strings. They would be no more safe from his vengeance. No, they were the target of his wrath. "Hmm..." Hermore growled. "You have given us much to consider... Warlord. And is this crusade of yours the cause for bringing a Reave into our walls?" Rallow stepped forward, a grimace on his face. "I came here alone in good faith." His clawed hands rolled into fists. What little restraint he had kept him from advancing. "The Mulvain have a greater purpose than squabbling amongst themselves. A partnership between the two Warlords of our Clans could bring an end to that," Cal spoke with hope, but he was no fool. He knew all too well that years of animosity could not be ended by the dream of an outsider. He had seen how Rallow shared that dream. And the look Cal saw in the elders, the reception to his story, it gave him promise.
 "Mulvain breed on conflict—" Hermore began.
 Cal hung his voice over the elder's words, "Then let me show you what else is out there." He waited a moment. "There are greater fights than these." The elders hummed and murmured to each other. They turned their heads, speaking in low whispers barely audible over the crackling flames. Hermore waved his hand toward the exit. "As I said, you've given us much to consider. We'll speak again when the time is right, Warlord Cal."
   "Growing tired of the pace of dry scales. Speak all you like, the Clan stands with us now," Hesh flicked his chin toward Cal. Cal nodded and ushered them all for the door. Hermore bellowed a low sigh as their guests disappeared out of lodge. A gust of air pulled the torch flames along as Rallow stormed away in a huff. They gathered together back out on the cobble stone stairway.
    Cal turned to Rallow and Hesh with an affirmative cue. "Time we got back to Sanctuary."

 

Chapter 29: The Mechanic

        "Pass me the plasmer torch, will you?" Talc asked Jasen. Jasen stood in the middle of the dark room, crowded with all sorts of tools and metal scrap. Lastubes beamed faint reflections on the shiny surfaces, while the occasional spark flew from a fitting wire—a mechanic engineer's paradise. Jasen handed Talc the torch, quickly snatching it from his hand, eager to return to his work. Talc sat in front of a wide stone slab he had repurposed as an operating table. His various surgical instruments lay beside him on the edge as he slowly pieced TX back together. Only Talc had not created him exactly as he was. Like him and Jasen, TX had not been suited for their environment, for this situation. And while they could attempt to adapt, Talc saw in TX an opportunity for evolution. The mechanic's obliterated limbs had been fully replaced. The base which once held his bipedal legs had been converted to two small Grav engines capable of levitating him off the ground much like a comet. His long clumsy arms had been replaced with two shorter and more durable limbs, equipped with an environmental scanner. Talc looked over the mechanic, marveling at his impressive work before snapping out of his trance. "Do you think we're going to die here?" Jasen asked Talc.
 The question seemed to jump out of thin air, almost startling Talc at the sound. He put down his torch and turned back toward him. "Well I certainly wasn't planning on it. We have good friends... we'll be fine," Talc said. A mild attempt at reassurance. "We barely even know them."
 "You barely even know me," Talc inflected sharply. "But because I'm a Gawn there's no reason for you to feel intimidated." Jasen went to interject, but Talc continued. He would not be interrupted now. "No, I get it. But listen, Cal is the only thing that's kept you alive this long. That's worth some trust where I come from."
 Talc held back his tongue as the word coward instinctively longed to escape his lips. He wondered how all they had learned and witnessed had still not inspired Jasen to take up action. Few causes could be more worth fighting for—dying for—in Talc's eyes. Maybe Jasen simply didn't know how.
 "I can't trust what I don't understand, Talc," Jasen said in a near whimper. "Because the world you do know is so perfect, right?" Talc folded out his arms, presenting up like two palm fronds. "The Legion would have you believe you're inherently superior to my people—to me—based on nothing more than the species you belong to. They took us in when we were most vulnerable, and now they hold us down, oppress us, and still expect the world from our analytical minds because we chose to value security over freedom." He sighed. "Volk always said that was our greatest mistake," he muttered beneath his breath. "And all the while no one dares to dream of a better world." He met Jasen's gaze, who quickly averted away toward the stone slab. "Well I've seen it in Cal's eyes. He believes in that better world... do you?"
 "History shows us revolution is hardly ever that simple." Jasen leaned over TX's body, his palms pressed onto the table over for support as he leaned over. He took a deep breath, a calming rush.
   "What are you so afraid of? You were ambassador to Canopen. That place should have been twice as dangerous."
 Jasen let out a sarcastic chuckle. "I spent most days surveying overhead in a shuttle. The rest of the time, I wrote reports back on Empria—hardly ever touched the ground."
 "You never... saw the Gawn there then?" Talc inquired. "I spoke with one of their chiefs when they came to a Legionary settlement once. The camp was gone two weeks later."

             Talc imagined the lives of the Gawn living freely in the forest treetops. A life free from discrimination, of being a second-class citizen. Such a dream resonated with many young Gawn. Canopen, by deadly circumstance, had given them a place to roam and create purely for themselves. Yet many Gawn were still engrained into the traditional ways of Legionary law, afraid to take a leap into the great unknown. After all, that vast jungle world made no assurances, and held none of the security back on Empria. A gamble, with the odds stacked ever against them, and Gawn had never been gamblers. "You're just gonna have to trust Cal. He has more riding on this than anyone. With the stream TX took still intact, we have evidence. We'll go back as heroes," Talc said.
 "I'm no hero," Jasen said somberly. A hollow scrapping of stone echoed through the room as the door to the workshop slid open. Cal stepped through the doorway with the rest of his company. Talc gave him a friendly nod and stood up to present his newest creation. The secret relief of a more excitatory conversation fueled him. "Back just in time! I think I made TX good as new. Better than new actually," Talc chirped.
 Talc reached behind TX's head and slid the hatch to his processor shut. As the piece clicked into place, light coursed through the mechanic's body. The bulbs in his head lit up brighter than ever and the twin Grav engines beneath his torso hummed to life. TX lifted himself off the table and levitated in the open air. They all watched, impressed by the miraculous transformation. "Looks like the metal man's got a few upgrades," Rallow said. Cal looked over at Talc. "How'd you pull this off?"
 Talc pointed to the vat of liquid colyne behind him. "Turns out, the sages liquefied colyne can make a low grade Grav engine. That, combined with all the old scrap parts around here, let me craft a pretty nice new model."
 Cal fully circled the floating mechanic, taking in the sight of his fresh design. The glowing Grav engines at his base presented TX as an advanced mechanic, while the worn, scratched up paint of his torso told a story of age. As Cal examined Talc's work, he wondered what else the Gawn engineer might be capable of with the right amount of fire in his belly.
 Cal smirked. "I like it."
 "I also reallocated most of his processing power originally utilized for language comprehension and translation to more intellectual thought. Should give the coat rack a little more brains," Talc joked.
 "I believe I'm learning new things already," TX's mechanical voice came back to life. The mechanic gazed over at Hesh, standing in the doorway. "Who is our new friend?"
 "Oh right, this is Hesh. My second in command," Cal informed them. Hesh chuckled. "Second in command. Like the sound of that." He looked around at all of them, stopping his sights on Talc. "All your babies talk that much?"
 "What? No. I'm not a baby. I happen to be twenty galactic years—" Talc argued.
 "He's a Gawn. Different species," Cal explained. Hesh hummed to himself, eyeing up the new alien. "Still not as annoying as the metal man," Rallow said. Cal tuned out the back and forth of the two Mulvain. Walking over to Talc, "I need a new suit of armor. Think you could make me something with the power cell I told you about?"
 "The Gravity Well?" Talc queried out loud. A smile spread across Talc's face like wildfire as ideas flowed through his synapses. The Gawn hopped off his chair and walked over to the sea of parts spread out before him. He sifted through the pile of scrap, pulling out the occasional piece. He stood there scratching his chin as if deep in thought. "There's some stuff I'm gonna need still, but I'm always up for a challenge."
   Cal nodded and motioned to Hesh. "Let's get some men on that. Get Talc whatever he needs," Cal replied.
 "You can get the Gravity Well from your ship?" Talc asked, already formulating a blueprint in his mind. Intricate layers of armor and electric wiring mapped all throughout his brain as a design began to take shape. Talc had big plans for his next creation. As he looked around at the parts collected, the main piece missing was a sufficient power source. Mechanic design had been fun, but he enjoyed the prospect of a militaristic project. Cal looked to Rallow. "How far's the crash site from here?"
 "Not far. But the wasteland surface will be dangerous," Rallow warned.
 "Nothing we can't handle," Cal declared. He paraded around his troops, directing each member one by one. His leadership role was all but cemented. "Hesh, you and your scouts help Talc get whatever parts or tools he may need. Ducarn and Jasen, you stay here and keep him safe. Rallow..." the Warlord growled. He still couldn't blindly give the Reave orders. "Why don't you come with me?" Cal phrased it as a question—more subtle. The rest of them nodded in confirmation of their directives. Shuffling around, they began to move in preparation of their tasks. Hesh activated an evostream while Ducarn melded into the brown of the wall. Talc thrust himself back into his work, Jasen acting as his unknowledgeable assistant. Cal moved for the door, Rallow behind him, before darting his head back as TX got their attention.
 "There is an urgent stream broadcasting across the network. Oh my..." TX stopped.
 "TX, what is it?" Cal asked.
 Rotating his mechanical head towards Talc. "Master Volk is being tried on Empria for treason."

 

Chapter 30: Elder Trial

 TX projected the evostream from the evopatch on his forearm. They gathered around, watching the scene straight from the mechanic servant's eyes as if they were their own. The mechanic's view panned over to Basilar leaned against one of the tall, white marble columns of the throne room. Various members of the Legionary council, noblemen, members of the EVO corporation, and Rionaughts lined the long hall in parallel lines. A chasm parted between the groups, ending right at the steps leading up to the Legionnaire's throne. Rook, now the new Captain of Chromarian Guard, stood upright at the base, a smug expression beneath his helmet.
   Kane perched on the golden chair, his flowing Legionary cloak displayed prominently. He held his posture rigid if only to mimic an aura of perfection, but his gaze extended towards the nervous bustling of the sea of patrons before him. Kane's eyes met Basilar, his stance speaking louder than words or even facial expressions ever could. The Paratore anchored, frozen in place. Not of fear—never fear. The mechanical lenses on Basilar's mask constricted as he spied the Legionnaire. A message buzzed in his evocom, "Commander Basilar. Ops report is ready for playback," the Paratore Captain droned. "Send it through, Verek," Basilar ordered. A soft beep sounded. He raised his evopatch as the report displayed on the digital face. He tapped the screen and the stream came to life, projecting Captain Verek's helmet stream as a hologram on his wrist. Three Paratores stood in an alleyway. In a swift motion, the first Paratore threw a man onto the ground. A pile of boxes fell over as the man collapsed. The villain towered over him, his boot pressed against his chest. The Paratore's golden shawl eclipsed the sun as the man pleaded up at him helplessly. "He's through there I swear," the man whimpered, pointing to the door.
   The Captain waved his men to formation on both sides of the door. Plasmers drawn, they waited for his order. Verek charged forward with a mighty kick. The metal door peeled back from the bionic force, tearing away from the frame. The Paratore tossed a lasflare into the room and watched as the laser field exploded out from the device. Safely behind the Paratore's masks, they were entirely unaffected. They stormed into the small room where Councilman Osad lay dazed, clutching his eyes with his face pressed against the desk. He was blind in that moment, but still heard the familiar ping of plasmer pistols charging. He held up his hands, shaking as he did. The councilman had fled when he realized Kane was hunting down his opposition. But even here on an island at the edge of the world, he had not gone far enough. A sound came from the other room. The councilman's wife and daughter stood in the doorway. They froze at the sight of the intruders. The wife clung to her daughter, sheltering her in her arms. It would not be enough. The ghost stories were real. Verek wasted no time. He fired two bolts at each target, the sound of burning plasma overshadowed by their high-pitched screams. They dropped motionless to the floor. The Paratores never flinched. The councilman cried out, "What have you done!" He sobbed, stumbling as he tried to get up from his desk. "Councilman Osad you are being tried with treason against the Galactic Legion," Captain Verek informed him.
   "You're carthing monsters! I've served the Legion faithfully for decades," Councilman Osad begged as he stumbled over to his family. He knew the price of treason. The Paratore trained his sights on the sightless man, Osad's red eyes gazed up at him. "Thank you for your service." A plasmer bolt sailed free, and the councilman crashed to the floor beside his family—a poetic death. Smoke traveled up from his chest as one of the Paratores walked over and checked his vitals. 

"Kill confirmed, sir," the Paratore declared. The evostream went dead. Basilar dropped his arm to his side. The screams echoed through his mind, hearing them so vividly, until he realized they were the same screams he had caused himself. He recalled being the swift hand of justice. But there was no justice in it. Not then, and certainly not now. They were executioners—butchers. And the Legion was right to fear them, Legionnaire Farrow right to drive them away. It had to end. The sound of rushing wind and a metallic shutter played through the hall as the tall set of doors burst open. Two Chromarian guards escorted Volk down the long road to the throne, his hands bound in front of him. The guards held him on each side as he struggled to keep up with the shuffling of his short legs. Volk held his face down to not meet the crowd, his disgust in that moment better left unknown. A small chair sat in the middle of the aisle positioned below the steps, directly across from the Legionnaire's throne. The guards forced Volk down into the seat and took post on each side of the steps. Volk looked up to meet Kane's gaze, his face expressionless. Kane's voice boomed throughout the grand hall, hushing everyone inside to deathly silence. "Do you know why you have been brought here today?" Kane asked the old Gawn. "Does it matter?" Volk replied. Ignoring his defiance, "You have been charged with treason. Conspiring to undermine the efforts of the Galactic Legion." Volk puffed out air through his nose. "Tyranny is nothing new. I've lived long enough to see the rise and fall of many Legionnaires. Most far better than you." Kane gripped tighter around the arm of his throne. He had to make a showing of this engineer, no matter the extent of his skill. The Goliath initiative had taken far longer than expected, and he had reached the conclusion that Volk was the cause. Kane knew all the while that Voidan lurked in the shadows. The Valmera needed his army, he needed his war. Kane would deliver on his promise, or die in the effort. Looking at the feeble creature now, Kane could see the rebellion burning in Volk's black eyes.  "I am not the one on trial here. You were given the task of leading a research project for the Legion. Instead, you deliberately delayed progress on the project for weeks," Kane said sternly.
   "You speak as if I should be grateful. Grateful for all your people have done for mine, is that correct? Grateful for the oppression, for the benefits you reap from our hard work, for our lives you toy with." "We honor the traditions of the Gawn. You are the finest creators in the galaxy. And so, we allow you to express your gift." He waved out his hand for presentation. "We gave you a home. And this is how you repay us? With defiance?" "You honor us?" Volk laughed, a loud mocking chuckle. "Agara," he declared the name above all others. "That was our home. A long, long time ago. We were explorers." He turned his head to the crowd. "We were the ones that came to Empria with the secrets of Grav. We made the Legion what it is today. And you do not honor us. You hold us hostage. Because you're terrified. Terrified of losing us." Volk stared Kane down. "Aren't you, your majesty?" Volk stared him down—no fear in his gaze. Kane felt unsettled by the famous elder of the Gawn. He knew the influence Volk had in the community—the cement that held the manufacturing of the Gawn district together, the unspoken leader of their people. And there was truth to his words. The Humans of the Legion had long since thrived on the efforts of the Gawn, since the day they stumbled out of deep space and marked a turning point in Emprian society. But now, Kane's rule was being threatened—something he could never allow. Volk's public opposition to his authority would be impossible to explain away. He knew his only choice. As Volk sat there, unwavering, Kane began to believe the old alien wanted this in some way. 

"Glory will return to the Legion. Despite your best efforts, you played a small role in assuring that," Kane said.
   The hall doors parted, making way for the two bulwarks standing like statues in the doorway. The goliaths had been polished with a coat of the traditional Legionary white and gold—their armaments intimidating in all respects. Gasps crescendoed through the crowd as the war machines paraded down center aisle. They came to a halt in front of the steps and turned to face Volk before melding back into stone sentries. "Your vision has already been realized, my friend," Kane taunted. Volk shook his head in shame. "Whatever happens next, that is on you alone, Legionnaire Kane."
   Kane motioned to his guards. "Bring out the gallows."
   Rook hit a button on his evopatch and immediately a panel on the titled floor retracted and a long, metallic platform emerged from the dark space, resting right before Volk's feet. Volk stared at the black circle transcribed onto the surface, a little larger than a human silhouette. He swallowed the knot in his throat before looking up at the Legionnaire once again. He had accepted his fate. "The sentence for such an act, as you are aware, is death," Kane declared. The crowd roared in outrage as the guards lifted Volk out of the chair. Chromarian guards patrolled down the line of patrons, their hands outstretched to keep them orderly and docile. Volk squirmed as the guards tossed him onto the platform. He got back onto his feet, standing in the center of the black circle. The Gawn knew exactly how these machines worked; he had helped design them himself. The gallows was originally created as a failed attempt at teleportation, and was soon repurposed as a more humane means of execution. Ironic now how he would come to his end. Volk looked back on his life, and fear struck him for the first time. He looked around at the technology he had brought into the world and questioned if any of it was for the better. He had produced instruments of war and death, a whole new race of mechanical slaves. Would that be his legacy?
   "Out of respect, I will grant you your final words," Kane announced.
   Volk sneered back at him. "The Gawn will no longer be your slaves."
   Kane turned his head, hiding the anger bursting through his clenched jaw. He motioned to Rook to proceed. Rook nodded and pressed a button on the side of the machine. Light radiated from the circle at the base of the platform, shooting up as an intense solar flare—a geyser from below. The wave of energy rippled through Volk's body, dissolving to dust as he was carried away particle by particle into the wind. The light retreated down into the base of the machine and the glowing circle faded back into a dull shade of black. There was no trace of Volk, as if he had never even existed. Rook tapped on his evopatch once more and the gallows disappeared back into the ground. Shouts echoed through the hall, numerous longings of outcry. Kane looked over at Basilar, leaned against one of the marble columns. He stood up straight and stared him down, his silent reaction speaking above all the others. Basilar's hand balled up into a fist, shaking as he questioned how to seek release. His hand slid to his holster, but as he examined the crowd, he thought better of it. The Paratore leapt through the open viewport and rocketed down to the city below as the Gravjet left a pulsing blue trail in his wake, thunderously guiding him into the wind. Kane stood up, trying to maintain his commanding demeanor. "Let this be a reminder of how rebellion is treated in the Legionary system. Our Legion is only as great as the trust we place in its leader," Kane spoke to the crowd. He stormed down the path out of the throne room past the fury of the bystanders. Shouts so loud his own thoughts blurred away. Guards held back the citizens as their Legionnaire disappeared through the throne room doors. The network connection went dead and TX ended the evostream. They had seen all they needed for now. Talc collapsed back onto the workbench as the realization sunk in. His mentor executed through another's eyes, dying for everything he believed in. To know not only that your life had purpose, but so did your death. If only everyone could be so lucky. "Talc, are you—" Cal tried before being interrupted.
   "Get me the Gravity Well. I'll build that suit. Then take care of whatever else you need to do. We're going back to Empria," Talc declared.
   Cal nodded firmly to his friend before turning to the others. "You heard him. Let's go." Signaling to Hesh, "Lead the way." Hesh promptly led Cal and Rallow out of the workshop. Jasen placed his hand on Talc's shoulder—a modest attempt at reassurance. Talc shook the hand away and went back to work. Right now, the best he could hope for was a distraction. Maybe somewhere in the process he could make something worthwhile, something Volk would have been proud of. 

 

Chapter 31: The Wasteland

        Hesh led them along the stone path and turned down into a darkening tunnel that gradually steepened as they went. Cal felt the temperature rapidly dropping as their distance from the heating spire increased. Cold winds crept their way through the rocks from the surface above, sending a shiver down his spine. The extreme temperature had reached the critical point for the Human body. While Rallow and Hesh seemed equally unaffected by the frigid air. Their bodies and minds alike had been hardened by the harsh desert world, one of the few advantages to calling Karkken home.
 Hesh looked at his navigator. "Navpoint is right above us. We'll head up through the old access tunnel." The tunnel came to a dead end in front of another mechanical lift embedded into the wall. Cal peered up at the elevator extending through a gaping hole in the sheet of rock lining the wasteland above.
    Recognizing Cal's discomfort, Rallow walked over to an old storage locker beside the lift. In it, a variety of old equipment for surviving the dark tunnels and frigid landscape they were destined for. Rallow reached inside, pulled out a helmet, and handed it to Cal. The faded black helm seemed to be the missing piece to the armor suit he wore. Lined along the inside was a sufficient layer of insulation meant to keep his cranium from freezing over, while the visor contained a frost resistance shield that permitted sight through the harsh winds.
   "What's a Human helmet doing down here?" Cal asked.
   "Long time ago... Mulvain had their own workforce down here," Rallow tried to explain delicately.
   "You mean Human slaves," Cal corrected him.
   "We don't practice slavery anymore. Both our people have plenty we aren't proud of," Rallow reasoned.
   "Ha! Clan Reave had more slaves than anyone," Hesh interjected.
   "That all ended with Gorn," Rallow replied.
   "Yes, ended it yourself." Hesh's eyes glared their bright green. "You think it was easy? We may not have the same concept of family as Human kind, but he was still my spawn father. And I had to drive a sword through his heart because I saw the atrocities he committed, the wrong he had done and would do, and I decided my love for my people was stronger than my paternal ties."
   "Saw an opportunity to shape your Clan in your own image," Hesh retorted. "Last time I checked, Clan Luthara and Clan Rydon were the ones throwing people into those fighting pits. Maybe you should fix your own Clan first," Rallow snarled.
   The Two Mulvain dashed forward like comets ready to collide. Cal held out his sword between them and met their fierce gaze. Their mandibles twitched with spirited anger on either side of the sword, a token barrier between them. "You're right, that is all in the past now. And so is this rivalry of yours. We're all on the same side now," Cal said.
   Rallow and Hesh stood down, lowering their postures to a less aggressive stance. Cal breathed a small sigh of relief. No matter how bold he was, he couldn't stop two rage fueled Mulvain set on brawling.
   "Very well, Luthara," Rallow purred. Their people had made mistakes, but had grown as well; though they both had plenty more growing yet to do. The way Cal saw it, Kane was about to set mankind back centuries in growth and progress if he started this war. A conflict spanning across the entire Legionary and Nebulous systems would have unimaginable devastation. The Mulvain would thrive off such chaos, destroying their civilization in the process. It was up to them to save their respective races from themselves. 

Cal locked the helmet into place, a small gesture of acceptance. Rallow ushered them onto the lift platform and pulled the lever to the icy surface. The sky was a dark grey, the light pale and limited as ever. As they neared the top, the lift came to a sudden halt, jarring the passengers back and forth. A wall of rock no more than a couple feet high separated them from the surface. Cal grabbed hold of the face of black stone and pulled himself up out of the dark tunnel. Before him on all sides, nothing but endless leagues of the black korite sheet that composed the twilight world. Cal stood on top of the one hill within view, looking further into the distance. Residing at the end of the long trench carved out in the crust was Cal's crashed starship. The smoldering had ceased now, but sparks yet flew from the damaged sections of the hull. The ship itself appeared untouched since he had been abducted from the crash site. Human salvage was not all that useful to the Mulvain it seemed. "There it is," Cal announced as the Mulvain climbed up, joining him on his rocky castle above the wasteland. "Best be quick about this. Wasteland is a dangerous place. Especially while the sun rays are weakest," Hesh told him. "We'll be in and out. Just need to get inside my ship," Cal said, moving towards the edge. The drop seemed feasible he reasoned. Rallow nodded, taking a running start as he jumped toward the hard surface below. The rocks beneath his feet audibly crunched as he landed. Cal quickly followed suit, rolling as he hit the ground to help absorb the impact. Hesh's landing was more clumsy, stumbling as he came down, which he naturally blamed on old age. All three began their march across the surface, plasmers raised, eyes trained along the horizon. A glowing streak of lightning arced across the sky, scattering through the storm clouds above. Cal stared in amazement as the whole skyline was momentarily lit up a fluorescent blue. The first sighting of beauty he had truly seen on this dark world. He found himself mesmerized by the battle of lights in the sky overhead as they proceeded across the plain. By the time he returned his sights back ahead of him, the ship was nearly in reach. "Grab what you need. We'll stand watch," Rallow told Cal.
 Cal rushed towards the starship, passing over the rubble surrounding the wrecked shuttle. The torn off door laid in front of the wreckage; the interior of the ship left completely ajar. Cal climbed through the doorway and dropped down into the sideways structure. The familiar blue glow from his bag was the only visible light left dwindling inside. Cal slithered his way down to the bag, grabbing hold of the strap and pulling it towards him. He reached inside and lifted the capsule confining the cobalt essence. The aura lit up his face, sparkling crystals in the corners of his eyes. A smirk spread across his visage as he savored the small victory. Celebration was cut short as a thunderous howl boomed across the wasteland. His head jerked behind him, his heartbeat quickening. Another howl sounded, followed by another. The cries were getting closer. Cal put the Gravity Well back in the bag and slung it across his shoulder. "Cal! Have to go! Now!" Rallow yelled. "Wanotaurs," Hesh said softly, charging up his plasmer.  The battered ship croaked and creaked as Cal dove from the entrance onto the frozen rock. In the distance, the howls of the beasts gradually grew nearer. They were on the hunt. "Go! Run!" Rallow urged. They took off in full sprint, with the steady rhythm of colossal paws dashing across the plains. Rallow grinded to a sudden halt, waving up his hand to signal them to follow suit. His face had a hushed look about it, and Cal understood their survival depended on silence. The Mulvain knew all too well an attempt to outrun the beats in an open field was futile. Cal stood still as the manifestation of stone surrounding him. He pivoted his head ever so slightly behind, viewing the animals slowly approach. Three of them, a pack, circled around them. Their nostrils huffed and flared in cadence as every sense but sight aimed to locate their prey. The wanotaur's milky white eyes stared lifelessly in their direction. One of the wanotaurs strode into the center of the circle. Built bigger than the rest, with a white streak of fur running across his body— the alpha. He stopped mere inches from Cal's face, sniffing the irregular scent before him. Rallow grimaced, struggling not to react. Cal froze until even his heartbeat had silenced in that moment. The stalemate broke by the abrupt crackle of Hesh's plasmer bolt. The shot launched free from the barrel and burned intensely through the thick layer of fur covering the Wanotaur's face. In the chaos, they made their dash back towards the hill they had descended from. Cal bolted away on the tips of his feet, scrambling with audible panting. The Wanotaurs cried out, thrashing in anger as they followed the pounding of footsteps on the stone. The wanotaur leaped towards Hesh, tackling him down to the ground. Hesh struggled to free himself under the immense weight of the beast. His scaly hands gripped the beast's neck, holding back its razor teeth for all his might. Hesh flared out his mandibles as he locked into the struggle, the beast's saliva trickling down onto his face. Cal drew his sword from its sheath and jumped onto the animals back. The korite blade slid through its flesh more effortlessly than Cal ever imagined. He rolled off the Wanotaur's back as it dropped with a loud thud—dead. Hesh roared as he frantically pushed the mound of muscle off him and resumed his pursuit for the rocky wall. Rallow leaped at the cliff face, grabbing a handhold halfway up. His claws dug into the rock, chipping away at the stone as he scaled to the apex in a frenzy. He reached down and helped pull Hesh over the edge as the last wanotaur neared. Cal desperately climbed up behind, a dire panic burning in his eyes. Rocks slide through his fingers as he clung to the wall, slowly inching his way up. The rocky tower shook as the beasts drove his paws deep into the stone, carving away at it like a primal sculpture. Cal felt the warm breath of the wanotaur on his heels. He thought of all those teeth climbing up for him. What a horrible way to perish—and after everything. No not today. Not yet. Cal grabbed Rallow's hand and rolled over the top of the wall. They dove down into the lift and slammed on the lever as the beast came up over the peak. The wanotaur howled down the shaft as the lift carried them away to safety. The piercing shriek cut as a knife through Cal's mind. His heartbeat failed to calm. Perspiration, even in this frozen desert, had been driven into overdrive. He would not be sleeping tonight. 

 

Chapter 32: Death of a Duel

 The darkness bred silence inside of the solitary ship floating high above Empria's atmosphere. Voidan resumed his regular post kneeled before the artifact he possessed; a celestial painting spread across the mist radiated from inside. Staring deeply into its wisps and folds, he saw a truth few others could comprehend. Fragmented visions and feelings of foresight danced before his eyes. Voidan curled his clawed hand into a fist, squeezing it tightly as he sought to quell his rage. The truth through the mist angered him more than any mortal ever could, as if divine beings were conspiring against him. He had waited long enough for the fruition of his interventions. A soft scuttling beyond the door to his meditation chamber jostled him from his concentration. Voidan diverted his attention to the side, watching the door from his peripherals as the thunderous boom erupted from outside. The blast hurled the door forward like a rocket, striking the Nebulae as he attempted to roll free of the blast zone. Shredded metal showered around him as he lay under the bulky frame. Small brush fires burned around the room, forming a luminescent display in collaboration with the sparks of fallen wires. Voidan threw the door off him and rose to his feet—his fury had reached new bounds. He grabbed the artifact fallen onto the ground and locked it in place into the slot on his leather chestplate. The Nebulae relic fit snuggly inside the diamond shaped space like a key nestling into its lock. He breathed in the presence of all that power so close to his breast. His novablade sprang to life as Voidan marched out through the new doorway torn away through solid metal. Voidan knew by immediate investigation this had not been an accident. He turned his head down the hallway as a blue blip progressively grew larger in the black. He reacted a second too late as Basilar rocketed towards him, his fist outstretched for a hook of inhuman strength. The force of the Gravjet knocked Voidan back in a state of disarray. Before he could hit the ground, he misted away—only dust settling on the cold metal.
 Voidan appeared again, flanking the bold Paratore. "A traitor after all then. Seems you are not the loyal soldiers Kane promised."
 Basilar fired a shock wire from his wrist as Voidan smoldered away into smoke, out of reach. The wire clamped down on the tattered wall behind his desired target, surging with electricity. Voidan reappeared beside him— his blade at the ready. Basilar narrowly dodged Voidan's blood hungry slash with a roll backwards. His golden shawl flapped up as he tumbled away. The Nebulae appeared in his wake yet again, grabbing hold as he slid his frozen blade across Basilar's arm. The Paratore winced in pain, an irk echoing through his mask. He slammed a button on his evopatch in a desperate reflex. A powerful blast sent Voidan flying backwards once again, its epicenter deriving from Basilar's overcharged Gravjet. The Paratore was full of tricks. He whipped around towards the Nebulae, drawing his plasmer pistol from its holster in one smooth motion. Basilar fired a volley of plasmer bolts at the dazed beast. He shifted side to side in short bursts as he began tiring. The last bolt hit its mark and singed the side of Voidan's shoulder. The Nebulae let out a rumbling roar as he advanced towards his attacker. Basilar prepared his defense, ready to jet off to the side. But he was not quick enough this time. Voidan wrapped his clawed hand across Basilar's throat, lifting him off the ground. He tightened his grip until Basilar's plasmer slipped through his fingers with a loud thud.
 "So disappointing," Voidan snarled. He threw Basilar down onto the display of one of the battered terminals. Voidan held his novablade at the Paratores throat, studying him for signs of fear that never came. Basilar merely stared back at those fierce yellow eyes from behind the guise of his armored helm. They shared those golden eyes. "I wonder what would happen if I cut this mask of yours right off. You see, we're not so different you and I. We both know the value of mystery, and the fear it inspires."

             Basilar subtly drew his heat dagger and thrusted it towards Voidan's side. The Nebulae shimmered in the twilight hall, his figure fluxing between corporeal states. Basilar traced his disbelief from the dagger to the Nebulae's piercing stare. The dagger passed straight through the mystic as if only grounded to a realm of his choosing. Basilar felt a shudder rise up from his core. He twitched his head away as he lay collapsed on the terminal. The dagger dropped to the floor. Basilar awoke to the sound of artillery. A starship roared overhead. Waves crashed down around him. He opened his eyes just in time to see a man shove him beneath the waves. He gasped for air, thrashing violently, but the man held him down, the heavy armor he wore only aiding his demise. Basilar saw a shadow rise behind the man. A plume of blood gushed into the surrounding water and his attacker toppled over. A hand ripped him from beneath the drink. His commander tucked his knife back away into his belt. He stared at him for a moment, his face familiar. The golden armor he wore, he had seen it before. He looked down at his chest—he wore the same suit. The commander thrust a rifle into his arms. "Sergeant! Natives are putting up more of a fight than expected. We need to move up and take the beach!"
 Basilar couldn't find the words—lost in the sounds of rifles firing. So much louder than plasmers. His armor so much heavier than he was used to. Yet it all felt familiar. He had been here before. Who was he? He heard the laughter of a child, and turned to face it as a little boy disappeared into a plume of ash. Then he was ripped away. Basilar awoke again, staring into the Valmera's white blade. "My days of inspiring fear are done. Galaxy needs something better."
 "What this galaxy needs..." Voidan began, "Is to be rid of the Mulvain. They're butchers, nothing more. They thrive off fear more than either of us ever will, Commander." "That's what all of this is about then? Your grand plan of genocide?"
 "If only you knew what was truly at stake here."
 Voidan withdrew his blade and released Basilar from his deathly grip, backing away from the console. Basilar propped back up onto his feet, collecting himself as he glared at the Nebulae. Voidan turned away, his back now facing him. "Enlighten me," Basilar said sternly.
 "Well tell me, why do you now feel you must be the hero? How is the cause that drives you anymore just than mine? I wish to stop the animals that murdered my entire race and decimated my planet—a plague they brought to countless other worlds throughout history. Now what righteous call do you fight for?" Basilar lowered his gaze. A cause he was prepared to die for should leap from his thoughts in an instant, yet nothing came. These new feelings, sensations he had never known, they drove his actions now. Towards what, he still did not understand. The Valmera wished to stop the butchers of his race, and in the process, had become one himself. Here he was, just as much the slaughterer, but finally able to feel remorse for his actions. Memories flooded in, crushing the heart he believed still beat within his chest. He had taken lives. Worse he got clever, tricked others into mutual murder all the same. "I think there's been enough death," Basilar replied.
 "Yet you came here to kill me. Certainly not the first." He pointed to his scar.
 Basilar stood apart from the Valmera, feeling naked without his plasmer by his side. He stared blankly with a heavy silence back at Voidan as the Nebulae waited for his reply. Voidan motioned to the artifact embedded into his chestplate, "Do you know what this is?" He asked, taking a brief moment of pause. "The ancient Nebulae called it a Nebula fragment—capable of housing a piece of the great Nebula inside of it. In essence, it holds the power to life itself. I could restore the lives stolen from my people. But first, my world must be wiped clean so it can start anew. The Mulvain must die. Every last one."
 "Why are you telling me this?"
 Voidan stepped towards him, locking eyes. "Because you are going to help me achieve my vision. Because you are a capable man. Kane was a means to an end, but you... there is a strength in you I can not deny." Voidan outstretched Basilar's fallen plasmer pistol towards him. He looked down at the handle for a moment, hesitating. The gesture was one of respect, but Basilar knew it more than that; Voidan was tapping him for recruitment into his galactic massacre. The uncertainty hit him again like a tidal wave as he struggled to justify in his head what noble cause deterred him from such. War and death, those were the only constants he had ever known in life. The implant in his head sent its last surge into his brain. The last order of execution buzzed through his thoughts. One last mistake.
 He snatched the plasmer from Voidan's hand. "What do you want me to do?"
 "Take a squad of your Paratores to Karkken. Find their leaders and eliminate them. I want to cripple whatever hierarchy those savages scrounged together before Kane brings in the legions."
 "Thought you would want to have the pleasure of killing them yourself."
 Voidan's eyes narrowed and focused in fierce intensity. "They're all animals. I place no more importance on the life of one animal than another. So, while you kill the few." He came closer to Basilar. "I will kill the many."
 "And what about Kane?"
   Voidan let out a half grin before turning to face away down the corridor. "His use has nearly expired." Voidan began to disappear further into his ship. Basilar took it as sign their conversation had reached its completion. But not before Voidan stopped and turned around one last time. "It will take more than an unexpecting explosive to kill me, Commander." Voidan vanished into a breeze of black mist. The wispy trails traveled away with an obvious sentience. The phenomenon left the viewer with a constant unease—a supernatural churning. Basilar slipped his plasmer into his holster with a sharp click. The rage inside him burned brighter now. His failure echoing through his mind. What was the greater evil here? What was worth fighting for? And would he find himself on the side of the angels when all was said and done?

 

Chapter 33: A Mulvain Feast

        Cal pushed open the door to Talc's workshop. His attention immediately set upon the half-assembled armor suit suspended in the center of the room. Though still a clear work in progress, Cal was already impressed with the sleek design of the durable plating. The smooth, sleek curves of the technological aesthetic encapsulated him completely. As he walked towards the display, Talc sprung up from his workbench, plasmer torch in hand. A newly designed helmet rested in front of him on the table. "Started to worry you weren't coming back," Talc joked.
 Cal made a half-hearted laugh, "We ran into some company up there."
 "Wanotaurs seem to be your specialty, champion," Rallow bellowed as he and Hesh walked into the room.
 Think I've killed enough of them to last a lifetime, Cal thought. Cal reached into the bag draped across his shoulders and pulled out the glowing container he risked his life for time and time again. He could feel the energy pouring off, dancing around as bright cobalt lights inside the containment field. All around the room, they marveled at the Gravity Well as Cal extended it to Talc. Jasen's eyes lit up with the reflection of the radiant blues crackling throughout the alien device. He had never seen such pure energy. Talc took the object into his small hand, surprised at the weight and prominent heat it possessed. He rolled the cylindrical shape across his fingers before setting it down on his workbench. Talc walked over to the constructed armor suit and opened a panel on the back of the chest piece. He looked inside as he inspected the inner workings of his creation and assessed how the new power source could be integrated. "Where did you get this thing?" Talc asked Cal.
 "Back on Luxarus. The Grav research facility there was working on creating new Grav powered weapons," Cal began to explain.
 "Grav field manipulation..." Talc muttered to himself. "I've always hypothesized tech like this but could never quite figure out how to contain the reaction in a transportable form. Always had a tendency to become unstable." The Gawn continued to stare at the capsule, holding it between his hands as he watched the energy dance around.
 "Yeah that was their main problem too."
 "Hmm... I have a few ideas," Talc went back to glossing over his armored suit. "I never intended to use it, just thought it safer out of Kane's hands, but now... I think we need every advantage we can get."
 Talc nodded. "I agree. I'll make it work."
 Ducarn walked into the scene, his gaze went to the Gravity Well resting on the workbench. A look of amazement peppered with a strange familiarity fell upon him. "Your Gravity Well looks even more beautiful with my own eyes," Ducarn marveled.
 "You've seen it before?" Jasen spoke up.
 "Through the mist, yes. A piece of a much grander design."
 Cal could make no sense of the Nebulae's explanation and had come to accept as much from their interactions. He noted the curiosity with which Jasen approached Ducarn, as if he was another one of his studies—the scholar in him he supposed. "How long do you intend to keep all these secret visions to yourself?" Cal asked angrily.
 "My visions are scattered... incomplete. To tell you would only confuse or misguide you. For now, you must simply trust me," Ducarn offered.

             Cal stepped closer. "My trust has its limits, Ducarn." The Valmera seemed unphased, calm and collected, as he merely assessed Cal's mannerisms. Sensing this, Cal searched for an answer he might actually achieve. "Where have you been?"
 Ducarn slowly circled the room. "I was speaking to the Grand Sage. It has been rather soothing to speak with someone else that has seen so much." He paused for a moment as his mind drifted into thoughts worlds away. "Through her and many of you," motioning to Rallow and Hesh, "I have witnessed the changing spirit of the Mulvain. It gives me hope yet. The Grand Sage has invited us to a feast here in the temple tonight. I believe it would be in our best interest to attend."
 "For once I agree," Cal replied. This Grand Sage would be the key to the cultural heart of their people. The voice of reason in a sea of shouting giants. "You guys go. I'm gonna finish this up. Still have a lot of work to do," Talc said as he fidgeted with his tools. Cal nodded a sign of respect and led the rest of them out the door. "Sure you don't need any help here?" Jasen asked Talc while halfway out the door.
   "Honestly I'm not sure what else you could do. This is the time when I just hunker down and focus on all the little intricacies. Go be social for once. Forget about our imminent demise."
   Jasen cracked a smile. "I'll save you some cake," and disappeared along after the rest of the party. The sages waited in the central hall of the temple. Dimly lit torches immediately set the mood of intrigue once again as they proceeded to join. Seated up on the tall chair was the Grand Sage, her eyes closed. As Cal stopped in front of her, she lifted her head and gently placed her attention upon him. "Good to see you again, Warlord Cal. I've heard you've achieved even more admirable feats since last we spoke. Luthara's Elders seem to be coming around," the Grand Sage said.
 Cal gave a small gracious bow. "Just hoping to achieve the vision of prosperity we both imagined. Strength is what the Mulvain respect more than anything else, and so that's what I'm gonna give them."
 The Sage let out a low growl, an exclamation of deep thought Cal had noted in Mulvain behavior. Midst their conversation, other sages came into the chamber, each carrying baskets of unknown foods. With speed and organization, they set up the traditional meal display on the table extended across the room. Looking closer, Cal spied a large roast, wanotaur he guessed. Another basket was full of loaves of something resembling bread—a welcomed familiar sight. Down towards the opposite end was a tall pot of steaming broth. One of the Sages stirred the soup with a large korite ladle, revealing the various grasses and lichens inside—the minimal foliage of Karkken. "Come and sit," the Grand Sage extended welcoming arms.
 "Kuraja!" Rallow yelled as he sat down enthusiastically by the pot of hot soup. Snatching up the ladle, he began filling one of the bowls set around the table. Everyone took their place around the prepared Karkken feast. Jasen's eyes rolled up slowly with a mixture of content and disgust as one of the Sages plopped a serving of meat onto his plate. Ducarn dug into the meal at a slow pace marked by a humble curiosity. Cal couldn't help but crack a smile at the different reactions around the room. He shoved the first portion of meat into his mouth, beyond the point of caring. He simply needed the fuel. And besides, the food was growing on him. "Any word from Mont'gar up in Mulvaire Keep?" Rallow asked the Grand Sage across the table.
 "I'm afraid our Bane is more concerned with rebuilding his precious fighting arena than anything else," the Grand Sage replied. The words were sharp, yet remained a cool calm that always lingered in her voice's aura of wisdom. 

             "Fighting should be done on the battlefield. Not in a fancy circle," Hesh growled. "Then perhaps it's time for a change in leadership," the Grand Sage eyed Rallow across the way.
 Hesh tipped his dome to Rallow. "Us dry scales have messed things up long enough. Mont'gar's too old fashioned. Time for a shine scale to take the reins."
 Rallow's expression marked of surprise which quickly faded into stern seriousness. "Just fought one war. I'm not gonna start another."
 The Grand Sage sipped from her drink before setting it back on the table. "I never advocated war. There is always an alternative to violence. We have the influence right here to perform a turn in the direction of leadership. Mont'gar can be rendered irrelevant without a single drop of blood... if we are smart."
 "But violence is always the most fun," Hesh chuckled as he gobbled down another serving of meat. Cal found a new appreciation for this Grand Sage as the devious schemes rolled off her venomous tongue. And yet every cause she spoke of, every motivation she possessed, all of it appeared to be for the betterment of the Mulvain. Such a dedication to her people Cal found impossible not to admire. "Clan Reave would have the full support of Clan Luthara. Should be more than enough to pressure Mont'gar and the Rydon's," Cal announced. Rallow leaned back in his chair, his claws dug into the armrests as he contemplated the proposition. The title of Bane was never something he sought, nor even dreamed of, never being one to lust for power. But his love for his people was without question, and the promise of a better life for them was a cause he could stand behind—a cause Mont'gar would hinder. Rallow chose Mont'gar as the lesser of two evils during the civil war. Gorn would have never ceased his bloodlust. But perhaps he still chose wrong. Perhaps the safest bet was neither. He never wanted this, but if not him, then who?
 "I will not start another war. But if it can be done another way, it would be our duty to do so," Rallow announced, his voice booming high above throughout the chamber. "The first step toward a new dawn," Ducarn spoke softly through the air. Around the table they became silent for a long moment as each individual dove into their own trance of contemplation. Sages came out and set down plates of the next course, large black beetles hung on skewers. A sugary glaze coated their hard shells in the Mulvain equivalent of dessert. Jasen took one look at the shiny beetles, nearly the size of his head, and decided it was time for some fresh air. He stood up from the table and walked out through the front door of the temple just as conversation began to pick back up.
 Jasen stopped outside at the very edge of one of Sanctuary's levels, staring out into the abyss below and the massive heating spire that stood proudly at the center. The scrape of a stone skidding across the rock darted his attention behind him. Cal walked over, a blank expression on his face. Without making eye contact, he stopped beside him by the ledge and stared off into space, as if a driving sense told to wait for conversation to come to him. Perhaps he knew Jasen better than he let on. "Weren't overly eager for that dessert either I suppose?" Jasen asked light heartedly. Cal released a shallow chuckle. "Wasn't quite my taste. Call me old fashioned." He paused for a moment, feeling the frequent silence that lingered between them. The thought that had long since resided in the back of his mind finally sprang forward to cut the divide. "I know you and I have our differences. You could've run and hid under a rock somewhere when all this happened... but you didn't. You're still here."
 "I never had much of a choice in any of this," Jasen replied.
 "No, you didn't. Kane used you as just another pawn in his scheme, sent you here to retrieve the last loose end of his treason. But now you're here with me, ready to fight, with a plasmer strapped to your hip same as me." Cal placed a reassuring hand on his shoulder that Jasen returned with a friendly, if somewhat uncertain, nod. Jasen found his fingers reaching toward the plasmer there in its holster. As he traced along the cold metal ridges of the ventilation scales, he reminded himself it had never fired a shot. Staying his current course, such action would be inevitable. Jasen turned to Cal. "Do you really think she's still alive?"
 As Cal heard the question out loud, he felt a ping of doubt for the first time thinking of Mara. He swallowed his doubts and fears and cast them away as he looked back at Jasen. "I find it's when we do the little mundane things I think about her the most. When I close my eyes, I lay there wondering if she's sleeping somewhere too—if she's safe. I placed faith in Ducarn's visions, as little as I might trust much else. But it's human nature, I can't trust what I don't understand." Cal paused for a moment. "So, do I think she's alive? Yes. Because I have to believe that. Because that's everything I'm fighting for. Even with everything and everyone else that's on the line, she's my call to action. She always will be."
 "You sound crazy when you talk like that."
 Cal laughed and stared off into the pit, his gaze traveled beyond, stretching endlessly into the night. He shook his head, coming back to the matter at hand. "Maybe. But it's a good kind of crazy. If that's what makes me insane then I'm alright with it." Jasen looked back with a surge of admiration. Accompanied came a sliver of guilt that he had mistaken Cal for any less than one of the most honorable men he had ever known. "I never knew the Legionnaire well. And his daughter even less. But I can see from you, they must have been truly good people. If ever I was going to find something worth fighting for..." Cal smiled, his head traveling toward the floor. He turned back toward the Sage Temple. "The Legion will owe you a great deal when this is over, Ambassador. That I assure you."
 The heavy stone door banged shut behind him and Jasen was alone with his thoughts once again. His finger twitched hanging by his side, longing for a chance to defend the cause that found him by the most unlikely of circumstances. A cause he had never expected but could now call his own. 